Contributions to Indian Sociology
http://cis.sagepub.com/
The salvation of the king in the Mahabharata
Madeleine Biardeau
Contributions to Indian Sociology 1981 15: 75
DOI: 10.1177/006996678101500107
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://cis.sagepub.com/content/15/1-2/75
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
Additional services and information for Contributions to Indian Sociology can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://cis.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://cis.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations: http://cis.sagepub.com/content/15/1-2/75.refs.html
>> Version of Record - Jan 1, 1981
What is This?
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
The salvation of the king
in the M&b&raaammaaathcchrra;;
MADELEINE BIARDEAU
The relation between brahman and ksatra has been a moot point ever
since Western indology started interpreting Indian data; in point of fact,
the question has never been an easy one and has raised many problems
in the Hindu minds as well, though not in the same way as among the
Westerners. Instead of contributing to the general discussion on the subject,
I just want to focus my attention on the Mahiibhiirata (MBh) and see what
as a whole it has to teach us about this subject.
It might be useful to state here that Western terminology will be avoid-
ed as much as possible and an attempt will be made to formulate the
’orthodox’ doctrine in terms that come closer to the brahmana texts or
the dharmagdstra. Therefore, we shall not make use of the opposition
spiritual/temporal nor speak of secularisation (Dumont 1962), even if it
entails dropping out any attempt at comparison.’ The opposition of super-
stition/spiritualism will be just as carefully dispensed with and there will
not be any hint at ’divine pretensions’ of Hindu kings (Derrett 1976).
From the bramanas, we know that if Brahmans on the whole are priests
officiating for generous patrons, the patrons are usually Kshatriya kings.
These kings certainly are warriors and wielders of force, of danda, but as
actors in the ritual context of the brahmanas, they first appear as the typi-
cal yajamana, the sacrificers without whom practically no solemn sacrifice
would take place. This is a first aspect of the complementarity of the
brahman and the ksatra which shows that one could not exist without
the other. A priest must have a patron, a patron must have priests, and if
their common sacrificial activity were not performed regularly according to
prescription, the order of the three worlds would be so upset ythat it could
lead to destruction.z Though this rule is limited to the two upper varnas,
1This obviously implies that the present essay is not meant to be a rejoinder to
Louis Dumont’s article, ’The conception of kingship in ancient India’ (1962), but
is rather a thankful acknowledgment of what my own work owes to his pioneering
reflection on the subject.
2This is true even in the br&amacr;hmana period, when the epic and pur&amacr;nic idea of a
cyclical destruction of the world does not appear: see &a&htSaamapmacaatuhcntar-eab;;r XIII.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
76
it still is valid nowadays between the so-called jajman and the Brahman
priest, even when the jajman belongs to some Shudra caste, provided he
be a locally important landlord. The conclusion is obvious: a king cannot
exist as a king without a Brahman and vice-versa. This ritual relationship,
to be complete, includes the generous gifts of the kings to the Brahman as
one aspect of the sacrifice.
In the dharmagdstras, this ritual symbiosis finds its complement at the
administrative level. Though, in actual fact, the kings had to issue decrees
-§asana-and rules of all kinds, they were not considered as legislators.
Theoretically, law was dharma and the dharma§dstra were the only source
of it. But the dharmagdstras were the Brahmans’ affair and a good king
was expected to have a Brahman mantrin by his side. The latter was to
decide in all matters pertaining to dharma. It should be remembered that
dharma is the objective order that holds together the three worlds-
heavens, earth and the infernal regions: the social order is part of that
whole. Learned Brahmans only are qualified to know what dharma is and
how it should be maintained. That,may be the reason why the Arthasástra
has been attributed to a Brahman author. Even without bringing into
consideration the moot question of hierarchy and power in the relation bet-
ween kings and Brahmans, it is obvious that dealing with artha without
any knowledge of dharma would be suicidal for the king, and to oppose
rajadharma and rajaniti (Derrett 1976) would be equally dangerous. Rdja-
niti, artha§dstra and all such controversial terms are as many phrases to
express the technicalities of the kings’ job, just as the kalpasutra (and later
on the Mïmåmsâ) deal with the technicalities of the Brahmans’ priestly
functions. But the Brahman has a place in the kings’ duties, just as the
Kshatriya is actively present during the Brahmans’ sacrificial perfor-
mances.
* * *
Is it inevitable that such an important charter of classical Hindu bhakti
as the MBh should have been conceived of as an epic story, that is, the
story of a battle, in which the fate of a royal dynasty, and through it of
the whole world, is at stake?’ If we refer to the Sántiparvan, or to the
Anusásanaparvan (and the same holds true of the Bhagavadgita), we see in
all these didactic parts of the epic many indications of its main import
and there can be no doubt that the author’s concern was primarily focus-
sed on the svadharma of Kshatriyas as opposed to that of the Brahmans.
7. 15, where, in the context of the sarvamedha, the Earth warns the king that he can-
not give her away to his priest as daksin&amacr; lest she should sink into the water.
3The same remark holds good for the R&m&yaaammnaaccarr,;; but in this smaller epic, the
meaning seems to be less important than the story itself, unlike in the MBh.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
77
The subdivisions of Book XII provide good guidance to their doctrine, if
we take notice of the fact that the opening section on rajadharma is follow-
ed by one on Apaddharma, and the final one on moksadharma. In each of
them the duties of kings are differentiated from those of other varnas and
particularly of Brahmans-even when a desperate situation (apad) allows a
violation of all prescribed rules. The section about moksa, however, is
rather disappointing in that it discourses on final liberation in terms so
general that the very relevance of the question for kings is not at all
discussed. Though one thing is sure: kings seem to have a right to know all
about moksa, since the Kashatriya Bhlsma is still the teacher (as for raja-
dharma, for instance) and king Yudhisthira, the disciple. The obvious
conclusion is that a king as such is not excluded from ultimate salvation,
and this in itself is far from being unanimously admitted.
but the problem remains to decide whether moksa can be reached by
kings and Brahmans alike by following the same course of action. Here
again the notion of svadharma comes in the way to forbid the Kshatriya to
act like a Brahman even for the sake of salvation. This brings us back to
the well-known problem of sannyasa and the four dgramas: do they apply
to all the three upper varnas or are they meant for Brahmans only? This
might be the very point on which the MBh as a whole, through its nar-
rative, and the Bhagavadgltä in particular through Krsna’s exhortation to
Arjuna, have something original and fundamental to say.4<1
The dharmagdstras when dealing with varnasrama-dharma are not very
clear on the subject as if it did not concern them or, perhaps, because they
prefer to leave it aside. Still it is obvious that the A1anusmrti, for instance,
which devotes its first books to the fou r dgramas, then addresses itself to
the Brahmans’ duties and way of life. It speaks of the dvija in general; but
the Brahman is the dvija par excellence, and the Brahman alone is meant
by this term; this is actually also true of the MBh. The result should be
then that only Brahmans are entitled to sannyasa, and so also to moksa.
Later authors, particularly in the darsana literature, hold differing views
on the subject. During this intervening period, it seems that the MBh
teaching has had an effect and allowed variations of opinions and new
definitions of who qualifies for moksa. The puranas have followed suit
and opened the mind to the idea of accessibility of moksa to all.
Even though the epic has the same thing to say about the duties of each
varna, and the close relationship between kings and Brahmans, as the
smrti literature at large, it has its own peculiar way of expressing it, and
4Kane (1941.II.2:942-44), briefly deals with the problem. He has collected a
number of quotations from the smrti at large, including some from the MBh show-
ing that the epic’s teaching is self-contradictory. It would be easy to prove the
contrary, but it seems more relevant to show what is the central teaching of the
epic.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
78
this is true mostly of the complementarity between the two upper varnas.
For clarity sake, we start from the well-known and clear-cut definition in
the Manusmrti (1. 88-89). ’To Brahmanas he assigned teaching and studying
(the veda), sacrificing for their own benefit and for others, giving and accep-
ting (of alms). The Kshatriya he commanded to protect the people, to
bestow gifts, to offer sacrifices, to study (the veda), and to abstain from
sensual pleasure.5 Later in the book, kings are taught respectful behaviour
towards Brahmans (IX.320) and the close association of both varnas is
strongly advocated (IX.322): ’Kshatriyas prosper not without Brahmanas,
Brahmanas prosper not without Kshatriyas; Brahmanas and Kshatriyas,
being closely united prosper in this (world) and in the next’ (IX.399). In
this type of formulation, the complementarity between the two varnas
cannot be missed. Almost all the terms that define their duties are opposed
by pairs. The Brahman officiate whereas the Kshatriya offers sacrifices;
the former teaches, the latter studies only; one receives gifts and the other
gives away his riches. But the protection given to people by kings is also
opposed and complementary to the priestly functions of the Brahmans.
In the smrti as well as the epic, it turns out that, the king’s protection is
first and foremost granted to Brahmans.
This is, of course, also fundamental in the MBh, as, for instance, in the
following passage taken from the Vanaparvan, in which the part of the
forest inhabited by the exiled Pandavas is clearly described in these terms.
’While the Pandavas were living in Dvaitavana, the large forest became the
resort of Brahmans. The holy lake Dvaitavana was like the Brahmaloka
with the noise of the vedas being constantly and everywhere uttered. The
sound of the yajus, the rks, the samans and the prose recitations was.
pleasant. There was the noise of the bow strings coming from the Pdrthas
and the noise of the vedas coming from the wise (Brahmans), and the
Kshatriya united with the Brahman had even more brilliance’ (111.26.1-4).
In the forest the Pandavas have to hunt for their and the Brahmans’ food.
Hunting here is the typical Kshatriya activity suited to forest life, and the
use of bows makes it clearly a substitute for war. This is the way the exiled
princes protect the Brahmans who are around. Conversely the Brahmans
are busy reciting the vedas and sacrificing, the holy sounds suggesting some
ritual performance going on.
5See Bh&uuml;ler (1886:24). This definition of Manusmrti (I.88-89) has its exact parallel
in A&ssacrtutte;r&hamaacar; (I. 3. 5-6). And the MBh eventually repeats these very terms. See for
instance Dhrstadyumna’s definition of the Brahman’s dharma (VII.197.24-25) in
the Kinjavadekar edition, which even today seems to be the most familiar to all
Indian pandits and has recently been reprinted. Henceforward we shall quote from
this edition only). We leave aside the two last varnas, since they seem to be rather
out of focus in the epic; but the Shudras’ importance and their special relationship
to dharma and salvation should not be overlooked in this bhakti work.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
79
However, the epic seems to especially emphasise the striking constrast
between kings and Brahmans. Should Duryodhana’s wickedness be held
responsible for such a rash statement as this: ’The earth swallows these two:
a king who does not wage wars and a Brahman who does not leave his
home (to go to the forest: Nilakantha’s commentary suggests sannyasinam
as a synonym to brähmmJam’) (II. 55.14)? Most probably not, since every-
where in the epic the benevolence and peacefulness of the Brahman is
opposed to the warlike nature of the Kshatriya. Each time Yudhisthira
wants to give up war and his kingship, and take to forest life, he is sus-
pected to be more like a Brahman than a Kshatriya. This is an insult, in
spite of the regard all these warriors evince for Brahmans. But there are
also very clear statements of principles in this respect, such as this one
uttered by a Brahman to a Brahman:
Absence of violence (Qhimsa) towards all living beings is the highest
dharma. This is why a Brahman should never injure any living being. A
Brahman should be benevolent only: this is the highest revelation. He
knows the vedas and their auxiliary sciences, he gives the abhaya (ab-
sence of danger) to all creatures. Definitely, absence of violence,tr uthful-
ness and forgiveness, and upholding of the vedas-such is the highest
dharma of the Brahman. As to the Kshatriya’s dharma, you should not
seek for it. Punishing, looking fierce, and protecting his subjects, these are
the activities of the Kshatriya (I. 11.13b-17).
There is some sort of a paradox in this protector of men, who can be so
only by killing and punishing, and the peaceful Brahman who does not
- ’protect’ anybody nor destroys any living being. Beyond this, it is a fact
that the Brahman is mainly defined as a renouncer, the one who practises
the virtues of the yogin or the sannyasin. Actually almost all the epic
Brahmans are rsis, living in the forest, rather than householders. Some of
them are with wives, most of them without, but all are instances of the
third asrama, they are vanaprastha. In this context, it means that the
values of the fourth asrama, namely sannyasa, have percolated through the
whole life of the ideal Brahman. Actually in any case a Brahman has to be
an ascetic, or like an ascetic, during his brahmacarya period and should
come back to ascetic life at the end after being a householder. No wonder,
then, if a Brahman householder also becomes a strict vegetarian and
staunch supporter of ahimsa. But this has been made possible only because
the svadharma of Kshatriyas has been defined mainly in terms of danda,
himsa, ugratva, war and so on; since there can be no worldly life-that is,
no life at all on earth-without punishment and violence to keep everyone
and everything in order according to dharma.
The Brahman ascetic is the first to be benefited by this division of
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
80
labour, as 8amikd explains to his wrathful son, who has cursed king Pariksit
for having insulted his father:
I do not like what you have done. This is not the dharma of ascetics.
We live in the territory of this king and he dutifully protects us. That is
why I do not rapprove of this harm done to him. One who is the ruling
king should always be forgiven by the likes of us. Dharma, when injured,
injures-that is sure. If the king did snot protect (us), we would be
in the worst situation. We would not be able to practise our own dharma
as we would like. When protected by dharma-oriented kings we fully
practise our own dharma and they have a share of it. So a ruling king
should be forgiven in any case (1.41.20-24).
It is clear from the epic that a Brahman cannot be clearly distinguished
from an ascetic, and the king rules over the forest ascetics as well as the
village and city peoples Conversely the ascetic, vanaprastha or sannyasin,
cannot just be considered as being outside the social order. He has become
part and parcel of it by the blessing his very presence bestows on the king-
dom. The contrast between the two upper varnas has been stretched to its
utmost, their complementarity not being impaired by this but rather
strengthened. Does this mean that the king is definitely without the pale
when ultimate values and salvation are concerned? Actually the MBh, far
from warranting such a conclusion, goes against it.
Let us for a moment listen to what Vidura (the younger brother of
Dhrtardstra and Pà1JQu, born of a Shudra mother by the Brahman ascetic
Vyasa as an incarnatian of Dharma)l has to say about dharma to his elder
brother, the blind Kshatriya Dhrtarastra: he should be an expert in this
field. He says:
Sacrifice, gifts, vedic recitation, asceticism (tapas)-these four are follow-
ed by good people. Self-control, truth, honesty, benevolence-these four
are observed by good people. Sacrifice, vedic recitation, gift, asceticism,
truth, forgiveness, compassion, absence of greediness-this is the eightfold
path of dharma. The first group of four can also serve the purpose of self-
pride. The second one is not found in those who are not truly spiritual
(mahdtman) (V.35.55-57).
6There would be a number of epic texts to support this. See for instance the
praise of danda uttered by Arjuna (XII.15.2-13).
7Vidura is one of the characters who, at the same time, shows that the bhakti
ideal does not exclude Shudras from salvation, and that the epic situation is pretty
bad in the generation preceding that of the fighting cousin’s: Vidura-Dharma is the
last of the three brothers and his status is also inferior because of his Shudra
mother, thus giving dharma the lowest place in the values that govern Dhrtar&amacr;stra
and P&amacr;nqu.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
81
This teaching obviously suits a Kshatriya rather than a Brahman, since the
definition of perfect dharma does not include the priestly and teaching
functions of the Brahman. But the ’protection’ of the subjects and the
necessity of fighting and killing are not mentioned. Instead there is a list of
yogic virtues that one would expect in Brahmans rather than kings.
Actually, many statements in the MBh would seem to contradict this, but
we cannot slight it because of what Vidura stands for; there should be a
way in which a king could be said to possess yogic virtues like a true
yogin, like a renouncer. But is this not the core of the Gata doctrine? For
once, let us stop talking of contradictions and satisfying ourselves with
the idea that a large text that the MBh is cannot possibly have a single
doctrine of its own. On the contrary, let us try to look for the deep unity
that lies at the base of the so-called contradictions. With this in mind, we
shall now turn to the epic plot and main characters, which alone can give
us a clue to this unity if at all it exists.
* * *
The importance of svadharma for kings as well as Brahmans has for its
correlative in the epic the fear of varnasankara, of mixed birth. Actually
the mixture of varnas, and the confusion or overlapping of svadharma, are
only two different aspects of one and the same fundamental disorder-
adharma-in society and their absence is one of the main features of the
Krtayuga. Whether a man be born from a Brahman father and a princess
or, he, being a Brahman, act as a warrior and a king, or vice-versa, the
result is an impending catastrophe for the world. This formula seems to
provide a good point of vantage to look at some of the main characters of
the epic,8 and more particularly those who are supposed to be virtuous,
’good people’, though they fight on the asuric side - I mean Bhisma and
Drona.
Bhlsma is a Kshatriya of the lunar dynasty, and at first sight a kind of
model for all Kshatriyas, since he is the tutor of the Kaurava and Pandava
brothers and the teacher in the Santiparvan and Anusasanaparvan of the
MBh. However, his father, Sdntanu is the ruling king because his elder
brother has chosen the life of an ascetic in the forest, and his name Sdntanu
preserves something of this fact. As to Bbisma’s mother, Ganga, she is the
well-known river of salvation, whatever else the word may mean. Things
become worse when, in order to please his father, who, out of passion,
wants to marry the lovely Satyavati, Bhisma renounces the normal Ksha-
triya life that should have been his. He will not get married, will not pro-
create and will not be his father’s successor on the throne, in order to allow
8We shall have to limit our study to only a few of them for want of space.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
82
Satyavati’s son to become the heir apparent. All this looks very generous,
disinterested, and full of filial devotion.
No doubt, Bhisma is a very virtuous man; but what about his svadharma
as a Kshatriya? By giving up marriage, progeny and kingship, he actually
violates his svadharma. The evidence for this is poor Amba’s fate. Ambd
should have been the chief queen (mahis!) but will instead remain a virgin
through Bhlsma’s action. A symbol of the earth, she is abandoned without a
protector and a master,9 because Sdntanu’s true heir has refused to play his
own part. No wonder that she had been secretly engaged to an asuric king!
As a reward, Santanu gives his son a boon that he will die only when he is
ready and willing. If this is connected with other facts of the MBh it can
be read as a Brahmanic feature in Bhisma, for a Brahman cannot be killed
in fight, he can only die of his own accord, especially if he has yogic
power (like Drona, for instance). Moreover, this man, who has no progeny
of his own, is called Pitamaha by everybody. Sure enough, this may seem
natural that his grandnephews call him so since he is their paternal great-
uncle. But Pitamaha is at the same time, the well-known title of Brahma,
and applied to Bhlsma, it might point to his Brahmanic behaviour as well.
He acts as a Brahman in that he renounces the life of a householder,
though, as a Kshatriya, he has no right to do so. Mention should be made
also of the fact that he becomes Yudhisthira’s teacher during Books XII
and XIII of the MBh, though only a Brahman should be qualified for such
a role. One cannot compare him to Krsna doing the same thing in the
GTtd, because Krsna is Visnu himself, an avatara and a form of the great
rsi Narayana.
Viewed in this light, Bhima at the same time is a very pious and virtu-
ous man and a cause of the forthcoming disaster through no fault of his. It
is not mere chance that his stepmother, the princess Satyavati, had an
illegitimate son from a Brahman before her marriage,l° and this son,
Vyasa, a Brahman and an amsa of Narayana (like Krsna on the Kshatriya
side), will live as an ascetic but will have to sire sons on behalf of his dead
uterine brother. Here we see the varnasankara and dharmasankara cor-
respond to each other for the same dreadful result. The scene is set in such
a way that nobody really is wicked or commits the first sin, though the
violation of the objective dharma is constant.
The same holds true of Drona, the warrior Brahman. Should we say that
9All this could be substantiated through an analysis of Bh&imacr;sma’s role in the
svayamvara of the Kashi king’s daughters and the fight between Bh&imacr;sma, the
Kshatriya bachelor, and R&amacr;ma J&amacr;madagnya, the warlike Brahman, about Amb&amacr;
(V.173-96).
1Th0e same motif recurs with Kunt&imacr;, whose first son Karna was born of the god
S&umacr;rya before her marriage. As to Vy&amacr;sa being the son of a Brahman father and a
Kshatriya mother, this is to be compared with R&amacr;ma J&amacr;madagnya’s situation.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
83
he has chosen to become a warrior, and that in so doing at least he be-
comes a great sinner? This is far from obvious. But here we can afford to
analyse the story of his young days till his arrival at Hastinapura, since it is
short enough. Moreover, it has been narratedt hrice, and the variations may
offer useful suggestions. However, the third version (1.166.1-28) will be left
aside: it is shorter and completely omits Drona’s marriage and the birth
of his son, the main focus is the falling out between him and king Drupada
that leads to Dbrstadyumna’s and Draupadi’s birth. The first two versions
are more interesting because they are Drona’s story (L 130.33-67;131.1-34;
1.131.40-79).
Drona’s birth narrative is practically identical in both texts: he is ayo-
nija. His father, the Brahman ascetic Bharadvaja, has spilled his semen
and collected it into a vessel (Drona) ~on seeing the lovely GhrtacI, an
apsaras whose name, derived from ghrta, clarified butter, is an indication
of what is in Bharadvaja’s mind. In spite of his tapas and his vanaprastha
life, Bharadvaja performs his ritual duties with an element of desire-
kama-a legitimate desire, no doubt, since he wants to lead the life of a
pure Brahman. This is personified in Ghrtäcï from whom Drona will be
born. The implications of this will be understood later on.
In both versions, Drona’s childhood is described in about the same
terms. In the first, his father is the guru under whom he and his friend
prince Drupada study the veda. The two boys study and play together
(this is also mentioned in the third version: 1.166.7). In the second one,
both study the veda and the dhanurveda under Agnivega, and Drupada is
then called Yajnasena: here comes in a non-Brahmanic feature that is sur-
prising in Drona’s education; but the young prince is learning how to
become a royal yajamana, being trained in dhanurveda and at the same
time prone to sacrificing as his name indicates. From the symbolic value
attached to ’play’ in the epic at large, and its particular relevance to the
king’s ruling over the world that is God’s lild, the mention of the playing
and studying together of Drona and Drupada may mean either that they
co-operate in making the world prosper according to dharma, or that they
vie with each other in performing the same activities. This will remain
ambiguous till the ascetic Drona meets king Drupada in his palace.
Then in both stories, Drupada becomes king whereas Drona, after his
father’s death, lives as a vanaprastha. Prompted by his father (or his an-
cestors, pitr), and out of desire (lobha) for a son, he marries Krpa, Sarad-
vat’s daughter, who, in both versions, is called Gautami. She gives birth to
Asvatthaman, Drona’s son. At first sight, Drona’s desire for a son is quite
legitimate, connected as it is with his duty toward his dead father. But the
word lobha is rather surprising: stronger than kama, it definitely has a dis-
paraging connotation. It betrays something wrong in the apparently
dharmic behaviour of Drona. The choice of his wife might be one more in-
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
84
dication of what is in Drona’s mind, stressing as it does both the purity of
his status and the obvious anomaly that mars its purity.
According to the MBh (I.130.2ff.), Krpi, garadvati or Gautami is Krpa’s
sister; she is a Brahman and her patronymic Gautami certainly is meaning-
ful : Gotama could be translated as ’utterly a cow’, and through this a pure
Brahmanic status is emphasised. A cow is that without which a Brahman
cannot be a Brahman. That is why daksinas are so often estimated in cows.
Moreover, the link between the Brahman and the cow through the sacri-
ficial offerings stresses the fact that the Brahman is the real source of all
riches in this world.ll Just as a king’s wife is the symbol of his kingdom, a
Brahman’s wife is symbolically linked to his cow as the main source of his
Brahmanic power. However Krpa and Krpi-who again are ayonija-were
born from their father’s seed fallen into a clump of reeds: 8aradvat was a
Brahman warrior, and his semen was spilled when he saw the apsaras
Janapadi. Then he dropped his bow and arrows, the goat skin he wore as
a vanaprastha, near that clump of reeds and left his hermitage. The two
children were brought up by king gdntanu. The meaning of the name of
the apsaras is clear: janapada is a compound word used to name as a whole
the territory and the people over which a king rules. ~aradvat obviously
is the opposite of Bharadvaja as his weapons would also indicate. He is a
Brahman who, in order to keep his Brahmanhood and his link with the
cow, holds some of the attributes of the ksatra. Two inferences may be
drawn from that. Either he has to resort to the use of weapons because the
present Kshatriyas do not correctly perform their svadharma and do not
protect Brahmans. This could be the case, if we think of Bhlsma’s renun-
ciation of kingship. Or, the Brahman, out of extreme purity, may refuse
to sacrifice for kings or serve them as minister, and is thus led to severing
his connection with Kshatriyas, the result being the same paradoxically:
the refusal of the relationship between kings and Brahmans leads the
Brahmans to wish for Kshatriya power. The clump of reeds (sarastamba)
in which Krpa and Krpi were born is a symbol of weapons (sara meaning
also an arrow) that prepares them for a life of warlike Brahmans. There-
fore, when Drona marries Krpi Gautami, his life takes a new turn (not so
new according to the second version, which makes him study the dhanur-
veda). His wife as well as his brother-in-law prepare him for what we have
called a dharmasankara.
Now the two versions somewhat differ in the account of Agvatthmdman’s
l~irth. In the first (L 130.47ff.), soon after he was born, the baby neighed
1Th1at is why the Brahman’s cow is K&amacr;madhenu. See also Vasistha’s name, which
makes him the richest of men, though he only possesses his cow. This is the source
of his difficulties with Vi&sacute;v&amacr;mitra. The same idea exists in J&amacr;madagni’s and K&amacr;rta-
virya’s story.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
85
like a horse. Hence his name, as the text has it: he possesses the strength
of a horse-asvasya sthdma. Then, as if it was the result of this birth,
Drona becomes an addict to the dhanurveda. Hearing of Rama Jdma-
dagnya, who is giving away everything to Brahmans, he decides to go to his
hermitage and get a share of these gifts. After introducing himself to
Rama as an Angirasa,l2 he asks him for riches. But it is too late:
Jamadagnya has given away everything he has conquered from the Ksha-
triyas. However, as he cannot reject a Brahman’s request, he offers Drona
to choose between his own body, that is himself, and his weapons. Drona
chooses the weapons: if they are not gold or kine, they can be used to
acquire them, and they are the necessary attributes of kings.&dquo; Then he
goes and visits king Drupada and reminds him of their former friendship
in order to revive it.
The second version (1.131.508’.) is better brought in before interpreting
the first. Agvatthdman, as soon as he was born, was bhimavikramakarman
-of fierceful bravery and feats. He craves for milk though, like a true
Brahman. Drona is so poor that he has no cow and he starts looking for
someone who would give him a cow without defiling him or impairing his
status. He does not get any. The children around his son give him some
flour diluted with water and make him believe it is milk. The child is
happy and actually believes he has tasted milk, whereas the other children
laugh at him. Drona cannot stand this situation, but does not accept to
’serve’ anybody in order to deal with the situation, since this would be
highly censurable for a Brahman (131:59). With this in mind he remem-
bers Drupada and goes to him, knowing his friend of old days has mean-
while become a king.
When compared to each other, the two versions mutually clarify and
strengthen their meaning, which on the whole is identical. Agvatthdman
neighs as a horse. The horse is a royal animal just as the cow is a Brahma-
nic one, and Asvatthaman is strong like a horse. The idea expressed in
’bhimavikramakarman’ is the same. These are royal features. A Brahman
is not supposed to possess strength and be able to protect himself. The son
is one’s other self: no wonder if Drona now starts devoting himself to the
1O2n the relationship of Gotama and Angiras in the veda, see Macdonell and
Keith (1967: Vol. I: 234-35) under Gotama. Moreover there is a well-known comple-
mentarity between the Angiras and the Bhrgus (R&amacr;ma being a Bh&amacr;rgava). Brhaspati
is an Angiras, &Sacute;ukra a Bhrgu. One is the purohita of the devas, the other of the
asuras. Both Bhrgu and Angiras were born from the Fire (Brhaddevat&amacr; V. 97-101).
1Th3is offer reminds us of the scene in which Duryodhana and Arjuna come to
Krsna and ask for his help in the forthcoming conflict (V. 7). Krsna offers himself
without any weapon or his troops. Arjuna chooses Krsna, Duryodhana is very happy
to get his armies. Duryodhana and Drona make the same type of choice and they
are going to fight on the same side.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
86
dhanurveda and being desirous of riches after the birth of such a son.
The other version makes the link between Agvatthaman’s birth and
Drona’s search for riches even clearer. Right from the beginning, Drona is
looking for a cow or goods which would not be given as a ’salary’. He
refuses to ’serve’, and this obviously excludes the service of kings, though
a dharmic society needs the mutual help of kings and Brahmans. It is true
that the dharmagdstras give the poor independent Brahman as an ideal of
Brahmanhood and forbid him all kinds of seva. At the same time, they
make it necessary for Kshatriyas and Brahmans to co-operate, with the
result that, in actual fact, a Brahman who ’serves’ a king is slightly inferior
to others.&dquo; That is why in the first version Drona has gone to Rama
Jamadagnya, a Brahman, from whom he could receive gifts without serving
anyone. Left with a choice between Jamadagnya himself and his weapons,
he follows the same logic and is obliged to choose weapons, which will
make him independent or equal to a king, like Jamadagnya himself. At the
same time, this choice will make him violate his svadharma, possibly to
show that independence is not the aim to be pursued.
Now the scene is set for the meeting between Drupada and Drona, and
Drupada’s flat refusal to help his former friend can be seen in its proper
light. He has perfectly understood that Drona does not come to him as a
Brahman comes to a king, to seek help and protection and give blessings
in return, if not proper service. Though he is in great need, Drona has
come as a friend, that is, as an equal. Drupada’s reply then in its own way
is quite correct: ’A poor man is no friend for one who is rich, nor an
ignorant man for a learned one; a eunuch is no friend for a warrior. What
do you expect from a former friendship’ (1. 131.9)? Or, in 131.66b-67a:
’One who is no srotriya is no friend for a srotriya, nor one who is not a
car-warrior for a car-warrior. Friendship requires equality, or ’sameness’
(samya) and is made impossible by inequality (vaisamya)’; 1.166.15a is
identical with 131.66b and 15b adds: ’one who is not a king is no friend
for a king’. The Brahman’s claim for friendship is sufhcient reason to dis-
miss him and refuse the slightest help. Drupada’s statement is4well balanced.
If the wealthy man or the car-warrior is the Kshatriya, the ignorant
and the a-srotriya also is the Kshatriya, whereas the Brahman is rightly
acknowledged as learned and srotriya. The impossibility of friendship holds
for both sides and its expression is but another way of stating the comple-
mentary oppositions between Brahmans and kings.
On the face of it though, king Drupada is wrong and violates his sva-
dharma by ignoring a Brahman’s request. But the whole scene centers
1Actua4lly the king’s personal chaplain is called purohita, the one who is placed
before or first, and in the jajm&amacr;ni system the Brahman pries t is never considered a
’servant’.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
87
around the idea of friendship and its implications. Drona, whether equip-
ped with Jdmadagnya’s weapons or only stubborn in his refusal to do any
sevd, does not come to king Drupada as a true Brahman, and that is what
his claim for friendship means. On the one hand, Drona wants to break
the dharmic complementarity between Brahmans and kings; while remain-
ing superior as a Brahman, he wants to get arms and riches for himself in
order not to depend on a king for his livelihood. On the other hand,
. Drupada does not evince the respect with which he, as a king, should treat
a Brahman. Though in a different way from Bhisma, he thus shows that
the ksatra is not performing its part. Many stories have been told of
Kshatriyas who were tested by haughty Brahmans and proved to be ex-
ceedingly patient before being rewarded for so much forbearance. Again
where is the first sin? However, the result is clear. Just as Amba, the Earth,
was left unprotected, the Brahman child Agvatthdman is doomed to extreme
poverty and made unable to grow as a true Brahman. 15 -
It is no wonder then that Drona, with a vindictive mind, goes to Hastina-
pura and meets Bhlsma. The renouncing prince and the warlike Brahman
will work hand in hand at the court of the blind king Dhrtarastra and will
serve the asuric Kauravas; from the very beginning they have been the
symptoms of adharma and have helped to bring the world to a desperate
situation, which will be solved through a war and complete destruction.
According to Hindu tradition, the prevailing adharma is like the result of /
a victory of asuras over devas and the upsetting of the normal hierarchy
between the three worlds. The asuras have become the inhabitants of
heaven whereas the devas have been chased away from their home. In the
epic, Bhlsma is an incarnation of the Vasu Dyaus, a deva who has been
doomed to be reborn on earth because of some offence (against a brahma-
n;i!): Dyaus (sky) is here the transparent symbol of heaven. Drona is the
incarnation of Brhaspati, the gods’ purohita. When both of them are
living at Dhrtardstra’s court, whose sons are an asura (Duryodhana) and
raksasas (the 99 others), the epic scene seems to correspond to that situa-
tion in which heaven is occupied by asuras.l6 But this type of world crisis
1Actu5ally A&sacute;vatth&amacr;man’s name seems to hint at the aranis, the kindling sticks of
the sacrificial fire that are made of a&sacute;vattha wood. See Biardeau (1978-1979:154).
Thus there is one more symbolic link between the son being deprived of milk and
the Brahman father who cannot maintain his fires, between milk and Brahmanhood.
1The6re are many more instances in the epic of the confusion in the svadharmas
of the two upper varnas and its symbolic equivalent, the varnasankara. An obvious
one is the importance of the Suta caste (a mixture of Brahman and Kshatriya), of
which Karna is the most famous example. The role of r&amacr;ksasas is also quite typical.
These carnivorous monsters are considered as Brahmans (brahmaraksas), and a care-
ful study of their feats in the MBh (or in the R&m&yaaammaanccrra;; as well, from T&amacr;t&amacr;ka to
the
R&amacr;vana) helps understand that they are a form of Brahman that comes to the
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
88
again has a name in Hindu tradition. It is the end of a yuga, that has to
come anyway at regular times, and dharma should then be restored
through Visnu’s avataras. As a matter of fact, Duryodhana is the asura
Kali and his maternal uncle Sakuni the asura Dvapara, the two last yugas
being personified.
The main difficulty in understanding the whole plot in the MBh is that
it uses the typical frame of an avatara myth without being such a myth.
No doubt Krsna is everywhere and decides everything; he is considered as
the supreme god and nothing takes place without his consent or his active
co-operation.17 But he has, so to say, split into two characters: Arjuna is
his bosom friend, cross-cousin and brother-in-law (by Subhadrd); and the
two of them are the rsis Nara and Narayana reborn. From this privileged
relationship between Krpa and Arjuna, one may guess that Arjuna’s role
is particularly meaningful. He receives special instructions from Krsna (the
Gitd) and the grace of his vision as Visvarupa; he has Krsna as his
charioteer during the battle and, as such, is guided by him in all his
actions. He obeys Krsna in everything and holds him responsible for the
final victory in the war without giving himself any share of the merit,
though he has been his agent in all circumstances. He is Krsna’s true
bhakta. It seems-and this is the main contention of this paper-that the
epic makes him the figure of the ideal king, in spite of Yudhisthira’s being
the apparent king of the story. If such is the case, the doctrine of the Gitd
and Arjuna’s behaviour in conformity with it should have something to tell
about the ideal king,18
What is Arjuna’s place among his brothers, once we )keep in mind his
special relationship to Krsna? This can be made clear by referring to the
values each one of his brothers stands for. Dum6zil’s analysis is quite rele-
vant here and remains largely valid.l9 It will allow us to deal more briefly
fore when the ksatra does not perform its normal function. In both epics, there are
r&amacr;ksasas on both sides, the asuric and the divine.
1Scho7lars
do not any longer try to reconstruct the epic and read into it a pro-
gressive growth of Krsna’s deification. Moreover, it is possible, starting from the
MBh itself, to show that there is no opposition between the Kshatriya Krsna and
his gop&amacr;la form.
1I8t is somewhat paradoxical that the very success of the G&t&iammaaccrr;; in India, and even
elsewhere, has kept its main purpose more or less hidden. It is uttered for a king
and tells of the king’s duties. However, we shall see that the king may also stand
for a man in general, that is, the Hindu conception of man. For a lengthy discussion
of this problem of kingship in relation to Yudhisthira and Arjuna see Biardeau (1978:
87-204). In the present paper the same problem is raised in terms of the svadharma
of a king as taught by the epic.
1Se9e Dum&eacute;zil (1968), and particularly pp. 42-102 where he acknowledges his
debt to S. Wikander. The following is the gist of his analysis: Starting from the
birth story of each brother and bringing together relevant features and events with
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
89
with this question, even though we shall have to differ from its conclu-
sions. More specifically, Dum6zil’s method helps illuminate our problem. In
the epic characters he sees types rather than individuals, and these types
are meant to embody values and social functions rather than illustrate any
psychological truths. That is how, following him, we consider the five
Pandavas here.
First of all, the central position of Arjuna among his four brothers, after
Yudhisthira and Bhima but before the twins, is to be noticed. Nakula and
Sadadeva in every respect are inferior to their brothers and their only aim
is to serve their brothers’ purposes. Because of their asuric maternal uncle
(Salya), we may see them as the representatives of the inferior strata of the
world, that is, both of the low castes of the Indian society and of the in-
habitants of the infernal regions. All they have to do is to obey their
superiors, and that is what they actually do.~° In the present context, they
may be kept aside. As to Yudhisthira and Bhima, being older than Arjuna,
they are his superiors in a way and he should obey them. When Yudhis-
thira talks of retiring to the forest and renouncing kingship, he proposes
Bhima as his successor (VIII.70.46). But this superiority should be under-
stood in the proper way: in a setting where the divine avatara acts as a
charioteer, the most obvious meaning cannot be the final one.21 Though
Krsna is supposed to take orders from Arjuna, he actually is his master,
his guru. Arjuna gives him instructions regarding his horses, but he obeys
him in everything else. Conversely, though Bhima can be considered as
Arjuna’s superior, the latter has been placed by Yudhisthira above the
former during the battle. We are thus invited to look for another level
of meaning, less obvious no doubt, but more in keeping with the overall
significance of the epic.
The striking Brahmanic features in Yudhisthira have been rightly deli-
neated by Dum6zil (1968: 59-63). But these should be qualified in more
than one way. He is likened to a Brahman when he wants to avoid the war
or to stop it, when he proposes to renounce the world and go to the
woods, or when he advocates moksa as the supreme goal of man (XII. 167).
His Brahmanhood is more that of a sannyasin than of a householder. He
which they are associated, Dum&eacute;zil sees Yudhisthira, son of Dharma, as the sove-
reign, who is for him a representative of the Brahmanic varna; Bhima and Arjuna,
born from V&amacr;yu and Indra respectively, as two representatives of the warrior class;
and the twins, sons of the A&sacute;vins, as standing for the third ’function’, that is, the
productive classes of society. This pattern allows him to conceive of the epic heroes
as replicas of the vedic pantheon and its structure.
2Thi0s should not be understood in a minimal way. Sahadeva especially is con-
sidered as an expert in niti, he is the most beloved son of Kunti, though he actually
was born of M&amacr;dr&imacr;. The bhakti ideals work such wonders!
2Simil1arly Visnu was born as Upendra and as such subservient to Indra’s aims.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
90
believes in ahirhsä, truth, compassion, the virtues that have become the
Brahman’s through the sannyasic ideal. This is in agreement with the epic
conception of the Brahmans, but does not account for Yudhisthira’s king-
ship.22 It rather makes it unintelligible.
After his coronation comes the famous dice playing between him and
Sakuni, who acts for his nephew Duryodhana. As a Kshatriya he may
play dice, but he is exceedingly fond of gambling and not very good at it.
That is how he stakes and looses all his possessions to Sakuni. In Book
IV, when the Pandavas have to disguise themselves before appearing at
Virdta’s court and live there for one year unrecognised, Yudhisthira takes
the garb of a Brahman, but of a Brahman who is an expert at dice playing.
He will spend that year gambling with Virdta and his court and winning all
the time. He had been taught all the subtleties of the game by a gandharva
king during his exile in the forest. To be a Brahman and a dice expert
makes a strange combination. Given the constant comparison between the
dice game of Book II and the war (see Gehrts 1975:229ff.), it is possible
to look at such a Brahman as a mock duplicate of the Brahman warrior,
that is, as the kind of mixture the epic considers as dangerous and exem-
plifies in Drona.
The name Yudhistbira adopts during that year points to the same con-
clusion and adds a new piece of information: the pseudo-Brahman is called
Kanka Vaiydghrapadya. The patronym, which is mentioned only once, is
rather difficult to interpret, but the name Kanka is easier to decipher.23
Kanka is first of all the name of a carnivorous bird, a kind of heron,
which in the epic is traditionally coupled with the baka, a crane, and found
in all inauspicious descriptions of the battlefield in the company of jackals,
vultures and other meat and carrion eaters. Moreover, the kanka lives in
the Matsya kingdom, among the fish, which are its normal food. A
Brahman gambling and winning, a heron which fishes around for food:
these are ominous associations for the dharmic Yudhisthira. As a matter
of fact, he is Dharmaraja and son of Dharma. Nowhere in the epic is
Dharma equated with Yama, but Dharmaraja is a well-known epithet of
Yama (just as Pitamaha is of Brahma). This at the same time clarifies
Dharma’s appearance as a fish-eater baka at the end of Book III, and takes
care of the awful power of Yudhisthira that is not connected with the
actual practice of fighting: the bleeding of his nose which could destroy
the whole world. He is clearly associated with Death. The epic plot being
2Th2is is one of the points where we cannot agree with Dum&eacute;zil: the topmost
varna, that is, the Brahmans, should not partake of sovereignty according to Hindu
ideals. They are superior, not only because they act as priests, but because they are
the repositories of the knowledge of dharma, which provides the theoretical frame
for their functions as priests and kings’ advisers.
2Fo3r a more detailed discussion, see Biardeau (1978: 94-111)
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
91
the enactment of a world crisis at the level of human ’history’, Yudhisthira
with his sannyasic bent is the fit sovereign to rule over this period and lead
all the warriors to salvation. Ultimately they all will be found in heaven at
the end of the MBh. That is why 1’udhisthira’s kingship is not meant to
give the portrait of the ideal king. He rules as Dharma-Yama rules, by
destroying and making room for a new world in order to save dharma and
the three worlds. At the same time, he embodies the ultimate value of
moksa which commands the universal order. But it is also quite clear that
he could not do anything without the avatara Krsna’s help, that is, without
Arjuna as well.
Bhima in many respects is just the opposite of Yudhisthira. He advocates
kama as the supreme goal of man (XII. 167), and sees kama at the very
root of sannyasa: no life, nor renunciation of life, in the world can be
understood without an element of desire. But the urge in the Brahman to
sacrifice for himself or perform sacrifices for others also is rightly called
kama. Kama cannot be separated from all forms of life. That is one of the
meanings of Bhima’s birth from Vayu. Vdyu should be understood as the
god of vital breath, prana, that is, the first and last manifestation of life
and movement.24 But Vdyu is also known as Prabhanjana, the breaker, one
of the symbols of physical strength in its most violent form. Desire for life
requires violence (himsa) because every living being is threatened in its very
existence by a stronger one. This is the idea underlying the so-called mat-
syanydya, according to which might is right.
In this way the symbolism of Bhima cuts across Yudhisthira’s at the
Matsya court. The year spent in the Matsya kingdom marks the lowest ebb
in the world crisis and calls for the emergence of a king. Bhima was born
just at the same time as Duryodhana, as an answer to this embodied threat
to the existence of earth. Therefore, he at the same time is the one who
upholds the interests of life in this world, and is the strong and bloody
warrior who treats his victims on the battlefield (Duhgdsana, Dhuryodhana,
etc.) as well as outside (Jardsandha, Kicaka, many raksasas) without any
consideration for the warrior’s code of honour. The meaning of so much
violence is made obvious when he, at the same time, is Draupadi’s most
helpful and understanding husband whe she is in pressing need or has an
apparently frivolous and unreasonable whim to fulfil. Bhima always is
ready to answer her demands for help, contrary to Yudhisthira who
preaches patience to her and blames her ignorance and her irresponsible
behaviour.
2I4n this capacity V&amacr;yu is the first and transitory form of Brahma at the end of a
cosmic night, when N&amacr;r&amacr;yana wakes up. Brahm&amacr;, becoming V&amacr;yu, moves over the
ocean and looks for means to dive and raise the earth from the bottom of the
ocean. This is the first appearance of life and movement, where the wind and the
vital breath cannot be dissociated.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
92
The contrast between Yudhisthira and Bhima thus could not be deeper
and their being born one after the other calls for some explanation. Moksa
and kama stand side by side, but kama coming after moksa should be
subordinate, moksa being the dominant and encompassing value. This
order recalls the puranic cosmogonies,25 which start from the supreme yogic
form of the Purusa to end with the formation of Brahmanda at the first
stage, then start again in the pratisarga with Brahma-Vayu and Yajna-
Vardha, thus subordinating the kama world symbolised by Brahma and
sacrifice-svargakamo yajeta is the standard formula that the Mimarhsa
analyses-to the yogic values that are connected with mokja.2~ Yudhis-
thira and Bhima thus stand for the two extreme values that command the
cyclical ’history’ of the universe. Creation occurs in order to allow indi-
viduals to crave for moksa, and in order to ensure the continuity of that
process, the world of kama should be kept constantly recurring through
alternating cosmic days and nights (the cosmic nights being equated jto the
yogic sleep of the Purusottama at the highest level, or of Narayana bet-
ween two kalpas). But the uncommitted attitude of Yudhisthira and the
unchecked behaviour of Bhima would lead to a disastrous situation, to the
reign of matsyanydya. The apparently irreconcilable opposition between
them calls for a mediation. In a way Krsna, is the mediation, since Yudhis-
thira often takes his advice, but he is not the main actor.
In fact this is the point at which Arjuna has to come in. He was born
third, but he was sired by Indra, the king of the gods; Pandu and Kunti
have prepared his coming in a very special way. Prophecies accompanied his
birth and they are repeated at several junctures in the narrative. Arjuna
is to be the performer of three great sacrifices, of which the most obvious
is not a sacrifice in the ordinary sense of the word; all commentators agree
in identifying the three sacrifices as Yudhisthira’s rajasuya and asvamedha
and the ’sacrifice of battle’ in beween. In the first two, Yudhisthira, as the
apparent sovereign, is also the apparent yajamana, whereas Arjuna acts
only as the main warrior in the digvijaya and as the guardian of the sacri-
ficial horse during its year of wandering. During the war, however,
Arjuna’s leading role is obvious at all levels of interpretation. But if he is
to be understood as the ideal king, his personal action should be analysed
as mediating between moksa and kama, between yogic values and sacri-
fice. He should be able at the same time to epitomise these opposite and
complementary values in himself and ensure their harmonious working for
the welfare of the three worlds.
2Ev5en though the pur&amacr;nas could be proved more recent than the epic, it is obvi-
ous that the epic rests on the same set of values and already knows the basic frame
of the pur&amacr;nic cosmogonies.
2Se6e Biardeau (1968, 1969 and 1971) on the pur&amacr;nic cosmogonies and pralaya.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
93
This is exactly what the Gitd has to say: at first sight, Krsna does not
teach Arjuna how to be a perfect king or a good warrior. The problem
Arjuna has raised right from the beginning is one of values. As a Kshatriya
that is, at the same time a prince and a warrior, he has to fight against his
own relatives and his superiors and he curses his svadharma .21 He does
not wish for victory, kingship or pleasure, not even for life, if he has to
destroy all his superiors and family for that; he will reap sin only from
such a victory and will bring about the destruction of dharma and of his
lineage. Kshatriya women will be led astray and there will be a ’mixture of
varnas’ as a consequence of the death of Kshatriya men on the battlefield
(Bhagavadgitd L28-46). Arjuna is obsessed by the very same idea which
pervades the whole epic plot.
But Krsna answers by emphasising the svadharma of the Kshatriya in
such a way as to brush aside all these objections. To put it briefly, Krsna
denies the possibility for at man to avoid acting in some way or other if
he is to live at all. No doubt traditional sannyasa and the ideal of naiskar-
mya are completely discarded, but the main purpose is to show their in-
applicability to Kshatriya ideals. A Kshatriya is a born warrior, his first duty
is to be a protector of people, to fight for the welfare of the worlds, and
the present battle is a battle for the sake of dharma and legitimate kingship
(two phrases to express one and the same idea). Actually kingship, which
Arjuna refuses with all the pleasures and privileges attached to it, is not
the subject matter of Krsna’s speech. He talks of a king’s duties, not of his
rights or profits. A Kshatriya is a yajamana of a special type. Not only
should he not give up the performance of regular and ritually defined
sacrifices, but he should consider all his actions, including fighting as a
warrior, as many sacrifices. In this way he is a yajamana who never stops
sacrificing and the battle as a sacrifice is his own variety of it, for which
he is the sacrificer, the priest and the victim. The first consequence is to
make the violence of war as justifiable as any killing performed within a
sacrificial rite: it cannot be called himsa if this violence is not for the sake
of killing but intended as sacrifice.
But Krsna’s teaching goes one step further. Even though the war should
result in kingship being restored to the Pandavas, kingship is not the
aim, but dharma and the welfare of the world. Moreover, the warrior who
starts fighting makes himself a victim; he has to renounce his own life,
which is more to him than his social status and possessions, as long as he
is not sure of his victory. Therefore, the true warrior is one who fights not
for his own benefit, not to conquer overlordship, power and riches, but for
2Th7is fight between ’brothers’ recalls the fight between asuras and devas, in which
the asuras, as the elders and superiors, are the winners; only the avat&amacr;ra’s inter-
ference turns the victory in favour of the gods, that is, of dharma.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
94
the whole world’s good. He offers his own self as a victim for that purpose,
and in doing so he imitates the Supreme God who gets incarnate on earth
in order to save the dharma. That is why his acts cannot remain attached
to him and produce future good or bad births, since he does not try to
reap the fruits of what he has done. This sacrificer thus also becomes the
true renouncer, the true sannyasin. Keeping his sacrificial fires burning,
lighting the fire of war, he never has his self-interest in view but devotes
himself to God and acts as his duplicate or his representative on earth. As
such a Kshatriya can be a true yogin when performing the sacrifice of war.
This idea, of course, gives the svadharma of kings a new content and links
it with salvation. The specific Kshatriya way to salvation is also their
specific sannyasa and sacrifice. Kings have not to renounce ultimate values
in order to remain kings, they only have to renounce their own self-, and
this the Brahman has also to do if he is to become a sannyasin.
This teaching of the Giti could not be understood outside the bhakti
ideals. It implies a new arrangement of the different goals of man. If the
practice of svadharma, which has for its aim the maintenance of universal
dharma, is now linked with the attainment of moksa, the word dharma
acquires a new meaning by which it encompasses all goals including even
moksa. This is not possible without giving the dharma a broader definition,
in which the sannyasic virtues will find the pride of place, and this new
definition will not be the Brahman’s exclusive concern but will be applica-
ble to all varnas. In the already quoted chapter 167 of Book XII of MBh,
Vidura, the .ksattar, a mixture of Kshatriya and Shudra (actually one of
the three sons who were sired by the ascetic Brahman Vyasa acting as a
surrogate for his dead uterine brother), is the advocate of dharma as the
supreme goal of man. Being an incarnation of Dharma, what else could he
say? But his idea of dharma, in agreement with the GTtd, includes all san-
nydsic virtues as well as the ideal of dharma of the upper varnas. Says
Vidura:
Vedic learning, asceticism (tapas), generosity, faith, performing sacri-
fices, forgiveness, pure feelings, compassion, truth, self-restraint and per-
fection of atman.. all these have dharma and artha as their roots, and
to me this comes under a single word: by dharma alone have rsis crossed
(this life), and the worlds are founded on dharma. By dharma gods have
prospered and artha is entrusted to dharma. Dharma is first, artha
comes in the middle and kama is last, as the wise say (XII. 167.5, 6b-8).
Obviously Vidura’s idea of dharma is not different from Krsna’s, though
he retains the ’orthodox’ order of purusarthas and seems to exclude moksa.
But the difference is only one of the starting point: in a statement meant
to give the true order of values in this world, dharma has to come first
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
95
anyway, since the world is maintained through dharma. 340Aja comes in
only when the individual as such is taken into consideration and wants to
know where he is going to land after a dharmic life. This actually is the
purport of Yudhisthira’s praise of moksa at the end of the same chapter
(43-48); he does not forbid the practice of the three goals of man but warns
that one should not have any attachment to worldly things since success
and happiness do not depend on men’s efforts or virtues (47-48). From this,
one comes to the conclusion that true happiness should be reached amidst
the activities of life through detachment (45-46). Detachment is mukti or
moksa, and Dharmaraja does not even refer to samsara and rebirth as
opposed to final liberation. Though Yudhisthira has the last word, and is
praised by everybody, his own arrangement of the purusdrthas does not
contradict Vidura’s.28
After Vidura, Arjuna pleads in favour of artha as the most important
goal of man (~IL 167.11-20). Knowing him as the faithful disciple of
Krsna, and the recipient of the Gitd’s teaching, we should interpret his
words with that context in mind. Artha 29 is considered as the king’s main
concern, and this here certainly is one of the reasons why Arjuna should
be considered as the ideal king. But, at the same time, we know him as
disinterested and fully engrossed in his duty. He is not of the type who
would confuse his own artha and the world’s artha, the more so as he
only fights in order to surrender the earth to his elder brother.3 No doubt
his praise of artha is linked with the character he typifies.31 Dharma and
kama are mentioned as depending upon artha and not opposed to it or
exclusive of it. How could a king perform costly sacrifices and lavishly
reward Brahman priests without artha? He should possess artha and cons-
tantly acquire some new one if he wants to be the main yajamana of his
kingdom. Arjuna does not use the term mosksa but mentions those who
wear the jata and saffron robes, who have their senses under full control
and are free from attachment, as actually in need of artha-artharthin.
2More8over this chapter 167 occurs in the &Amacr;paddharma section of the &Sacute;&amacr;ntiparvan;
therefore, we should be prepared for various formulations [that correspond to diff-
erent situations. It might be said that ultimately there is no &amacr;pad at all for the de-
tached man who does not strive after any particular goal in this life.
2Th9e word will be kept untranslated, like dharma, because it retains in itself so
mariy shades of meaning as cannot be expressed by a single English term: wealth,
material interest, aim or purpose in general, anything good. All these terms mostly
remain at the level of the individual’s artha. As the king’s specific goal, Dumont
(1962) sees in it the undiscriminated sphere of both politics and economics. We shall
presently show how this statement should be qualified.
3Ju0st as Karna wants to give her to Duryodhana.
3Th1e same may be said of Bh&imacr;ma’s discourse in favour of k&amacr;ma as described
above.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
96
Only the man, arthavan, is able to maintain the members of his household
and punish his enemies.
Is not the arthavan a king, then, when we know that, according to the
same Arjuna (XII. 15), the king should make use of his danda to rule even
over the ascetics in the forest and see that everybody acts in conformity
with his own dharma? The very first words of the present speech are parti-
cularly meaningful, coming after Krsna’s teachings: ’This is the land of
actions, karmabfifimi’.32 Artha, then, is at the centre of this karmabhümi,
as that which keeps everything going, and going in order if properly
managed. Artha is a purusartha (here again the translation of artha is im-
possible) because it is the means to all other purusdrthas, and not because
everything is moved by interest, as a superficial reading might lead one to
suspect.
We then have the clue to Arjuna’s rank among his brothers. Obedient
to Yudhisthira, he remains silent when Bhima blames him and speaks in
anger to him. He also keeps quiet when he disapproves of Krsna’s plan to _
have Drona killed and does not prevent Bhima and Yudhisthira to act
accordingly, but he stands aloof to mark his disagreement and his perma-
nent dislike of the battle and its dire necessities. He appeases Bhima’s out-
bursts of anger as much as he can, but does not hesitate to counteract the
disastrous results of his thoughtless actions (as in the final meeting between
Bhima and Agvatthdman, when the latter makes use of the brahmdstra).
He opposes Dharmaraja when he wants to retire to the forest; it is in this
context that the above quoted speech about danda is delivered. When in
battle, he is the best warrior and cannot be vanquished as long as Krsna
is by his side. War for him is the core of his svadharma and is the means
by which he can serve both the values that lead this world and are imper-
sonated by his elder brothers: yogic virtues (traditionally linked with
moksa) and sacrifice (usually prompted by kdma). War also is, of course,
as usual the means to conquer territories and riches and establish one’s
sovereignty. But by now it has been invested with a new function, which
reaches far beyond the sphere of artha proper. There is not the slightest
chance left for artha to become autonomous, at least at the ideological
level.
This seems to be the only development that can be traced in the concep-
tion of Hindu kingship, and it was brought through the bhakti ideals. But
this development, meant for Kshatriyas in the epic has been conceived all
along Indian history as valid for all non-Brahman Hindus as well. It gave
every svadharma a religious content and an access to ultimate salvation.
3Wou2ld it be possible to read this well-known phrase karmabhumi under the
equally well-known name of Kuruksetra, which the opening words of the G&t&iammaaccrr;; call
also dharmaksetra?
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
97
The Brahmanic model was not lost sight of, but was generalised so as to
fit all other categories of Hindu society including Shudras, women and all
impure castes. Once the Kshatriya gained access to salvation through his
specific and impure activities, the generalisation became easy. Every sort of
impurity could be sacralised and turned into svadharma. Nothing was left
outside the realm of ultimate values, though at the same time the status
of Brahmans remained unimpaired.
REFER ENCES
BIARDEAU, MADELEINE. 1968, 1969, 1971, 1978. Etudes de mythologie hindoue.
Bulletin de l’Ecole Francaise d5’Extr4eme-O:rient 19-45;55:59-86;58:17-89;65:
87-204.
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;. 1978-79. Annuaire de l’Ecole Pratiques des Hautes Etudes, Ve section-sciences-
religieuses 87: 145-71. Paris.
B&Uuml;HLER,G., ed. 1886. The laws of Manu. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
DERRETT, J. DUNCAN, M. 1976. R&amacr;jadharma. Journal of Asian studies 35, 4: 597-
609.
DUMEZIL, GEORGES. 1968. Mythe et &eacute;pop&eacute;e. L’ideologie des trois fonctions dans les
&eacute;pop&eacute;es des peuples indoeurop&eacute;ens. Paris: Gallimard.
DUMONT, LOUIS. 1962. The conception of kingship in ancient India. Contributions to
Indian sociology 6: 48-77.
GEHRTS, HEINO, 1975. M&b&raaammataahccahrr,;; das geschehen und seine bedeutung. Bonn:
Verlag Herbert Grundmann.
M&b&raaammataahccahrr.;; Ed., Kamchandrashastri Kinjawadekar. 1929-33. 5 vols. Poona:
Chitrashala Press.
KANE, P.V. 1941. History of the D&ssahtcuatre;r&aamma.car; II, 2. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute .
MACDONNEL, A.A. and A.B. KEITH. 1967. Vedic index of names and subjects (Jst ed.
1912). 2 vols. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Manusmrti. See B&uuml;hler.
Downloaded from cis.sagepub.com at HUNTER COLLEGE LIB on December 17, 2012
