
Disorienting Dharma
RELIGIONS IN TRANSLATION
SERIES EDITOR
Anne Monius, Harvard Divinity School
A Publication Series of
The American Academy of Religion
and
Oxford University Press
THE SABBATH JOURNAL OF JUDITH THE DAOIST MONASTIC MANUAL
LOMAX A Translation of the Fengdao Kejie
Edited by Laura Hobgood-Oster Livia Kohn
THE ANTICHRIST LEGEND SACRED AND PROFANE BEAUTY
A Chapter in Jewish and Christian Folklore The Holy in Art
Wilhelm Bousset Garardus van der Leeuw
Translated by A. H. Keane Preface by Mircea Eliade
Introduction by David Frankfurter Translated by David E. Green
With a new introduction and bibliography by
LANGUAGE, TRUTH, AND RELIGIOUS
Diane Apostolos-Cappadona
BELIEF
Studies in Twentieth-Century Theory and Method THE HISTORY OF THE BUDDHA’S RELIC
in Religion SHRINE
Edited by Nancy K. Frankenberry and Hans H. A Translation of the Sinhala Thūpavamsa
Penner Stephen C. Berkwitz
BETWEEN HEGEL AND KIERKEGAARD DAMASCIUS’ PROBLEMS & SOLUTIONS
Hans L. Martensen’s Philosophy of Religion CONCERNING FIRST PRINCIPLES
Translations by Curtis L. Thompson and David Translated with Introduction and Notes by
J. Kangas Sara Ahbel-Rappe
Introduction by Curtis L. Thompson
THE SECRET GARLAND
EXPLAINING RELIGION Ā ṇ ṭ ā ḷ ’s Tirupp ā vai a nd N ā cciy ā r Tirumoḻi
Criticism and Theory from Bodin to Freud
Translated with Introduction and Commentary
J. Samuel Preus
by Archana Venkatesan
DIALECTIC
PRELUDE TO THE MODERNIST CRISIS
or, The Art of Doing Philosophy
The “Firmin” Articles of Alfred Loisy
A Study Edition of the 1811 Notes
Edited, with an Introduction by C. J. T. Talar
Friedrich D. E. Schleiermacher
Translated by Christine Thirlway
Translated with Introduction and Notes by
Terence N. Tice DEBATING THE DASAM GRANTH
Robin Rinehart
RELIGION OF REASON
Out of the Sources of Judaism THE FADING LIGHT OF ADVAITA
Hermann Cohen ĀC Ā RYA
Translated, with an Introduction by Simon Kaplan Three Hagiographies
Introductory essays by Leo Strauss Rebecca J. Manring
Introductory essays for the second edition by
Steven S. Schwarzchild and Kenneth Seeskin THE UBIQUITOUS ŚIVA
Som ā nanda’s Śivad ṛ ṣ ṭ i and His Tantric
DURKHEIM ON RELIGION
Interlocutors
Émile Durkheim
John Nemec
Edited by W. S. F. Pickering
PLACE AND DIALECTIC
ON THE GLAUBENSLEHRE
Two Essays by Nishida Kitarō
Two Letters to Dr. Lücke
Translated by John W. M. Krummel and
Friedrich D. E. Schleiermacher
Shigenori Nagatomo
Translated by James Duke and Francis Fiorenza
THE PRISON NARRATIVES OF
HERMENEUTICS
JEANNE GUYON
The Handwritten Manuscripts
Ronney Mourad and Dianne Guenin-Lelle
Friedrich D. E. Schleiermacher
Edited by Heina Kimmerle DISORIENTING DHARMA
Translated by James Duke and Jack Forstman Ethics and the Aesthetics of Suff ering in the
THE STUDY OF STOLEN LOVE Mah ā bh ā rata
Translated by David C. Buck and K. Emily T. Hudson
Paramasivam
Disorienting
Dharma
E thics and the A esthetics of S uffering
in the M ahā bh ā rata
z
EMILY T. HUDSON
1
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research,
scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide.
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With offi ces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by
Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Copyright © 2013 Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without
the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly
permitted by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reproduction rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the
scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press,
at the address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hudson, Emily T.
Disorienting dharma : ethics and the aesthetics of suff ering in the mahabharata / Emily T. Hudson.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-19-986076-0 (alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-19-986078-4 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Mahabharata—Criticism, interpretation, etc. 2. Dharma. 3. Suff ering—Religious
aspects—Hinduism. I. Title.
BL1138.26.H83 2013
294.5′923046—dc23 2012019813
1 3 5 7 9 8 6 4 2
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper
Special thanks to Laurie Patton and Anne Monius whose guid-
ance and support made this project possible. This book is dedi-
cated to my husband, Parimal Patil, and to Wendy Doniger’s
Mah ā bh ā rata class that brought us together.
So, then, hear from me in full the news of the slaughter of
the horses, elephants, and kings of immeasurable splendor
in the battle. And while you are listening to what hap-
pened in the great war that gave rise to the destruction of
all the world, remain calm and do not despair, O king.
—sam·jaya to dhr ·tarā ·s ·tra, 5.156.12–13
Contents
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mah ā bh ā rata 3
What Is the M ah ā bh ā rata ? 8
The Aesthetics of Suff ering 27
Two Central Concepts: D harma and D uḥkha 35
Chapter Overview 47
1 . Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory
of the Mah ā bh ā rata 50
Sanskrit Literary Theory: Ānandavardhana’s Concept
of Dhvani and His Reading of the M ah ā bh ā rata 51
Reader-Response Theory 61
Narrative Ethics 65
The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 69
2 . Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 74
Summary of the Episode of the Dice Game 75
Proximity and Estrangement in the Episode of the Dice
Game 77
The Depiction of Draupadī in the Dice Game 97
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 100
Conclusion 104
3 . The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 106
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s “When I heard . . . ” Dirge: The Lament
as Summary 109
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s Role in the Failed Peace Negotiations 116
Sa ṃ jaya Narrates the Battle Events to the Blind King 122
viii Contents
The End of the War and the Moment of Advice:
Three Arguments Against Grief 131
Conclusion 141
Postscript 143
4 . Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 146
Two Theories of Time: Y ugas and K ā lav ā da 148
Narrative Strategies of Temporal Manipulation: Consuming,
Dismissing, Collapsing, and Stretching Time 164
Conclusion 176
5 . Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy
and Narrative Strategies 178
Fate and Human Exertion in the Game of Dice 180
Karma and Suff ering 189
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a the Enigmatic Deity 198
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick:
The Two Conclusions of the M ah ā bh ā rata 205
Conclusion 216
Conclusion: Dharma and Suff ering 218
Appendix : Glossary of Characters 225
Bibliography 2 27
Index 249
Disorienting Dharma
This page intentionally left blank
Introduction
t he a esthetics of s uffering in the M AH A¯ BH A¯R ATA
Not dharma , the good life of right conduct, but
dharmasūk ṣ mat ā or the subtle nature of d harma that
mixes good and evil in every act, the impossible labyrinth
of the moral life, is the central theme of the M ah ā bh ā rata .
—a. k. ramanujan1
Because d harma is subtle, dear queen, I am unable to
solve your question in the proper way.
—bhī ṣ ma to draupadī2
this book explores the relationship between aesthetics, ethics, and
religion in classical Indian literature and literary theory by focusing on
one of the most celebrated and enigmatic texts to emerge from the San-
skrit epic tradition, the M ah ā bh ā rata . Widely acknowledged to be one of
the most important sources for the study of South Asian religious, social,
and political thought, the M ah ā bh ā rata is generally considered to be a
major vehicle for transmitting dharma (moral, religious, and social duty
or virtue) in the Hindu tradition(s). Indeed, the “subtle” nature of d harma
is the central theme, if not the central problem, of the epic. However, even
a cursory reading would lead many to suspect that it is less interested
in communicating something conclusive about d harma and more con-
cerned with charting the manifold ways in which it can be transgressed.
After all, the M ah ā bh ā rata tells a story that involves a brutal, fratricidal war
that ends in the near destruction of the world; a virtuous queen’s sexual
1. A. K. Ramanujan, “Where Mirrors Are Windows: Toward an Anthology of Refl ections,”
History of Religions 28/3 (1989): 205 .
2. 2.60.40.
4 disorienting dharma
violation at the hands of her cousin-brothers; and a god, or more specifi -
cally God (Viṣ ṇ u/K ṛ ṣ ṇ a), who decides to descend to earth and take human
form, ostensibly to aid the side of dharma , but who encourages some of
the most virtuous characters in the epic to lie, cheat, and violate the rules
of battle. Throughout the epic, dharma is placed in tension with other
potentially more powerful forces, such as fate and time. The narrative de-
scribes the path of d harma as “scarcely discernable” (s ūk ṣ ma ) and depicts
this path as being so subtle that it resists straightforward interpretation.
Characters who struggle to determine the virtuous path often lose their
way, and frequently d harma is transgressed with disastrous, apocalyptic
consequences.
This book investigates the Mah ā bh ā rata’s seemingly subversive en-
gagement with d harma in order to determine whether the epic’s purpose
is to expose “the impossible labyrinth of the moral life,” as A. K. Ramanu-
jan puts it, or if, as will be argued here, the work complexifi es d harma in
order to convey wider and deeper truths about it.3 It argues that in order
to comprehend w hat the epic is saying about d harma , one fi rst has to
understand h ow it communicates its messages about d harma , and that to
grasp this, one has to understand how it functions as a work of literature.
More specifi cally, this book argues that one important way in which the
3. It is important to note that this study is not the fi rst to focus on the question of the text’s
confounding presentation of d harma and how—and if—it imparts a moral lesson. For ex-
ample, A. N. Bhattacharya has argued that the M ah ā bh ā rata contains many unethical ac-
tions in order to expose the evils of a dharma (the absence of dharma ) and warn against
them ( A. N. Bhattacharya, D harma-Adharma and Morality in Mah ā bh ā rata [Delhi: S.S. Pub-
lishers, 1992], 5 ). In a similar vein, V. S. Sukthankar has argued that although the M ah ā bh ā rata
story allows evil to triumph over dharma for a period of time, the epic does so in order to
show that the victory of evil is always short-lived and that a dharma always carries within itself
the seeds of its own destruction (O n the Meaning of the Mah ā bh ā rata [Bombay: Asiatic Society
of Bombay, 1957], 61–90 ). One of the best studies to date on the subject is B. K. Matilal’s ex-
amination of moral dilemmas in the M ah ā bh ā rata . In his series of articles in E thics and Epics
Matilal makes the following pertinent points: fi rst, that the M ah ā bh ā rata gives expression to
the tradition’s self-consciousness about moral values and moral confl icts; second, that the
epic exemplifi es the “internal criticism” of the tradition on the nature of d harma itself; and
fi nally, that the M ah ā bh ā rata exposes the problems that are presented by a rigidly conceived
ethical system constituted by a set of fi xed moral principles ( Bimal Krishna Matilal, E thics
and Epics : The Collected Essays of Bimal Krishna Matilal , ed. Jonarden Ganeri [Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2002], 1–122 ). Taking Matilal’s intuitions in the direction of Sanskrit lit-
erary theory and reader-response criticism, this book explores how the presence of moral
dilemmas in the M ah ā bh ā rata impacts the audience’s understanding of d harma and ethics
more broadly. Such an approach requires reading the epic self-consciously as a work of lit-
erature, an approach that Matilal takes implicitly, not explicitly.
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 5
Mah ā bh ā rata operates as a literary text is by conveying meaning more
through what it “does” than through what it says, that is by “doing” some-
thing to its audience. Just as Joel Brereton has persuasively argued that
the “solution” to Ṛ gveda hymn 10.129 lies less in what the poem says and
more in the responses it evokes in the audience, this book argues that
meaning in the M ah ā bh ā rata is found in its poetic features, that is in its
literary devices—what I call its “narrative strategies”—that are designed to
impact its audience in very specifi c ways that are ethically relevant.4
Until recently Mah ā bh ā rata scholarship has been polarized by a debate
concerning whether or not the epic should be regarded as consisting of an
old narrative core surrounded by a host of later accretions or as an organic
whole that is the product of a single redactor or group of redactors.5 While
scholars today still disagree about whether the epic developed in discern-
ible stages, 6 many have decided to move the conversation forward by
taking seriously the Sanskrit tradition’s view that the M ah ā bh ā rata is a
sophisticated literary object. In 1999 Alf Hiltebeitel declared that “the
largest inadequacy in M ah ā bh ā rata scholarship is simply the failure to
appreciate the epic as a work of literature.” 7 He subsequently published
Rethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , which explores the epic as a deliberately
authored work of literary fi ction. Several scholars have taken advantage of
the new interpretive possibilities that Hiltebeitel’s lead has opened up.
Adam Bowles’s D harma, Disorder, and the Political in Ancient India , for
4. Joel Brereton, “Edifying Puzzlement: Ṛ gveda 10. 129 and the Uses of Enigma,” J ournal of
the American Oriental Society 119/22 (1999): 248–260 .
5. The history of M ah ā bh ā rata scholarship has been summarized in numerous works, most
extensively John L. Brockington, T he Sanskrit Epics (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1998), 41–66 . For a
survey of more recent trends, see Aditya Adarkar, “The M ah ā bh ā rata and Its Universe: New
Approaches to the All-Encompassing Epic,” H istory of Religions 47/4 (2008): 305–319 .
6. Scholars who have argued that the epic evolved in discernible stages are James L. Fitzger-
ald (see “Making Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira the King: The Dialectics and the Politics of Violence in the
Mah ā bh ā rata ,” Rocznik Orientalistyczny 54/1 [2001] 67–69 ); E. Washburn Hopkins (see T he
Great Epic of India: Its Character and Origin [New York: Scribner’s Sons, 1901], 397–398 );
Ruth Katz (see A rjuna in the Mahabharata: Where Krishna Is, There Is Victory [Columbia:
University of South Carolina Press, 1989], 11–12 ); Mary Caroll Smith (see “The M ah ā bh ā rata’s
Core,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 95/3 [1975]: 479–482 ); and J. A. B van Buite-
nen (see T he Mah ā bh ā rata: The Book of the Beginnings [Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1973], xvi–xxiii ).
7. Alf Hiltebeitel, “Reconsidering Bhṛ guization,” in Composing a Tradition: Concepts, Tech-
niques and Relationships , ed. Mary Brockington and Peter Schreiner (Zagreb: Croatian
Academy of Sciences and Arts, 1999), 156 .
6 disorienting dharma
example, approaches the Ā paddharmaparvan of the Mah ā bh ā rata as a uni-
tary work of literature and explores the poetic techniques that make it a
cohesive unit.8 In W oman as Fire, Woman as Sage , Arti Dhand, interpreting
the Mah ā bh ā rata as a “bounded literary work unifi ed by considerable
thematic coherence,” presents a critical study of sexuality in the epic.9
Finally, Simon Brodbeck’s T he Mah ā bh ā rata Patriline approaches the epic
as “an integral literary unit” in order to investigate the relationship
between the text’s internal narrators and the members of the family whose
story they tell. 10
Building on the renewed appreciation of the M ah ā bh ā rata’s literary
merits, this book has three main goals. The fi rst is to discuss how the
Mah ā bh ā rata functions as a work of literature to convey ethical meaning.
The primary way in which the M ah ā bh ā rata “does what it does” is through
what I call its “aesthetics of suff ering.” The aesthetics of suff ering refers
to the ways in which the epic’s literary devices, or narrative strategies, use
the theme of suff ering to impact its audiences in ethically signifi cant
ways. I say “ethically signifi cant” because the epic’s aesthetics of suff ering
8. Adam Bowles, D harma, Disorder, and the Political in Ancient India: The Āpaddharmaparvan
of the Mah ā bh ā rata (Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2007) .
9. Arti Dhand, W oman as Fire, Woman as Sage: Sexual Ideology in the Mah ā bh ā rata (Albany:
State University of New York Press, 2008), 18 .
10. Simon Brodbeck, The Mah ā bh ā rata Patriline: Gender, Culture, and the Royal Hereditary
(Farnham, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2009) . Brodbeck and Brian Black write of a
current “vibrant critique of the analytic approach” and argue that the Sanskrit Mah ā bh ā rata
is “a natural inclusion in any broad category of world literature.” See their introduction to
Gender and Narrative in the Mah ā bh ā rata (New York: Routledge, 2007), 8 . Other recent
works that have focused on the text’s literary merits are James Hegarty, “An Apprenticeship
in Attentiveness: Narrative Patterning in the D yūtaparvan and the N alop ā khy ā na of the
Mah ā bh ā rata , Rocznik Orientalistyczny 54/1 (2001): 33–62 and “Extracting the K ath ā - ā m ṛ ta
(elixir of story): Creation, Ritual, Sovereignty and Textual Structure in the Sanskrit
Mah ā bh ā rata ,” Journal of Vaishnava Studies , 14/2 (2006): 39–60 ; Eric Huberman, “A Note
on the Multi-Centered Imagination of the M ah ā bh ā rata ,” J ournal of Vaishnava Studies 4/3
(1996): 151–160 ; A. K. Ramanujan, “Repetition in the M ah ā bh ā rata ,” in Essays on the
Mah ā bh ā rata , ed. Arvind Sharma (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991), 419–443 ; Tamar C. Reich, “Ends
and Closures in the M ah ā bh ā rata ,” International Journal of Hindu Studies 15/1 (2011): 9–53 ;
Arvind Sharma, “Of S ūdras , Sūtas and Ś lokas : Why is the M ah ā bh ā rata Preeminently in the
Anu ṣ ṭ ubh Meter?” Indo-Iranian Journal 43/3 (2000): 225–278 ; David Shulman, “Toward a
Historical Poetics,” and “The Yakṣ a’s Questions” both in T he Wisdom of Poets: Studies in
Tamil, Telugu, and Sanskrit (New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2001), 21–39 and 40–62 ;
and Lynn Thomas, “Disappearing Dragons and Russian Dolls: Unpacking the V ṛ tahatya in
the Āra ṇ yakaparva ,” J ournal of Vaishnava Studies 14/2 (2006): 9–38 . Since this book was
submitted for publication, James Hegarty has published a monograph on the M ah ā bh ā rata
and narrative entitled R eligion, Narrative, and Public Imagination in South Asia: Past and Place
in the Sanskrit Mah ā bh ā rata (New York: Routledge, 2012) .
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 7
initiates a critical inquiry into the nature of the vexed relationship between
suff ering and d harma . A disturbing question that the aesthetics of suf-
fering persistently raises for the audience, for example, is “Why is the path
of dharma implicated in so much suff ering and sorrow?”
A second goal for this book is to off er a new method for reading literary
texts by “lifting out” of the aesthetics of suff ering the more general but
implicit literary theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata . In order to identify and artic-
ulate this implicit theory, I use the resources of Sanskrit literary theory,
reader-response theory, and narrative ethics. In particular, I rely heavily on
three aesthetic categories taken from Sanskrit literary theory, namely
dhvani , or suggestion; sah ṛ daya , or the sensitive reader/spectator; and
rasa , or aestheticized emotion. By examining how these categories help
one to locate meaning in the Mah ā bh ā rata , this study also seeks to illus-
trate the enormous interpretive potential that could be opened up by
bringing these concepts from Sanskrit literary theory to bear on other
works of religious and literary art.
Finally, the M ah ā bh ā rata is a daunting text. Its sheer size and intrac-
table nature have frustrated Indologists and intimidated nonspecialists for
centuries. Perhaps because of its encyclopedic design and confounding
nature, many have been wary to embark on its journey. In short, many
students have struggled with how to read it; academics have wrestled with
how to teach it. At the most basic and perhaps most ambitious level, the
purpose of this book is to introduce audiences to the pleasures of reading
what is in my opinion one of the most profound literary texts to emerge
from premodern India. The M ah ā bh ā rata has “new” ideas to off er us
about literature and how it works, and as the world literature movement is
transforming comparative literature departments and the general reading
population has taken an interest in contemporary Indian fi ction, the time
is ripe to make these ideas better known.
The opening chapter of this book introduces the M ah ā bh ā rata by
briefl y discussing its history, its central story and concepts, and some of
the basic literary features that will be drawn upon in greater detail in the
chapters that follow. It also lays out the basic argument of the book by
discussing the aesthetics of suff ering, which is made up of fi ve compo-
nents that work together to produce meaning in the text. These fi ve com-
ponents are (1) the concept of suff ering, both as a central theme and an
aesthetic principle, (2) narrative strategies, (3) the sensitive reader/receiver
( sah ṛ daya ), (4) characters, and (5) conceptual categories. These fi ve compo-
nents are discussed particularly in terms of how they work together to
8 disorienting dharma
encourage the audience to accept the epic’s ethical and religious vision,
which centers on confronting the pervasive presence of suff ering in the
world.
What Is the M ah a¯ bh a¯ rata ?
The Mah ā bh ā rata is one of the two major Sanskrit epics from classical
India.1 1 Along with its epic “twin,” the R ā mā yaṇ a , it is a foundational text
of the Hindu tradition(s). The epic has traditionally been calculated to
contain 100,000 quatrains, making it about seven times the length of the
Iliad and the Odyssey combined. Scholars have compared the place and
importance of this great epic in world literature to that of the Bible, the
works of Shakespeare, the Greek epics and tragedies, and the Q ur’an . It
contains the B hagavadgīt ā , which is considered by many to be the central
statement of Hinduism and is among the most popular and most trans-
lated texts in the world. Like the Greek epics, the story of the M ah ā bh ā rata
has provided the material for many literary adaptations, especially in San-
skrit drama. It has been recast into many Indian vernacular languages
and retold through countless dramatic performances, visual representa-
tions, musical works, and most recently, weekly podcasts.1 2 In the 1990s
it was broadcast serially throughout India on television; this ‘Doordar-
shan Mah ā bh ā rata ’ became one of the most popular programs ever pre-
sented on Indian television. Because the story has been told and retold in
a variety of mediums and languages, it is fair to say that the M ah ā bh ā rata
is not just one text but a vibrant tradition spanning well over two thousand
years of history.
Unfortunately, very little is known about the composition of the San-
skrit Mah ā bh ā rata . Even the most basic questions, such as where the text
was composed or who composed it, are diffi cult to answer. Vedic texts, the
earliest Sanskrit works of India dating to the last centuries of the second
millennium BCE, mention the names of some of the characters of the
story and even refer to a struggle over royal power, but the text that we can
11. For a justifi cation of the use of the term “epic” for the M ah ā bh ā rata , see Alf Hiltebeitel,
Rethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education of the Dharma King (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2001), 2–15; 34–38 .
12. www.mahabharatapodcast.com .
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 9
reconstruct from the manuscript sources dates from a signifi cantly later
period.1 3
According to the tradition, the author of the Mah ā bh ā rata is the sage
Vy ā sa, who is also a character in the story (he is the grandfather of the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas and Kauravas, the principal actors in the story). However, most
scholars agree that the epic was in fact compiled over several centuries,
from the fi rst half of the fi rst millennium BCE to the fourth century CE.1 4
Recent scholarship has begun to view the text as we have it now as the
careful compilation of a fi nal redactor or group of redactors.1 5 According to
this view, the Mah ā bh ā rata is, despite being the product of many authors
composing over a signifi cant span of time, a work of conscious design.1 6
Until recently, most scholars believed that the text was originally an
oral composition that was later committed to writing. Most now agree,
however, that the M ah ā bh ā rata , in the form that we now have it, was com-
posed in an environment in which writing and orality were intertwined in
complex ways. 17 Alf Hiltebeitel has gone so far as to argue that orality in
the epics is a literary trope “that should be understood against a back-
ground of redaction and above all writing.”1 8 The oldest extant manu-
scripts of the M ah ā bh ā rata date from the medieval period, after the
formation of the two major extant recensions: the northern and southern.
The Critical Edition is the result of the collation of a large number of
13. Sheldon Pollock, “The Mahabharata of Vyasa,” in T he Longman Anthology of World Liter-
ature, Vol. A: The Ancient World , 2nd edition, ed. David Damrosch (New York: Pearson/
Longman, 2009), 830 .
14. For an extensive discussion of the text’s growth and development see John L. Brocking-
ton, The Sanskrit Epics , 130–158 . Recently, Alf Hiltebeitel has argued for a narrower chrono-
logical span of composition from the mid-second century BCE to the year zero. Hiltebeitel,
Rethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , 18 . He also provides a good discussion of the scholarly debates
regarding dating of the epic, Ibid. , 10–17 .
15. Madeleine Biardeau, “Introduction,” L e Mah ā bh ā rata (Paris: Flammarion, 1985–86), 27
and Alf Hiltebeitel, R ethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , 19 .
16. For the most recent debate concerning the merits and pitfalls of a “synchronic” versus a
“diachronic” reading of the M ah ā bh ā rata , see James L. Fitzgerald, “The Many Voices of the
Mah ā bh ā rata ,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 123/4 (2003): 812–816 , and Alf Hilte-
beitel, “On Reading Fitzgerald’s Vyā sa,” J ournal of the American Oriental Society 125/2 (2005):
241–261 .
17. Tamar C. Reich, “A Battlefi eld of a Text: Inner Textual Interpretation in the Sanskrit
Mah ā bh ā rata ” (PhD diss., University of Chicago, 1998) .
18. Hiltebeitel, R ethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , 4 .
10 disorienting dharma
manuscripts from both of these recensions. The aim of the editors of the
Critical Edition was to recreate what they considered to be the ancestor of
all the manuscripts that they examined and collated, a goal that in the end
they could only approximate.1 9 When this book refers to the M ah ā bh ā rata ,
it refers to this reconstituted Poona text, unless otherwise noted. While
it is not without its fl aws, the Poona text is widely regarded as being a
generally successful representation of a M ah ā bh ā rata that is as early as the
manuscript evidence will allow us to go.2 0
The Story
The Mah ā bh ā rata is a story about a war, a brutal, fratricidal, apocalyptic
war, between two sets of cousins, the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and the Kauravas, who are
fi ghting over the kingdom of the Bhā ratas—hence the title of the epic, the
Mah ā bh ā rata or “The Great Story of the Bh ā ratas.” The story focuses on
how this war came about, the course of the war, and how those who sur-
vived it, particularly those who felt that they were responsible for it, bore
living in the aftermath of an apocalypse. This war has often been described
as a war over a royal throne. A close reading of the epic, however, shows
that this is somewhat of a mischaracterization. While it is true the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas care a great deal about power in the beginning of the epic, after
their thirteen-year exile, they care more about peace than power. Book 5 of
the Mah ā bh ā rata details the extreme measures that the Pā ṇ ḍ avas take to
avoid war. They fi ght because there is no option left to them. Surely they
are the most reluctant warriors in world literature. Indeed, why the war
takes place, what the war is really about, and whether it actually could have
been averted are the questions that provide the engine for the unfolding
of the central narrative as well as some of the epic’s most fundamental
riddles.
For those who are not familiar with the central story of the Mah ā bh ā rata ,
a summary of the epic is provided here. Any attempt to summarize a
19. For a helpful overview of the creation of the Critical Edition, see Brockington, The San-
skrit Epics , 56–61 , and James L. Fitzgerald, “The Mah ā bh ā rata ,” in The Hindu World , ed.
Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby (New York: Routledge, 2004), 68–70 .
20. F or thoughtful refl ections on some of the weaknesses in the way that the editors of the
Critical Edition conceptualized the development of the M ah ā bh ā rata manuscript tradition, see
John Dunham, “The M ah ā bh ā rata : A Survey Discussion” in E ssays on the Mah ā bh ā rata , ed.
Arvind Sharma (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991) 1–18 and Brodbeck, T he Mah ā bh ā rata Patriline , 5–6 .
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 11
literary text of this magnitude risks draining it of life. Therefore, I also
recommend John Smith’s abridged translation of the M ah ā bh ā rata .2 1 In
the following summary, a dizzying array of characters will parade into and
out of the story. To aid the reader, a glossary of characters is provided in the
appendix.
The Build-up Toward War
Our story begins with three brothers and a throne. These brothers,
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, P ā ṇ ḍ u, and Vidura belong to the ruling family of the Bhā ratas.
Because Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, the eldest, is born blind, he is ineligible to become
king.2 2 Thus his younger brother Pā ṇ ḍ u is given the throne. Vidura, the
youngest of the three, is the son of a śūdra , a lower-class woman, and
therefore also ineligible. To say that this is unfortunate is somewhat of an
understatement: Vidura is the wisest of the three brothers; he also hap-
pens to be the incarnation of the god Dharma.
P ā ṇ ḍ u decides to renounce the kingdom and repair to the forest with
his two wives, Kuntī and M ā drī. Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a takes over as king, but the
precise nature of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s regency is left open to question. What is
not clear is whether Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra is actually given the throne (with his sons
standing in the line of succession) or whether he is simply watching over
the kingdom until Pā ṇ ḍ u’s heirs come of age.
One day while hunting for sport in the forest, P ā ṇ ḍ u shoots a buck
mating with a doe; the buck is really a sage and the doe is his wife. The
dying sage curses Pā ṇ ḍ u: if he ever makes love again, he will die in the act.
This curse is especially severe since Pā ṇ ḍ u has no children. His wife
Kuntī, however, has a solution. When she was young, she acted as a
hostess to a wandering ascetic who gave her a magic mantra that allowed
her to summon any deity she wished to impregnate her with a son. To test
the m antra , Kuntī called upon the sun god Sūrya. The result of their liai-
son was a son, Karṇ a. Terrifi ed of being found out (Kuntī was still very
young at this point and unmarried), she placed the infant in a basket and
21. John D. Smith, trans., The Mah ā bh ā rata: An Abridged Translation (London: Penguin
Books, 2009) .
22. See 1.102.23. The biological father of all three brothers is Vyā sa, the epic’s author. When
Vy ā sa impregnated Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s mother, Ambik ā , she closed her eyes out of fear due to
his frightful appearance. Thus, her son, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, was born blind. Balarā ma links
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s physical blindness with his moral blindness at 3.119.11.
12 disorienting dharma
set it afl oat upon the river. He was discovered on the banks of the river by
a lower-class charioteer—a s ūta —and his wife, and was raised by them.
When Pā ṇ ḍ u learns of Kuntī’s boon, he begs her to use it to produce
heirs. She calls upon the gods Dharma, Vā yu, and Indra and she gives
birth in successive years to Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira, Bhīma, and Arjuna. Kuntī allows
M ā drī to use the mantra as well, and Mā drī calls upon the two Aśvins,
subsequently giving birth to twins, Nakula and Sahadeva. These fi ve boys
are the P ā ṇ ḍ avas, the heroes of the epic.
Soon after the births of his sons, P ā ṇ ḍ u takes M ā drī into his arms and
attempts to make love to her. The sage’s curse is activated and Pā ṇ ḍ u dies
in M ā drī’s embrace. Grief-stricken, Mā drī follows her husband to the
funeral pyre, leaving Kuntī to raise the Pā ṇ ḍ avas alone.
Meanwhile, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a marries the virtuous princess Gā ndh ā rī, who
out of devotion to her blind husband blindfolds herself for life. After two
years of a painful pregnancy, Gā ndhā rī attempts to abort her fetus and
discharges a single ball of fl esh. Vyā sa (the epic’s ostensible author and
father of P ā ṇ ḍ u, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, and Vidura) arrives and divides the ball
into a hundred and one clay pots from which are born the Kauravas: one
hundred sons and a daughter. The eldest son, Duryodhana, although
conceived before Yudhiṣ ṭ hira, is born after him, making Yudhiṣ ṭ hira,
ostensibly, the rightful heir to the kingdom. Duryodhana’s birth is ac-
companied by inauspicious omens. Seeing the ominous portents, Vidura
informs Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra that his son will cause the extermination of the
Bh ā ratas. He urges him to abandon Duryodhana, since the peace of the
family depends on it. Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra refuses to listen to him, because of his
“love for his son” (p utrasneha ).
The Pā ṇ ḍ avas and Kauravas are raised together in Hā stinapura under
the tutelage of their great uncle, Bhīṣ ma, and their uncle Vidura. They are
all trained in the art of war by Dro ṇ a and K ṛ pa, brahmins who are skilled
in the art of weaponry. However, the Kauravas, led by Duryodhana, are
jealous of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and plot to kill them in various ways. On one oc-
casion Duryodhana ties Bhīma up in fetters and throws him into the river.
With Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s approaching maturity, the problem of royal succes-
sion becomes pressing. Duryodhana urges his father to take measures
to secure the kingdom. Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a at fi rst refuses, worried that their sub-
jects would kill them if they were to oust the much-loved Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira.
Duryodhana assures his father that he has a plan: they will send the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas off to the city of Vā ra ṇ ā vata so that their subjects will forget
them. Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra readily agrees with his son.
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 13
After Duryodhana makes a particularly vicious attempt on their lives
while they are living in Vā ra ṇ ā vata, the Pā ṇ ḍ avas fake their deaths and go
into hiding disguised as brahmins. During this time, they hear that King
Drupada is holding a s vaya ṃ vara , or marriage contest, for the hand of his
daughter, Draupadī, and decide to attend. At the s vaya ṃ vara , they fi rst
meet K ṛ ṣ ṇ a, their cousin (the son of Kuntī’s brother, Vasudeva). Arjuna
wins the contest, and when the Pā ṇ ḍ avas bring Draupadī home to meet
Kuntī, she instructs Arjuna to share his prize with his four brothers
(Kuntī’s back is turned so she is unaware of what the prize is). Thus
Draupadī becomes the wife of all fi ve P ā ṇ ḍ avas.
When news spreads that the Pā ṇ ḍ avas are still alive and that, further,
they have grown powerful due to their alliance with Drupada, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
reluctantly decides (at Bhīṣ ma’s prompting) to give them half the king-
dom, the eastern half, in the region called Khā ṇ ḍ avaprastha. There the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas establish their capital at Indraprastha, and a magnifi cent palace
is built for Yudhiṣ ṭ hira. He, proud of his sumptuous abode, sets his mind
on performing the royal consecration, a lavish ritual asserting his univer-
sal kingship. He seeks the advice of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a on the matter (it is at this point
in the story that Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s divine status as the creator of the universe is
revealed2 3 ) and K ṛ ṣ ṇ a urges him to undertake the consecration. Rulers
from across the land attend, bearing gifts and swearing allegiance to
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira. This arouses the jealousy of Duryodhana once again and
when he returns to Hā stinapura, he plots with his uncle Śakuni to devise
a way of robbing the Pā ṇ ḍ avas of their kingdom. They settle upon the idea
of challenging Yudhiṣ ṭ hira to a game of dice, a proposal that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
fi rst refuses (primarily because he knows his wise brother Vidura is
against it) and then accepts.
Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira is summoned to H ā stinapura. In the “rigged”2 4 game
that follows, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira pledges and loses his kingdom, his wealth, his
brothers, himself, and fi nally Draupadī. Draupadī is subsequently dragged
into the assembly hall by Duḥś ā sana (Duryodhana’s brother), her hair
23. See 2.12.20–30.
24. Whether the game is really rigged or not is open to question. Śakuni claims he was play-
ing fairly, but who can trust Śakuni? Most characters believe that Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira was tricked,
but not all do. David Shulman explores this question in his article “Devana and Daiva” in
Ritual, State, and History in South Asia: Essays in Honour of J. C. Heesterman , ed. D. H. A.
Kolff , A. W. van den Hoek, and M. S. Oort (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1992), 350–365 .
14 disorienting dharma
undone, her robe stained with menstrual blood. She is insulted, humili-
ated, and sexually assaulted by Duryodhana, Karṇ a (Kuntī’s son with Surya
and thus the Pā ṇ ḍ avas’ half-brother who has reentered the story through
forming an alliance with Duryodhana), and Duḥś ā sana while the elders in
the hall and the staked-and-lost Pā ṇ ḍ avas watch and do nothing. Finally,
the howls of jackals prompt Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a to intervene and grant Draupadī
her freedom as well as the freedom of her husbands.
As the Pā ṇ ḍ avas journey to Indraprastha, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a recalls them for
one last “all or nothing” throw. If the Pā ṇ ḍ avas win, their kingdom will be
returned to them; if they lose, they must live in exile for twelve years in the
forest and one year in disguise. Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira unwillingly returns, and when
the game is resumed he loses once again. The Pā ṇ ḍ avas and Draupadī
prepare to depart for the forest. Clad in deerskins they form a sorry proces-
sion as they fi le away from the capital. Evil omens accompany their depar-
ture while Droṇ a warns Duryodhana that in due time the Kauravas will be
massacred by the Pā ṇ ḍ avas.
In the forest, a dejected Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira refl ects on his sorrowful state
repeatedly asking why he, who is virtuous, suff ers misfortune while his
enemies, who lack virtue, prosper. He is visited by a variety of sages who
narrate beautiful stories about the instability of human life and the impor-
tance of practicing dharma . Meanwhile, Arjuna journeys to heaven to
procure weapons and receive instruction in the art of battle. Draupadī is
abducted by the Sindhu King Jayadratha, but is quickly rescued by her
husbands. To console a very upset Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira, M ā rka ṇ ḍ eya, a visiting
sage, recounts the story of a woman who was in even greater distress than
Draupadī—Sītā , wife of R ā ma and heroine of the R ā m ā ya ṇ a .
After sorrowfully carrying out their twelve years in the forest, the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas fi nd refuge in the kingdom of Vir ā ṭ a , the king of the Matsyas, for
their last year in exile, which is to be carried out in disguise. Their year in
Vir ā ṭ a ’s kingdom passes uneventfully until Draupadī attracts the attention
of the commander of Vir ā ṭ a ’s army, Kīcaka. Draupadī attempts to shun
his advances by running into Virā ṭ a ’s assembly hall where Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira is
sitting. Kīcaka grabs her by the hair and, while Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira looks on, he
throws her down on the fl oor and kicks her with his foot. Because he is
afraid of revealing their true identity, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira does nothing. Draupadī
complains to Bhīma about the miseries of being married to Yudhiṣ ṭ hira
who cares about nothing but d harma . Moved to tears, Bhīma promises to
seek revenge. The next evening, he lies in wait for Kīcaka and kills him by
breaking every bone in his body.
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 15
After their thirteen-year exile, the P ā ṇ ḍ avas send an envoy to
H ā stinapura to demand that Duryodhana keep his end of the covenant
and return their kingdom. Otherwise, they will declare war. However,
midway through his negotiations with Saṃ jaya, the envoy of the Kaura-
vas, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira makes a stunning concession. In order to avoid war, the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas will withdraw the demand for their kingdom and will accept fi ve
villages. When Duryodhana refuses even this concession (he will not, he
says, give the Pā ṇ ḍ avas even a pinprick of land),2 5 the P ā ṇ ḍ avas urge Kṛ ṣ ṇ a
to go to the Kauravas as their envoy and sue for peace. Bhīma, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira,
and Arjuna all implore Kṛ ṣ ṇ a to do everything in his power to secure peace
and it is assumed that the fi ve-village option is still on the table. When
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a returns and reports that his peace mission has failed, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira,
seeing that there is no option left, reluctantly prepares for war. However,
even at this moment, after he has done virtually everything in his power to
avert war, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira hesitates. It is at this point that Arjuna urges
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira to accept the fact that there is no option left but to fi ght.
According to Arjuna, even Vidura, their wise uncle and the incarnation of
the god Dharma, has come to this conclusion.
The War
After peace negotiations fail, and war is clearly inevitable, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a asks
his aide Sa ṃ jaya to narrate the events of the war to him. Saṃ jaya agrees
to this, but off ers the king instructions on how he is to hear the narration:
he is to remain calm and not despair (s thiro bhūtv ā . . . śrutv ā m ā viman ā
bhava ).2 6 Vy ā sa visits Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and off ers him the gift of vision so that
he may see the battle events. Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a refuses Vy ā sa’s off er, telling him
that he does not wish to witness the deaths of his kinsmen; he prefers to
hear of the events. Vyā sa then bestows upon Saṃ jaya the gift of a divine
eye so that Sa ṃ jaya may observe all the events of the war and report them
in full detail to the blind king.
After the armies are arrayed for battle, Arjuna, gazing at his family
members and his elders on the Kaurava side, throws down his weapons in
despair. Kṛ ṣ ṇ a preaches the B hagavadgīt ā to him. At the conclusion of
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s divine teaching to Arjuna, the fi ghting begins and continues for
25. 5.57.10–19.
26. 5.156.13.
16 disorienting dharma
nine days. On the tenth day, Arjuna kills Bhīṣ ma, his great uncle and the
greatest warrior on the Kaurava side. Bhīṣ ma, however, who has been
granted a boon to choose the day of his death, remains conscious lying on
a bed of arrows throughout the rest of the battle.
Duryodhana appoints Droṇ a to replace Bhīṣ ma as commander of the
Kaurava army and the fi ghting resumes. Droṇ a, a master strategist, diverts
Arjuna to the southern part of the battlefi eld, away from center stage, and
directs his warriors to form an impenetrable battle formation. Other than
Arjuna, only Abhimanyu, Arjuna’s young son, knows how to break into
this formation. However, he does not know how to exit it. At Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s
urging, Abhimanyu enters the formation, and he is immediately sur-
rounded by the most powerful Kaurava warriors (Droṇ a and his son
Aśvatth ā man included) who divest him of his weapons and mercilessly
kill him. This event, which occurs on the thirteenth day of battle, marks a
major turning point in the war. It initiates a cycle of revenge that causes
the fi ghting on both sides to become devious, vicious, and inhuman.
On the fi fteenth day the P ā ṇ ḍ avas plot the death of Droṇ a, their beloved
teacher. K ṛ ṣ ṇ a assures the Pā ṇ ḍ avas that the only way to stop Droṇ a is to
lie to him, telling him that his son Aśvatthā man is dead. Bhīma kills an
elephant named Aśvatthā man, and Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira, renowned for his com-
mitment to truth-telling, reluctantly informs Droṇ a that Aśvatth ā man is
dead, muttering the words “the elephant” under his breath. Because he
hears the news from Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira, Dro ṇ a does not question it. Utterly de-
jected, he withdraws from the war and enters a yogic trance. Dhṛ ṣ ṭ a dyumna,
Draupadī’s brother, beheads the now passive Droṇ a and tosses the head
before the Kaurava troops. Aśvatthā man, enraged by the unrighteous way
in which his father has been killed, vows to destroy all the Pā ṇ ḍ avas.
After the death of Dro ṇ a, the fi ghting on the part of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas
becomes even more underhanded, and while it secures their victory over
the Kauravas, it renders their triumph a disturbing one. Bhīma kills
Duḥś ā sana, Duryodhana’s brother who had dragged Draupadī into the
assembly hall in Book 2, tears open his chest, and drinks his blood. Arjuna,
at K ṛṣ ṇ a’s prompting, kills Karṇ a when his chariot is incapacitated, and
Bhīma, again at Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s prompting, defeats Duryodhana in a mace battle
by shattering his thigh, an area of the body deemed off -limits by the war-
rior code of conduct. With the death of Duryodhana, the Kauravas are
defeated.
The cycle of revenge culminates in T he Book of the Night Massacre (Book 10),
the book that brings the war to a bloody close. Aśvatthā man, Droṇ a’s son,
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 17
seeking revenge for the unrighteous ways in which both his father and
his king (Duryodhana) are killed, enters the P ā ṇ ḍ ava camp at night and
massacres everyone as they sleep. When Yudhiṣ ṭ hira hears the news, he
falls to the ground in despair, declaring that his victory has ended
in defeat. At the close of the war there is only a handful of warriors
left standing on both sides. The number of the dead is staggering:
1,660,020,000.2 7
After the War
After the war, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a mourns the loss of Duryodhana and his other
sons. Sa ṃ jaya, Vidura, and Vyā sa off er him words of advice in an attempt
to console him. Gā ndh ā rī is given a divine eye by Vy ā sa so that she may
witness the carnage of the battlefi eld. Movingly, she describes to Kṛ ṣ ṇ a the
details of the carnage as well as her own mixture of emotions—sorrow
and resignation—upon seeing Duryodhana’s body. She also mourns the
loss of her other sons. After concluding her description of the battlefi eld
scene, G ā ndh ā rī blames K ṛ ṣ ṇ a for the disaster. Accusing him of having
ignored the mounting hostility between the Kauravas and P ā ṇ ḍ avas, she
curses him: in thirty-six years he will slay his own kinsmen and then die.
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a, smiling slightly, declares that he already knows this to be the case.
The Pā ṇ ḍ avas, bewildered by K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s response, become despondent and
lose their will to live.
In perhaps the greatest blow of all to the P ā ṇ ḍ avas, particularly
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira, Kuntī reveals Karṇ a’s true identity as their brother. Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira
says that his grief at knowing that he was responsible for the slaying of his
brother is a hundred times greater than his grief over the deaths of his
nephew, Abhimanyu, or his sons.2 8 Together with his family members,
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira performs the sacred water rites for Karṇ a.
With the time for mourning over, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira fi nds himself unable to
move beyond his grief and assume his role as king. He blames himself for
the deaths of his kinsmen, loses his will to live, and yearns to retire to the
forest to expiate his sins. Arjuna, Bhīma, Nakula, and Sahadeva attempt to
dissuade him from his renunciatory yearnings but to no avail. Vyā sa off ers
a discourse on the transitory nature of life and the universal nature of
27. 11.26.
28. 11.27.17–19.
18 disorienting dharma
suff ering to assuage his grief. Finally Kṛ ṣ ṇ a persuades Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira to seek
words of advice from Bhīṣ ma, who is still lying near death in a bed of
arrows on the fi eld of battle. In a state of illumination granted by Kṛ ṣ ṇ a,
Bhī ṣ ma instructs Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira on a variety of topics including the duties of
kings, the nature of d harma , the means to eliminate sorrow, and the path
to heaven. The irony of the fact that this discourse on dharma is delivered
by a felled warrior, his body pierced by a multitude of arrows, a victim of
k ṣ atriya dharma (the proper conduct of the warrior class), is surely not to
be missed.
Bhī ṣ ma fi nally succumbs to death. Despite Bhīṣ ma’s lengthy discourse,
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira is still disconsolate. Vyā sa suggests that he perform a horse
sacrifi ce to expiate his sins. Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira does so and, afterwards, is ready
to rule at last.
Fifteen years into Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s rule, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, still mourning the
deaths of his sons, decides to retire to a forest hermitage. G ā ndh ā rī,
Vidura, and Kuntī accompany him. The Pā ṇ ḍ avas, disconsolate in their
absence, visit them. Upon seeing Yudhiṣ ṭ hira, Vidura, emaciated and with
matted locks, uses his yogic power to enter his nephew. Vyā sa arrives and
G ā ndh ā rī tells him that they (Gā ndh ā rī, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, and the P ā ṇ ḍ avas)
have been suff ering for sixteen years and have not been able to forget their
loved ones who died in battle. She requests that they be given a vision of
their sons. Vyā sa agrees to grant her request and, after bathing in the river,
he summons the deceased warriors. A deafening sound is heard and thou-
sands of kings rise up out of the river, dressed in celestial robes. Reunited
for one joyful night, the P ā ṇ ḍ avas reconcile with Karṇ a, and Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a
sees his sons for the fi rst time. Soon after, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s abandoned sacri-
fi cial fi re ignites the surrounding forest and the old king, his wife, and
Kuntī are consumed. Saṃ jaya escapes and departs for the Himā layas.
Thirty-six years after the Bhā rata war, ominous portents begin to ap-
pear. The P ā ṇ ḍ avas receive news that Gā ndh ā rī’s curse of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a has been
fulfi lled. In Dv ā rak ā , a number of noisy youths from K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s clan, the
Andhakas and V ṛ ṣ ṇ is, attempt to trick some holy sages by disguising one
of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s sons as a pregnant woman. The sages curse him to give birth to
an iron club that will be the destruction of his people. The club is ground
up and thrown into the sea. Later a drunken brawl breaks out, and the
V ṛ ṣ ṇ is and Andhakas begin to fi ght. K ṛ ṣ ṇ a remains a passive observer
until he witnesses the slaying of his own son. He then picks up blades of
grass and each blade turns into an iron mace. Kṛ ṣ ṇ a wipes out every last
person in his clan. Afterwards, he departs for the forest. As he sits in
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 19
meditation, a passing hunter named Jar ā , or “old age,” mistakes him for a
deer and fatally shoots him.
Arjuna hears the news of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s death, and, heartbroken, he journeys
to the hermitage of Vyā sa for comfort. Vyā sa tells him that his work in the
world, like Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s, has come to an end and it is time for the Pā ṇ ḍ avas to
depart. Hearing of the slaughter of the Vṛ ṣ ṇ is and Andhakas, Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira
too decides that it is time to renounce the world, telling Arjuna that time
“cooks” every creature. Arjuna agrees, by simply replying, “Time, time.”2 9
The fi ve brothers along with Draupadī and a dog set out for their
fi nal journey. They fi rst circumambulate the world, then proceed north-
ward into the mountains until, one after another, Draupadī, Sahadeva,
Nakula, Arjuna, and Bhīma fall down dead. Yudhiṣ ṭ hira leaves them
where they fall and continues on without looking back. Indra appears
and tells Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira to climb into his chariot so that he may be taken to
heaven. Yudhiṣ ṭ hira refuses to leave the dog. Indra insists that he do so,
but Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira repeatedly refuses. Suddenly, the dog is transformed
into the god Dharma, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s father. He tells Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira that he
had assumed the disguise of a dog in order to test his son. Dharma,
pleased with Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira, urges him to enter heaven.
In heaven, Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira does not see his brothers and Draupadī. Rather,
he encounters Duryodhana! Enraged, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira tells Indra that he wants
no part of heaven if he has to share it with Duryodhana, since it was
because of Duryodhana that his friends and kinsmen were killed and that
Draupadī was so horribly mistreated.3 0 Instead, Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira wants to see
his brothers and his wife. A celestial messenger is called to lead Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira
to his family. The messenger takes Yudhiṣ ṭ hira on a path that is “inauspi-
cious and dangerous and frequented by evildoers.”3 1 After traveling on this
path for some time, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira decides to turn back. As he does so, he
hears the voices of his brothers and Draupadī crying out in pain, suff ering
the torments of hell. At fi rst stupefi ed and then enraged, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira cen-
sures the gods and his father Dharma. He tells the messenger to return to
heaven without him; he will remain in hell, since his presence eases the
suff ering of his loved ones. Instantaneously, the darkness disappears and
29. 17.1.4.
30. 1 7.18.8–9.
31. 18.2.16.
20 disorienting dharma
an auspicious breeze blows. All the inhabitants of heaven appear. Indra
tells Yudhiṣ ṭ hira that his experience of hell was an illusion that all kings
must experience. Now he may enter heaven and join his family members.
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira does so and beholds K ṛ ṣ ṇ a, Arjuna, Bhīma, Draupadī, Pā ṇ ḍ u,
Kuntī, and all the others.
Some Distinctive Literary Features
of the Sanskrit M ah a¯ bh a¯ rata
In the history of scholarship on the M ah ā bh ā rata a great divide has existed
between the traditional view of the text as one of the most celebrated poems
in the history of Indian literature containing a unifi ed aesthetic vision and
the Euro-American view that the epic was a “literary unthing,”3 2 a “mon-
strous chaos,”3 3 “a huge and motley pile.”3 4 Indeed, for many early twentieth-
century Euro-American scholars the M ah ā bh ā rata was hardly a text at all,
much less one with literary merit; it was, instead, a confused confabulation
of layers from earlier and later time periods that could be mined for its
historical, philological, and mythological treasures. Alf Hiltebeitel writes:
The epic has been mined for Indo-European myth, Indo-European
epic, Indo-European goddesses, non Indo-European goddesses,
oral epic, a prior epic cycle, a pre-Brahmanic K ṣ atriya tradition, an
historical kernel; a textual kernel; the “old” narrative beneath the
fi nal written ‘surface’; e tc .3 5
Fortunately, as previously mentioned, M ah ā bh ā rata scholarship in the West
has undergone a tectonic shift in the past few decades and scholars are now
increasingly willing to view the epic with what could be termed “a herme-
neutics of respect.”3 6 A hermeneutics of respect seeks to listen to rather than
disembowel the text; it assumes that what is most interesting about the
32. “ literarisches Unding ,” Moriz Winternitz, G eschichte der indischen Literatur (Leipzig: C. F.
Amelangs Verlag, 1908–22), 272 .
33. “ ungeheuerliches Chaos ,” Hermann Oldenberg, Das Mah ā bh ā rata: Seine Entstehun, Sein
Inhalt, Seine Form (Gottingen: Vandenhoek und Ruprecht, 1922), 1 .
34. Hopkins, The Great Epic of India , 363 .
35. Hiltebeitel, R ethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , 2 .
36. I am grateful to Paul Courtright for this phrase.
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 21
Mah ā bh ā rata is what the great epic has to say for and about itself, rather
than what it has to say about its pre-history or its future.3 7 Indeed, scholars
today are beginning to see that many of the literary features that their early
twentieth-century predecessors held in disdain—its size, its riddles, its
open- endedness, even its dark worldview—are integral to the epic’s dis-
tinctive literary genius. Before turning to a discussion of how the
Mah ā bh ā rata “works” as a literary text to convey ethical and religious
meaning, it may be helpful to discuss some of the epic’s distinctive literary
features, since the substantive chapters that follow will refer to and draw
from these features signifi cantly.
Let us begin with the Mah ā bh ā rata ’s mind-boggling size. Why is the
epic so long? Its length is due no doubt to what many scholars identify
as the epic’s outstanding characteristic, its encyclopedic drive. The
Mah ā bh ā rata , in addition to being a story about a confl ict between two sets
of cousins, is also a story about “everything else”; it is, in some sense, a
summation of an entire culture. Through its complicated narrative struc-
ture, the Mah ā bh ā rata tells its story via stories within stories, and many of
its substories, which include legends, ritual lore, myths, folktales, and
philosophical passages, are only loosely connected to its central story.
Thus the M ah ā bh ā rata boasts in perhaps its most famous passage, “what
is here is elsewhere; what is not here is nowhere else.”3 8 As David Shulman
notes, “Vyā sa, it is said, left behind him (in his work) the entire world.” 39
Here we see something of the purpose behind the Mah ā bh ā rata ’s
mind-boggling encyclopedic drive: it refuses to view itself as a bounded
text; it is not a representation of the world; it i s the world. And through the
logic of its own frame structure (examined in detail below) that narrates
the details of the epic’s fi rst two tellings, the text makes the point that
wherever its story is told or heard b ecomes the Mah ā bh ā rata . Thus the text
never really ends nor does it begin; existence i s the Mah ā bh ā rata .4 0
37. See Peter Hill, Fate, Predestination, and Human Action in the Mah ā bh ā rata: A Study in the
History of Ideas (New Delhi: Munishiram Manoharlal Publishers, 2001), xxii . van Buitenen,
in his critique of Georges Dumézil’s Indo-European approach to the epic and Biardeau’s
Pur ā ṇ ic one, writes that “neither shows great respect for, or even much interest in, the pos-
sible integrity of the Mah ā bh ā rata as a unique product in the growth of Indian civilization:
the text seems fated to be relevant to anything but itself.” J. A. B. van Buitenen, T he
Mah ā bh ā rata . Vol. 3, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978), 163 .
38. 1.56.33; 18.5.38.
39. David Shulman, “Toward a Historical Poetics,” 26 .
40. Ibid. , 26 .
22 disorienting dharma
Another literary feature of the text that is closely related to its encyclope-
dic drive is its “riddle-question design.” This text above all is a text that
raises questions, imbues them with life-or-death import, and then refuses
to answer any of them in a straightforward manner, if at all. Insightfully,
J. A. B. van Buitenen writes, “The epic is a series of precisely stated prob-
lems imprecisely and therefore inconclusively resolved, with every resolu-
tion raising a new problem until the very end, when the question remains:
whose is heaven and whose is hell?”4 1 Many of the “problems” or riddle-
questions that the M ah ā bh ā rata raises and never conclusively resolves
revolve around two related issues: the power of human agency and the
complexities of the moral life. To what extent do human beings have the
freedom to make decisions and act, and to what extent are they bound like
puppets on a string—a common motif in the M ahā bh ā rata —to forces
beyond their control, forces like time or fate? To what extent does being
good and following the right course of action (i.e., following d harma ) ensure
happiness and well-being? If the path of d harma does not lead to happiness
or perfection, or worse, leads to suff ering, is it worth following? Precisely
why, in spite of many characters’ intentions to follow d harma , did events
turn out in the disastrous way that they did? Who or what is responsible for
the Mah ā bh ā rata war, the tragic devastation of the great Bhā ratas, and the
near annihilation of the world? 42 Questions such as these, which recur in
ever-changing form, provide the text with its “coherence,” which David
Shulman refers to as “a coherence of doubt and ambiguous riddles.”4 3
The M ah ā bh ā rata itself includes a story about why it contains so many
riddles or “knots.” A popular though probably late passage describes how
the Mah ā bh ā rata was written down directly from the mouth of Vyā sa.
Once upon a time, Vyā sa, the compiler of the Vedas, conceived the
Mah ā bh ā rata in his mind and sought out Gaṇ eśa, Lord of Obstacles, to
41. J. A. B. van Buitenen, The Mah ā bh ā rata: Book 2: The Book of the Assembly Hall; Book 3: The
Book of the Forest , Vol. 2 (Chicago, The University of Chicago Press, 1975), 29 . Hiltebeitel
points out that what van Buitenen describes is really a series of deferrals. See R ethinking the
Mah ā bh ā rata , 277 . Even so, these “deferrals” are not resolved. See Reich, “Ends and Closures
in the Mah ā bh ā rata ,” 22 .
42. Reich calls this the most problematic of all the unresolved questions in the epic. See
“Ends and Closures in the M ah ā bh ā rata ,” 37 .
43. Shulman, “Toward a Historical Poetics,” 29 . For a discussion of the distinction between
a riddle and a p raśna , or question, see Shulman, “The Yakṣ a’s Questions.” For a discussion
of praśnas in the Mah ā bh ā rata , see Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , 240 .
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 23
serve as his scribe. 4 4 Ga ṇ eśa agreed, but with one condition: that Vy ā sa
dictate his story without pause. Vyā sa consented, but with a condition of
his own: Ga ṇ eśa had fi rst to grasp the meaning of Vyā sa’s verses before
transcribing them. Gaṇ eśa agreed and the recitation and writing began.
Whenever Vyā sa needed time to think about what was to come next, he
mysteriously wove “knots” or complicated passages into his composition
in order to stump Gaṇ eśa. This strategy gave Vyā sa ample time to com-
pose many verses in his head. As a result, it is said that no one even today
is able to penetrate this “very tightly woven” collection of verses because of
the depth of their secret meaning.
Another distinctive—and innovative—feature of the M ah ā bh ā rata is its
use of frame stories. I use the term “innovative” because Christopher
Minkowski has argued that the M ah ā bh ā rata is the fi rst work of literature
to employ this device.4 5 The text possesses an embedded structure of
stories within stories. One story often leads to the telling of another so that
they are embedded in a complex web of interlocking narratives, which
exist at varying points in time. The eff ect is dizzying; one often feels that
one has completely lost track of where one is in the grand scheme of the
narrative. Further, the Mah ā bh ā rata ’s frame stories are self-referential;
they are stories about the telling and reception of another story.4 6 The
frame stories in the Mah ā bh ā rata tell us when, where, by whom, and to
whom a particular story was told. Thus, audience reception is built into the
design of the M ah ā bh ā rata . “Textualized audiences” are created whenever
a character tells a story to another character.4 7 Indeed, many of the epic’s
stories, sub-stories, and repetition of stories are woven together through
questions asked by a built-in audience member of his or her narrator.
For example, the M ah ā bh ā rata contains two outer frames that intro-
duce the narrators and the audience members of the fi rst two tellings of
44. For scholarship on Gaṇ eśa’s role as the M ah ā bh ā rata ’s scribe, see Paul B. Courtright,
Ga ṇ eśa: Lord of Obstacles, Lord of Beginnings (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985),
151–153 .
45. See Christopher Z. Minkowski, “Janamejaya’s S attra and Ritual Structure,” J ournal of
the American Oriental Society 109/3 (1989): 412 . For scholarship on the framing device in the
Mah ā bh ā rata , see Brian Black, “Eavesdropping on the Epic: Female Listeners in the
Mah ā bh ā rata ” in Gender and Narrative in the Mah ā bh ā rata , ed. Simon Brodbeck and Brian
Black (New York: Routledge, 2007), 53–78 ; Hiltebeitel, R ethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , 92–130 ;
Reich, “A Battlefi eld of a Text,” 4–6, 56–64 ; and Minkowski, “Janamejaya’s S attra ,”401–20 .
46. Minkowski, “Janamejaya’s S attra ,” 402 .
47. Black, “Eavesdropping,” 57 .
24 disorienting dharma
the epic.4 8 The outermost frame—as well as the M ah ā bh ā rata itself—
begins when Ugraśravas, an expert in telling stories about kings, meets a
group of brahmins, headed by Śaunaka, who ask him to tell them the story
of the Mah ā bh ā rata . Ugraśravas agrees and begins by recounting the story
of where, when, and with whom he fi rst heard the story of the great
Bh ā ratas. This took place at King Janamejaya’s snake sacrifi ce (Janame-
jaya is a descendant of the Bh ā ratas)4 9 where Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana told the story
of the Mah ā bh ā rata to Janamejaya in the presence of the epic’s ostensible
author, Vy ā sa.
This context, that of Janamejaya’s snake sacrifi ce, is the inner frame
story of the Mah ā bh ā rata . When Ugraśravas introduces Vaiśaṃ p ā yana’s
narration of the Mah ā bh ā rata , then Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana’s voice as narrator takes
over; this is signaled by the words “Vaiśaṃ p ā yana uv ā ca ” or “Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana
said.”5 0 Once it begins, the Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana-Janamejaya frame story is care-
fully maintained throughout the epic.5 1 At almost every transition in the
story, the reader/listener is reminded of this frame because Janamejaya,
an active participatory listener, often asks a question or requests elabora-
tion of a story that Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana has narrated.5 2 Thus, Janamejaya’s ques-
tions often prompt the direction of the story. The presence of the outermost
Ugraśravas-Śaunaka frame is less pervasive. For the most part, Ugraśravas’s
presence as narrator is cited in the fi rst fi fty-four chapters of T he Book of
the Beginning . Once Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana is introduced as the narrator, Ugraśravas
is mentioned only rarely.5 3
The Mah ā bh ā rata ’s framing technique does not exist only at the text’s
borders; it is pervasive throughout. For example, the four battle books,
Books 6 through 9, have a frame story. In the frame of these books,
48. Hiltebeitel adds a third frame, which he calls variously the outer/middle/cosmological
frame. However, Hiltebeitel and I disagree on what constitutes a frame. I am using the term
“frame” to refer to a story about the telling of another story, a story which, by defi nition,
opens and closes the story which it frames. On the other hand, Hiltebeitel seems to use the
term to refer to diff erent levels of the narrative, these levels being “historical or genealogical”
(his inner frame); cosmological; and authorial (his outermost frame). See Hiltebeitel, R e-
thinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , 94 , and Black, “Eavesdropping,” 74n15 where he too takes issue
with Hiltebeitel’s defi nition of a frame.
49. He is Parik ṣ it’s son and Arjuna’s great grandson.
50. This takes place at 1.55.1.
51. Minkowski, “Janamejaya’s Sattra,” 403 .
52. Ibid .
53. But not “never” as Minkowski suggests ( Ibid. , 405 ).
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 25
Sa ṃ jaya narrates the events of the war to the oft-lamenting Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra.5 4
Minkowski considers the Saṃ jaya-Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra frame to be “the most
highly elaborated of the frame stories” as well as the most “tense and emo-
tional,” since the lamenting Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra often blames his son Duryodhana
for the war and Saṃ jaya insists that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra must face the fact that he
(Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a) is to blame.5 5
Minkowski has called the M ah ā bh ā rata ’s use of frame stories “an in-
alienable part of the M ah ā bh ā rata ’s narrative identity.”5 6 This book argues
that much of what the M ah ā bh ā rata “does” it achieves through its framing-
embedding technique. The frame stories allow the text to foreground the
signifi cance of audience reception, since Janamejaya’s questions in many
cases drive the narrative. Further, these framing devices provide the text with
the opportunity to present itself in specifi c ways. The epic not only begins by
telling us when and where it was fi rst told, 57 but it also tells us what it is
about (i.e., d harma , 58 and “that which concerns the soul”[a dhy ā tma ]),5 9 the
merits of listening to it (i.e., to purify one’s sins;6 0 to cause one to never
despair, even in dire situations [n a k ṛ cchreṣ v avasīdati ]) 61 , and its genre (k ath ā ,
pur ā ṇ a , ā khy ā na , v eda , ś ā stra , etc. 62 ). Third, the framing device gives the text
the ability to manipulate time, a trajectory that will be explored in more
depth in chapters 3 and 4 .
A fi nal distinctive feature of the M ah ā bh ā rata —its most powerful—is
the relentless manner in which it tells its dark tale, “the most harrowing in
world literature.”6 3 The M ah ā bh ā rata fashions its tale in such a manner that
54. Thus V. B. Athavale calls the M ah ā bh ā rata “a triple dialogue.” V. B. Athavale, “The Roles
of Vy ā sa, Sañjaya, Vaiśampā ya ṇ a and Sauti in the Kuru War Narration,” The Journal of the
Ganganatha Jha Research Institute 3/2 (1946), 121–141 .
55. Minkowski, “Janamejaya’s S attra ,” 406 . See chapter 3 for a more extensive discussion of
this frame.
56. Ibid.
57. According to Minkowski, the story of the epic was fi rst narrated “in its monumental
form” at King Janamejaya’s snake sacrifi ce. He bases this claim on 1.1.8–9. “Janamejaya’s
Sattra ,” 402.
58. 1.1.14.
59. 1.1.96.
60. 1.1.191.
61. 1.1.199.
62. 1.1.8–20.
63. Pollock, “The Mahabharata of Vyasa,” 829.
26 disorienting dharma
it brings its audiences to the brink of meaninglessness and then, instead of
receding from it, it toys with pushing them over the precipice. Take for ex-
ample the fact that the eighteen days of the Mah ā bh ā rata war consume fi ve
entire books, or more than a quarter of the epic (making them longer than
the entire I liad ). The blow-by-blow progression of the massive slaughter is
narrated with painstaking detail, cataloguing the infi nitely horrifying ways
that the soldiers’ lives are cut short and the human body can be torn apart,
as well as just about every possible expression of human despair:
Some were pierced by spears and some by battle-axes, and some were
crushed by elephants and others were trampled by horses. Some were
cut by car-wheels and some by sharp arrows, and they cried out every-
where for their relatives, O king. Others cried out for their sons, and
others for their fathers and brothers. And their many entrails were
scattered and their thighs were broken, O Bhā rata. And others, with
arms torn off and their sides split open were seen wailing. Thirsty, they
desired to live, and others overwhelmed with thirst, with little strength,
fell on the battlefi eld on the bare ground, and begged for water.6 4
The last violent episode of the battle, the night massacre, takes the slow,
steady descent into horror to an entirely new and unprecedented level that
morphs into the utterly macabre. Warriors no longer die with some mo-
dicum of dignity on the battlefi eld, but are slaughtered at night in their
beds, weaponless, begging for their lives, groveling in the dirt; human vio-
lence here turns utterly bestial. The Book of the Night Massacre is followed
by The Book of the Women . In this book the Kaurava women visit the battle-
fi eld after the war and behold the carnage. Here the audience witnesses the
women gasp, shriek, wail, and drop to the earth as they happen upon the
severed heads and limbs of their husbands, brothers, and fathers or as they
see the ghouls or beasts of prey feasting upon the corpses of their loved
ones. The M ah ā bh ā rata perennially delivers a “sucker-punch”—the crip-
pling blow that rips away one’s comforting blinders—and then, while one
is still reeling, the epic does the unthinkable: it delivers another punch. It
is relentless in this respect, in a manner that is unmatched in world litera-
ture. Perhaps this is why even today the text is not stored or read within a
house for fear it will consume its inhabitants. As David Shulman notes,
64. 6.44.34–38.
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 27
one reads it outside, on one’s porch, and not from beginning to end, “since
that progression, too, is felt to be potentially disastrous.”6 5
The Aesthetics of Suffering
As previously mentioned, one important way in which the Mah ā bh ā rata
operates as a literary text is that it conveys meaning more through what it
“does” than through what it says. By “what it does” I refer to the fact that its
literary strategies are designed to “do” something to its audience. This book
argues that the primary way the M ah ā bh ā rata does “what it does” is through
the “aesthetics of suff ering.” The aesthetics of suff ering, which is my artic-
ulation of the specifi c way the M ah ā bh ā rata works as a literary text, is made
up of fi ve components that work together to produce meaning in the text.
These fi ve components are (1) the concept of suff ering, both as a central
theme and an aesthetic principle, (2) narrative strategies, (3) the sensitive
reader/receiver (s ahṛ daya ), (4) characters, and (5) conceptual categories.
This section briefl y discusses these fi ve components and how they work
together to encourage the audience to accept the epic’s worldview, which
centers on confronting the pervasive presence of suff ering in the world.
With respect to the fi rst component, the concept of suff ering, the argu-
ment here is that one of the central themes as well as one of the predomi-
nant poetic principles guiding the inner momentum of the central
narrative is suff ering (d uḥkha ). To say that the M ah ā bh ā rata is largely
about suff ering is, in some sense, to state the obvious. The M ah ā bh ā rata ,
after all, tells the tale of a violent fratricidal war that comes very close to
destroying the entire world. Virtually every character in the epic, good or
bad, either suff ers a violent death—often at the hands of a blood relative
or lifelong friend—or survives the war and lives out his or her days over-
whelmed by grief over the loss of loved ones.6 6 Even so, surprisingly few
studies have considered the M ah ā bh ā rata in this light. 67
65. Shulman, “Toward a Historical Poetics,” 29 .
66. Tamar C. Reich in her recent article “Ends and Closures in the M ah ā bh ā rata ” discusses
how characters in the last books of the epic struggle with their feelings of grief and guilt in
terms of renunciation, sacrifi ces, and preoccupation with the afterlife (18–82).
67. Notable exceptions are Greg Bailey, “Suff ering in the Mah ā bh ā rata : Draupadī and
Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira” in Suff ering: Indian Perspectives , ed. K. N. Tiwari (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1986),
38–60 ; Black, “Eavesdropping,” 53–78; R eich, “Ends and Closures in the M ah ā bh ā rata ; and Nich-
olas Sutton, R eligious Doctrines in the Mah ā bh ā rata (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2000), 407–421 .
28 disorienting dharma
However, the aim here is not simply to point out that the M ah ā bh ā rata
focuses on the theme of suff ering. This point needs to be underscored because
to say that the M ah ā bh ā rata is about any one topic is to ignore how the epic,
with its encyclopedic drive, resists reductive reading. The concern here is
rather with the role that suff ering plays as an aesthetic principle and with the
“work” that it does as such. Specifi cally, this work entails “disorienting and
reorienting” the audience’s understanding of conceptual categories (such as
dharma , fate, and time) as well as its relationship to many of the epic’s princi-
pal characters (most signifi cantly Yudhiṣ ṭ hira). 68 A basic argument in this
book is that when specifi c conceptual categories and/or characters are juxta-
posed with instances of palpable suff ering, these instances tend to explode
our understanding of that category or character. This is especially true of
dharma or characters closely linked to d harma , such as Yudhiṣ ṭ hira and K ṛ ṣ ṇ a.
For example, as mentioned earlier, a fundamental question that the epic per-
sistently raises is “Why is the dharmic path implicated in so much sorrow?” 69
To bring together the idea of suff ering/sorrow on the one hand and the
creation and operation of a literary work on the other is a quintessentially
Indian way of conceiving of literature. For example, the R ā m ā ya ṇ a , consid-
ered by the tradition to be the “ ā di k ā vya ” or very fi rst poem, begins by de-
scribing itself and poetic expression in general as born of sorrow. V ā lmīki,
the epic’s ostensible author, feels grief when he witnesses the slaying of a
male bird and hears the laments of the bird’s female partner. He then goes on
to compose a work of literature (the story of Rā ma) in śloka verse that largely
is structured on the theme of sorrow (ś oka ), and the pun here is intentional. 70
In the M ah āb h ā rata , the principle of suff ering does its aesthetic
work through what I call the epic’s “narrative strategies.” Generally
speaking, a narrative strategy is a set of instructions that a text deploys
to guide its audiences. 71 I refer to those who allow themselves to be
68. According to Paul Ricoeur, disorientation is a powerful tool that a literary text deploys to
stimulate active reading. T ime and Narrative , trans. Kathleen McLaughlin and David Pel-
lauer (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 3:171.
69. Or, as Bailey puts it, “In the end the sole question remains—is d harma worth upholding if it
can be maintained only at the cost of great suff ering?” Bailey, “Suff ering in the M ah ā bh ā rata ,” 55.
70. Barbara Stoler Miller, “The Original Poem: Vā lmīki R ā m ā yaṇ a and Indian Literary
Values,” Literature East and West 17 (1973): 163–169 .
71. Hiltebeitel too argues that the text “trains its readers” or contains instructions for how it
is to be read. See “On Reading Fitzgerald’s Vyā sa,” 248. See also James Hegarty, “Extracting
the Kath ā - ā m ṛ ta ,” 57.
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 29
guided by these instructions as the “sensitive reader/spectator” (in San-
skrit literary theory s ahṛ daya ; see chapter 1 ). To be more specifi c, a nar-
rative strategy refers to the dynamic interaction between the form and
the content of the text, and its impact on the sensitive reader. Signifi -
cantly, there are numerous instances where form undermines or “rup-
tures” content. Here meaning proceeds from the asymmetric relation
between the two and the way in which this impacts the reader or lis-
tener.7 2 A helpful description of the kind of work that this asymmetrical
relation “does” comes, surprisingly enough, from the musician Philip
Glass. He describes fi lm-music art (or composing musical scores for
fi lm) as “observing accurately the distance between the image and the
music.” Alex Ross elaborates: “In other words, instead of trying to make
image and music serve the same ends, you play one against the other,
letting the disparity become an emotional experience in itself.”7 3 Simi-
larly, one way in which the narrative strategies in the M ah ā bh ā rata func-
tion is to create a distance between the image (or content) and the telling
(or form), and the emotional experience comes from the disjuncture
between the two.
The “aesthetics of suff ering” refers to the ways in which the epic’s nar-
rative strategies use the theme of suff ering to impact the sensitive reader
in specifi c ways that are ethically signifi cant. It has two literary spheres in
which it operates: (1) characters and (2) conceptual categories. The central
characters in the M ah ā bh ā rata are fl awed human beings, torn by confl ict
and confused by reality; their frailties and confusions often lead them into
various predicaments that are marked by sorrow and grief. Indeed, the
central characters tend to fi nd themselves in one of two contexts vis-à-vis
the aesthetics of suff ering. The fi rst is situations that involve dilemmas
where characters must make diffi cult decisions the consequences of
which entail the potential for enormous suff ering (e.g., Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s
72. For a strikingly similar insight, see K. Ayyappa Paniker, I ndian Narratology (New Delhi:
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts: Sterling Publishers, 2003), 5 . Paniker identifi es
“interiorization” as one of eight main features of Indian narratology. Interiorization “is the
processs by which a distinction, a contrast, or even a contradiction is eff ected between the
surface features of a text and its internal essence.” It is the notion that “there is in a text
something like a counter-text.”
73. Alex Ross, “Sound and Vision: Glass’s ‘Koyaanisqatsi’ and the art of fi lm scoring,” T he
New Yorker , June 27, 2005, http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2005/06/27/050627crmu_
music.?currentPage=all (accessed November 1, 2008) .
30 disorienting dharma
decision to accept the invitation to the game of dice). 74 Here the character
in question, no matter how virtuous, inevitably makes a bad decision or
reacts to the situation in a way that makes matters exponentially worse.
The second is situations that take place after the bad decisions have been
made and the catastrophe has occurred and characters are reeling with
sorrow (e.g., Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s post-war malaise).
Generally speaking, four character types operate in these two situa-
tions: (1) the victim of suff ering—characters who experience pain either
physically or psychologically and who often express their despair by
lamenting; (2) the agent of suff ering—those who cause others to suff er,
often unwittingly, as a result of bad decisions; (3) the passive witness to
suff ering—those who observe others in distressful situations and do
nothing;7 5 and (4) the advisor against grief—those wise counselors who
attempt to dispel the despair of others. For the most part, the principal
characters in the epic fall into more than one of these categories. 76
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira, for example, is a victim, a passive witness, and potentially an
agent of suff ering (see chapter 2 ).
In these two situational contexts (i.e., situations in which characters
fi nd themselves involved in dilemmas or catastrophes), the aesthetics of
suff ering works primarily in two ways. The fi rst is to “disorient” any uni-
lateral understanding of so-called virtuous characters and thereby any
“easy,” “comfortable” understanding of them as moral guides. The second
is to reorient the audience to a new way of seeing the world through the
74. Shulman (“Toward a Historical Poetics,” 24) characterizes the M ah ā bh ā rata as a “po-
etics of dilemma.” See also Bimal Krishna Matilal, ed., M oral Dilemmas in the Mah ā bh ā rata
(Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1989) for scholarship on dilemmas in the M ah ā bh ā rata . Daniel
H. H. Ingalls argues that what makes the M ah ā bh ā rata a fascinating and enthralling work
of literature is not its encyclopedic nature but its representation of a series of moral prob-
lems as well as the various human responses to them. Ingalls, “D harma and M ok ṣ a ,” P hilos-
ophy East and West , 7 (1957): 41–48 .
75. A. K. Ramanujan argues that the cast of characters in the epic can be divided into actors
and watchers; see “Repetition in the M ah ā bh ā rata ,” 439.
76. For an example of a character typology in Sanskrit literary theory, see T he N ā ṭ yaś ā stra: A
Treatise on Hindu Dramaturgy and Histrionics, Ascribed to Bharata Muni , trans. Manmohan
Gosh (Calcutta: Asiatic Society, 1950), 2: 201–213 . Bharata distinguishes between three kinds
of male and female characters: the low; middle; and high, from less to more virtuous. More
signifi cantly, he defi nes heroes and heroines as those who experience misfortune, and they
are classifi ed according to their responses to distressful situations. Thus, the four classes of
heroes are the self-controlled and vehement, the self-controlled and light-hearted, the
self-controlled and exalted, and the self-controlled and calm. The four classes of heroines are
the self-controlled, the light-hearted, the exalted, and the modest.
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 31
lens of the epic’s many “arguments against grief,” which are delivered
when a character is lamenting the sudden, tragic death of a loved one. The
advisers against grief urge the lamenters to overcome their personal
sorrow through understanding the fact that all creatures that have existed
and will exist experience suff ering. The implication here is that to move
beyond one’s personal suff ering, one has to “see” and accept the fact of
universal suff ering. A thorough exploration of the “argument against
grief” as a sub-genre in the M ah ā bh ā rata and the immense ethical work
that it does will be explored in chapters 3 and 4 .
With respect to the second sphere, the sphere of conceptual cate-
gories, the aesthetics of suff ering refers to the way the narrative strat-
egies manipulate the sensitive reader/spectator’s hopes, desires, and
expectations regarding central concepts in the epic largely, but not exclu-
sively, by bringing the issue of suff ering to the foreground at key strate-
gic moments. Often what is at stake is the validity and reliability of
specifi c conceptual categories that structure how the reader/spectator
understands the world of the text—categories such as time, fate, human
exertion, heaven, hell, god, and—most importantly—d harma . By using
instances of palpable suff ering to call into question the effi cacy of spe-
cifi c conceptual categories (such as the way d harma is called into ques-
tion in the dicing scene, see chapter 2 ), the epic’s narrative strategies are
able to reach out and radically disorient the sensitive reader or spectator
by rupturing his or her understanding of these categories. Through this
process the epic’s strategies are then able to reorient the audience to a
new way of seeing and hence understanding the world. The “disorient-
ing/reorienting process” is ethically signifi cant because the categories
that these strategies are designed to impact are inextricably linked to the
moral life. Indeed, what unites most if not all these categories is that they
are frequently called upon to provide a rationale for the existence of suf-
fering. For example, when characters lament the death of a loved one,
they often blame their loss on time, fate, the gods, and/or karma (less
frequently), or they comfort themselves with the thought that the
deceased will now enjoy heaven (see chapters 4 and 5 ). In this context,
then, the categories are summoned to explain, justify, or make suff ering
palatable. The work of the aesthetics of suff ering, however, is to show
that these categories—or specifi c ways of understanding these categories—
fail to make suff ering comprehensible or palatable. The task is, there-
fore, to confront the reality of suff ering without using these categories as
conceptual crutches.
32 disorienting dharma
Perhaps the most important category in this regard is d harma . The illu-
sion under which many characters in the epic operate is that d harma will
protect them from suff ering. The reality in the world of the text is that
nothing protects one from suff ering. This is driven home predominantly
through the presentation of fate and time in the epic, as well as through
the epic’s narrative strategies of “rupture” (i.e., those aspects of the text
that create holes or gaps in literal meaning).7 7 This book suggests that what
the text is ultimately “doing” through disorienting this understanding of
dharma is reorienting its audiences to a deeper understanding of d harma ,
one that is divested of all self-oriented pretenses. One would, according to
this understanding of the concept, perform d harma for the sake of nothing.
Through its aesthetics of suff ering the M ah ā bh ā rata makes a threefold
“argument” about the importance of confronting the fact of suff ering, rec-
ognizing the forces that cause it and apprehending the appropriate emo-
tional and psychological responses that allow one to move beyond it. The
term “argument” is used loosely here because the epic’s aesthetics of suf-
fering is not attempting to forcefully persuade so much as to “disorient
and reorient” the sensitive reader toward deeper knowledge and insight.
The purpose of this disorientation/reorientation process is to refi gure the
way the audience sees and hence responds to the world.7 8 Indeed, the
transformative impact of the audience’s refi guration has epistemological
consequences. The discovery of truth (i.e., the insights generated by the
text’s aesthetics of suff ering) involves an epistemological shift, a radically
new orientation to the world.
The project of refi guring the sensitive reader/spectator’s understanding
of suff ering—and by extension refi guring their understanding of the
world—is primarily ethical (and in the classical South Asian context reli-
gion and ethics are inextricably linked; indeed what we think of as “religion”
in this context was largely defi ned as “a practical way of dealing with suf-
fering”). 79 Ethics here is conceived as the threefold task of how to confront,
77. For a slightly diff erent application of the concept of rupture to the epic, see David
Gitomer, “King Duryodhana: The Mah ā bh ā rata Discourse of Sinning and Virtue in Epic and
Drama,” J ournal of the American Oriental Society 112/2 (1992): 225, 232 . See also Alf Hiltebei-
tel, Rethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , 5 .
78. “Refi guration” here refers to “the healing and transformative potential of narratives.”
See C harles Hallisey and Anne Hanson, “Narrative, Sub-ethics and the Moral Life: Some
Evidence from Theravā da Buddhism,” J ournal of Religious Ethics 24/2 (1996): 308 . Refi gura-
tion here refers to “the healing and transformative potential of narratives.”
79. Rupert Gethin, T he Foundations of Buddhism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), 64 .
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 33
respond to, and thus move beyond suff ering.8 0 “Confronting suff ering,”
refers to the task of seeing suff ering as an objective fact. The M ah ā bh ā rata’s
aesthetics devotes a tremendous amount of attention to scenes of enormous
sorrow and grieving (e.g., Draupadī’s abuse in the dicing scene;8 1 the cruel
slaying of Abhimanyu and its impact on Arjuna, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira, Subhadr ā ,
and others; 82 the grieving of the women in T he Book of the Women ,8 3 etc.). In
these scenes, the epic’s narrative strategies encourage the sensitive reader/
spectator to face the vulnerability of all human beings to enormous suf-
fering. The fact that even the most virtuous characters suff er forces the
audience to face the fact that nothing, not even d harma , off ers protection.
“Confronting suff ering” also involves cultivating a clear sense of the
factors that contribute to human misery. The epic explores a plethora of
potential causes of sorrow (e.g., fate, time, God/gods, human exertion),
but we learn the most about the causes of sorrow through watching char-
acters as they triumph and fail—particularly as they fail. Often in these
contexts the narrative voice focuses on the quality of a character’s state of
mind and/or ability to see. Indeed, the quality of one’s mind (m anas , mati )
or one’s intelligence (b uddhi ) receives much attention in the M ah ā bh ā rata .
Characters are often described as losing their wits to grief, to jealousy
(Duryodhana is the prime example of this in the episode of the dice game),
and anger (primarily during the war, during which relatives and close
friends do not “know” one another and thus kill one another8 4 ). Two very
important passages related to this point are Bhīma’s speech to Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira
at 12.16.21–25 and Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s speech to Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira at 14.12.1–14. Both Bhīma
and K ṛ ṣ ṇ a, in an eff ort to persuade Yudhiṣ ṭ hira to stop grieving and agree
to rule, tell him that the battle he now must wage is one with his mind
( manas ). According to Bhīma, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s “battle” involves accepting
“the coming and going of creatures” (b hūt ā n ā m ā gatiṃ gatim ), or the tran-
sitory nature of life.
80. Bimal Krishna Matilal notes the absence of moral philosophical thinking in the Indian
philosophical tradition and locates it in the Indian epics, the Sanskrit M ah ā bh ā rata and
R ā m ā ya ṇ a . Bimal Krishna Matilal, “Moral Dilemmas: Insights from the Indian Epics,” in
Ethics and Epics : The Collected Essays of Bimal Krishna Matilal , ed. Jonardon Ganeri (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2002), 22–23 .
81. 2.15–64.
82. 7.32–75.
83. 11.16–26.
84. See, for example, 6.44.2–3.
34 disorienting dharma
“Responding to suff ering,” refers to the task of reacting to catastrophic
situations with a calm mind and clear vision. Very few characters in the
Mah ā bh ā rata respond in such a manner. Instead, characters in such situ-
ations are often overwhelmed by powerful emotions and, as a result, they
lose control of their senses. Consequently, they make reckless decisions
that simply lead to more suff ering. By showing its audiences the disas-
trous consequences of these inappropriate responses, the M ah ā bh ā rata
presents a powerful and palpable argument for why it is necessary, even
imperative, to respond to suff ering with calmness and clarity.
“Moving beyond suff ering” refers to the techniques, solutions, and
even ways of viewing the world that would help one overcome the ten-
dency to succumb to sorrow. The didactic portions of the text contain
many discussions of techniques and virtues that are said to bring an end
to psychological sorrow—techniques such as mental restraint and virtues
such as contentment and tranquility.8 5 The content of these discussions
intersect in important ways with the epic’s arguments against grief
referred to above. The point of many of the epic’s arguments against grief
is to shift the focus of victims of suff ering from the narrow lens of their
own particular situation to the level of the experience of suff ering of all
living creatures. Such an epistemological shift is meant to snap lamenters
out of their despair by distancing them from their own personal situation
and opening up their eyes to the condition of all living creatures (i.e., uni-
versal suff ering). Such a shift is also meant to encourage a transformation
of their emotional responses from grief and self-pity to emotions that are
closely linked to self-mastery and restraint, such as stoic acceptance,
contentment, and tranquility.8 6
85. For statements on the concept of contentment in the Mahabh ā rata , see, for example,
Śaunaka’s discourse to Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira at the beginning of T he Book of the Forest (3.2.15–3.3.1); the
discussion of the hunter in “The Colloquy of the Brahmin and the Hunter,” a story told by
M ā rka ṇ ḍ eya in The Book of the Forest (3.198.1–3.207.2); and Vidura’s “argument against grief”
to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra after the Kaurava defeat in T he Book of the Women (11.3.1–7.20.) Related to the
notion of contentment is Saṃ jaya’s advice to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra as he narrates the events of the war
to him: to refrain from grief and remain calm and in control of his mind (5.156.13 and
6.16.6). Arti Dhand argues that equanimity is the overarching worldview of the epic. See
“The Subversive Nature of Virtue in the M ah ā bh ā rata : A Tale About Women, Smelly As-
cetics, and God,” J ournal of the American Academy of Religion , 72/1 (2004), 47 .
86. Ingalls proposes that the highest virtue in the epic is discipline: “The virtue of virtues in
the Sanskrit epic is what one might call discipline. The favorite Sanskrit word is y oga , putting
oneself under the yoke, a personal training . . . One disciples the senses by the mind, the
mind by the judgment, judgment by the very self. One must always be on the lookout; one
must do nothing carelessly.” Ingalls, “D harma and M ok ṣ a ,”44.
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 35
Just as these advisors encourage, even enjoin, victims of suff ering to
overcome their grief and despair, this book argues that the M ah ā bh ā rata
through its aesthetics of suff ering provides an extended “argument” in nar-
rative form on the perils of grief and other inappropriate responses to cat-
astrophic situations. Its goal is to “teach” its audiences how to meet tragedy
and misfortune with a tranquil eye so that they may never lose their minds
to grief, despair, and other tumultuous emotions that would blind them
from seeing the direct route out of the catastrophe. Just as Saṃ jaya pro-
vides instructions for how Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a should listen to his narration of the
blow-by-blow progression of the war (that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a should listen but not
grieve), so too does the epic through the aesthetics of suff ering instruct us
not to grieve in the face of the colossal theater of human suff ering that
takes place in the central narrative, a suff ering that is largely staged through
the drama of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas, but moves outward from the battle books to
overtake virtually every character in the epic. Indeed, Ugraśravas, one of
the principal narrators of the epic, declares that after listening to the
Mah ā bh ār ata , one will never despair, even in dire situations.8 7
By arguing that one of the Mah ā bh ā rata ’s overarching tasks is to refi g-
ure the audience’s understanding of suff ering and thus of the world, this
book seeks to de-center discussion of ethics in the Mah ā bh ā rata from the
topic of dharma and re-center it on the issue of suff ering and its relation-
ship to d harma . Ultimately this book argues that this relationship is one of
the overarching preoccupations of the epic and, to a large extent, drives
the internal momentum of the central narrative.8 8
Two Central Concepts: D harma and Duh.kha
Because this book argues that many of the M ah ā bh ā rata’s darkest and most
enigmatic “riddle-questions” concern the troubling points of contact between
dharma and duḥkha , or suff ering, and indeed are centered on the question
of the nature of the relationship between these two concepts, it is worth
briefl y introducing the range of defi nitions of both terms in the epic and
their place and points of contact in the history of ideas of premodern India.
87. 1.1.199.
88. Greg Bailey agrees; he writes, “Where notions of suff ering are expressed most clearly
in the M ah ā bh ā rata , questions about dharma and fate are usually in the background.”
“Suff ering in the Mah ā bh ā rata,” 40.
36 disorienting dharma
Dharma
Dharma is perhaps the most important and ubiquitous concept in the his-
tory of South Asian religions. It is central not only in Brahmanical/Hindu
traditions but also in Buddhist and Jain traditions as well. Because the
term has been used in a bewildering variety of ways, it has no single
semantic equivalent in English. In various contexts the word may mean
law, justice, custom, morality, ethics, religion, duty, nature, or virtue. This
semantic range seems to underline links between ways of living, ways of
seeing, and ways of relating to life’s ultimate issues.8 9
Patrick Olivelle has recently argued that while the term d harma originated
in the Vedic context, it was part of a specialized vocabulary associated with
royalty (particularly in the middle and late Vedic context).9 0 The term became
central to Brahmanical religious vocabulary only after it had been borrowed by
the Buddha to locate and articulate his new religion.9 1 In the Buddhist context
the term dharma was ethicized and came to defi ne the good and righteous
“Buddhist” life. After its Buddhist appropriation, the term was then reappro-
priated by the Brahmanical tradition and employed as a central religious and
ethical category, in part in an eff ort to respond to the Buddhist challenge.9 2
According to Olivelle’s view, the concept of d harma was on the front
lines of the intellectual debates of the post-Vedic to early classical period in
ancient India. This period was marked not only by the rise of Buddhism
(as well as Jainism), but also by the decline of the ś rauta sacrifi ce, the tran-
sition from “Brahmanism” to what we now refer to as “Hinduism” and the
rapid growth of “d harma literature,” that is, literature in which d harma is
the central concept under consideration.9 3 Within the Brahmanical tradi-
tion, the term “d harma literature” refers primarily to the D harma Sūtras ,
the Dharma Ś ā stras , and the epics (the M ah ā bh ā rata and the R ā m ā ya ṇ a ).
89. Bimal Krishna Matilal, “Elusiveness and Ambiguity in Dharma-Ethics” in E thics and
Epics: The Collected Essays of Bimal Krishna Matilal , ed. Jonardon Ganeri (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2002), 37 .
90. Patrick Olivelle, “The Semantic History of Dharma the Middle and Late Vedic Periods,”
Journal of Indian Philosophy 32/5–6 (2004): 503 .
91. Ibid. , 504 .
92. Ibid. , 506 .
93. Alf Hiltebeitel, D harma (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2010), 5–6 . See also
Hiltebeitel’s recently published expanded book on this subject, entitled D harma: Its Early
History in Law, Religion, and Narrative (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011) .
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 37
Alf Hiltebeitel has recently pointed out that once d harma became a
fl ourishing literary topic in classical India, a division emerged between
texts that treated dharma primarily as a legal matter (the D harma Sūtras ,
Ś ā stras ) and ones that explored it predominantly through narrative (the
epics). This “legislative/narrative” divide also corresponded to a division
between texts that attempted to assert d harma’s clarity, order, and perfec-
tion (the legal texts) and those that emphasized its subtlety, ambiguity, and
profundity (the narrative texts), although Hiltebeitel is careful to point out
that single texts can be expected to hold these tensions within themselves
and cannot be expected to have just one view of d harma .9 4
In the Dharma Sūtras , dharma is an encompassing term for ritual,
social, and moral norms.9 5 These short treatises written in aphoristic prose
are primarily concerned with the rules of conduct that regulated the v ar ṇ as
(social classes) and ā śramas (life stages). The Dharma Ś ā stras , or extended
treatises on the nature of d harma written in verse, consolidate and further
elaborate upon the rules of conduct as established in the D harma Śūtras .
By far the most celebrated of the D harma Ś ā stras is the M ā nava Dharma
Ś ā stra (fi rst to second centuries CE), often translated as “The Laws of
Manu.” One of the most signifi cant innovations in T he Laws of Manu is the
addition of a fourth source of d harma beyond the three mentioned in the
Dharma Sūtras . In the Dharma Sūtras the three sources of dharma are:
revelation, texts composed by the learned who have inferred what is not
explicitly stated in revelation, and the practices of learned people. To this
list The Laws of Manu adds personal conscience or “what is pleasing to
oneself” (2.6). This addition introduces the important idea that d harma
involves not only following a list of obligations but also the development
of insight.
What is worth noting about the use of the term d harma in the D harma
Sūtras and S ā stras is that, to a large extent, it is restricted to rules of behav-
ior according to strict Brahmanical norms. Over a period of time, however,
there was an expansion in the application of the word, a process most
94. Hiltebeitel, D harma , 10. Hiltebeitel also points out that the idea of the subtle nature of
dharma appears in the K a ṭ ha Upani ṣ ad . In Death’s house when Naciketas asks to know
whether a man exists after death or not, Death fi rst tells him to ask something else, since
“it’s a subtle dharma.” Hiltebeitel, D harma , 32.
95. For a good overview of the development of the concept of d harma in the Hindu tradi-
tions, see Barbara A. Holdrege, “Dharma,” in T he Hindu World , ed. Sushil Mittal and Gene
Thursby (New York: Routledge, 2004), 213–248 .
38 disorienting dharma
likely catalyzed by the rise of renunciant movements around the fi fth cen-
tury BCE. These movements represented a new set of values that chal-
lenged the idea that brahmin ritual provided the only way to religious
fulfi llment. The old goal of sacrifi cial and social behavior, heaven, was
superseded by a new goal: liberation from the world into which one was
continually reborn. Further, the ideal of a hi ṃ s ā , noninjury, a central tenet
of all renunciant traditions, is noteworthy because it was a virtue consid-
ered to be applicable to all human beings and not dependent upon one’s
class or life stage.9 6
The Mah ā bh ā rata was composed during this turbulent period, a fact
that helps explain why the depiction of d harma in the epic is “varied and
elusive” and why its defi nition is often under contestation both “explicitly
and implicitly.”9 7 While the epic does contain passages that describe
dharma in strikingly legalistic terms, many of the narrative passages seem
to call into question the idea that d harma is codifi able, suggesting instead
that dharma is subtle and may be understood only by deep insight.9 8 This
view of d harma is refl ected in Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s well-known statement, “The
truth of d harma lies hidden in a secret cave (d harmasya tattvaṃ nihitaṃ
guh ā y ā ṃ ).”9 9
Recently James Fitzgerald has argued that there are two predominant
uses of the term in the Mah ā bh ā rata that refl ect a transition correspond-
ing to the historical shift from the ritual ethics of meritorious deeds as
represented predominantly in the D harma Sūtras and Ś ā stras to the newer
yoga/renunciant-ethics of refi ning one’s self (i.e., cultivating virtue).1 00
Dharma in the fi rst sense, according to Fitzgerald, is duty or righteous-
ness, the way of conducting one’s life so as to achieve happiness on earth
and heaven after death. Here, one acts in accordance with d harma (i.e., the
dharma of one’s stage in life and one’s class) with the awareness that one’s
96. For an excellent discussion of the development of the term dharma during the time
period of the composition of the M ah ā bh ā rata , see Bowles, D harma, Disorder, and the Polit-
ical in Ancient India , 81–132.
97. James L. Fitzgerald, “Dharma and Its Translation in the M ah ā bh ā rata ,” Journal of Indian
Philosophy 32/5–6 (2004): 671 .
98. Sutton, R eligious Doctrines in the Mahābhārata , 294.
99. 3.313.117 in Ramachandra Kinjawadekar, ed., M ah ā bh ā ratam with the Commentary of
Nīlakaṇ ṭ ha (Poona: Chitrashala Press, 1923–33) .
100. James Fitzgerald, trans., The Mah ā bh ā rata, Volume 7: Book 11: The Book of the Women;
Book 12: The Book of Peace, Part 1 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003), 104 .
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 39
actions will accrue positive or negative results. D harma in the second
sense refers to the overcoming of all attitudes that are oriented toward
personal goals and merit. In this context, d harma focuses on the virtues of
mental purity, self-disciple, patience, truthfulness, tranquility, and, signif-
icantly, the ability to refrain from succumbing to grief. Chief among all the
virtues, according to this second defi nition of dharma , are harmlessness,
ahiṃ s ā , causing no pain or suff ering to any sensitive creature, and
ā n ṛ śamsya , lack of cruelty.1 01
As Fitzgerald notes, these two senses of d harma essentially contradict
one another because one is predicated upon the desire for some great
good (in the end heaven—the ultimate “protection” against suff ering) and
the other seeks to expunge all desire (i.e., to gain liberation or m ok ṣ a ).1 02
And, in Fitzgerald’s view, resolving the tension between these contradic-
tory senses of d harma constituted the “spiritual force” that drove some
brahmins to create the M ah ā bh ā rata .
Implicit in Fitzgerald’s formulation of the tension between these two
types of d harma is the problem of universal suff ering. In many respects,
suff ering is the engine that drives the logic of Fitzgerald’s second sense of
dharma , since it pivots on the twin aspirations of freeing oneself from
suff ering (by being able to remain tranquil and not grieve) and refraining
from causing suff ering to others (a hi ṃ s ā ).1 03 Furthermore, the problem of
universal suff ering renders the fi rst sense of dharma , which is built on
the egocentric structure of acting in accordance with one’s duty for the
sake of good results, untenable. Why? In this transient world (a dominant
worldview in this period as will be discussed below), acting in accordance
with dharma out of desire for any reward (including heaven) will only lead
to sorrow since any such reward is by nature transitory, and the loss of it
will result in grief and despair. Thus d harma in Fitzgerald’s fi rst sense
becomes implicated in—or more precisely perpetuates—the problem of
suff ering.
101. S ee Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , 177–214 , and Mukund Lath, “The Concept
of Ā n ṛ śa ṃ sya in the M ah ā bh ā rata ,” in The Mah ā bh ā rata Revisited , ed. R. N. Dandekar (New
Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 1990), 113–119 .
102. Fitzgerald, T he Mah ā bh ā rata, Volume 7, 104.
103. D harma and d uḥkha are clearly linked in the early Buddhist texts such as the D īgha
Nīk ā ya . Consider, for example, the following quotation: “And when the Lord knew that
Pokkharasā ti’s mind was ready, pliable, free from hindrances, joyful and calm, then he
preached a sermon on d hamma in brief: on suff ering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.”
As cited in Hiltebeitel, D harma , 40.
40 disorienting dharma
This book argues that the M ah ā bh ā rata provides an “aesthetic” argu-
ment for the untenability of the fi rst sense of dharma . The central narra-
tive foregrounds the issue of suff ering to such an extent that it “saturates”
most if not all instances of this understanding of d harma and makes such
a vision of ethics defensible only if radically stripped of all desire. The
problem is not only that desire leads to personal suff ering, as articulated
above, but because—as the Mah ā bh ā rata argues time and again—grief
due to loss stupefi es the mind and causes one to make decisions and take
actions that unleash further suff ering in the world. The suff ering of the
individual leads to exponential suff ering in the world, and d harma in
Fitzgerald’s fi rst sense, as the Mah ā bh ā rata argues, is implicated and
indeed feeds into this problem.1 04
Duh.kha
Many Sanskrit terms are employed in the M ah ā bh ā rata to refer to suff ering.
These include duḥkha (sorrow, grief, diffi culty), 105 śoka (grief, distress, lam-
entation, wailing, deep anguish),1 06 ā rti (distress, affl iction, suff ering),1 07
durmanas (troubled in mind, dispirited, sad),1 08 vimanas (out of one’s senses,
downcast, disconsolate),1 09 and adjectives, nouns, and verbs formed from
the roots √ dah (to burn, scorch, consume, destroy, pain, torment, distress,
grieve)1 10 and √ tap (to shine, be hot, suff er pain, hurt, injure, torment, mor-
tify the body).1 11 Victims of suff ering are often described as being perplexed
( vimohita ), stupefi ed ( mūrchita ), overwhelmed ( samanvita ), fl ooded (s am-
abhi √ plu ), tormented ( ardita ), emaciated ( karśita ), burning ( pradīpta ), or out
104. The “argument” that d harma is viable as an ethical category if and only if it is stripped
of all desire for fruits is very close to Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s argument for desireless action (n i ṣ k ā makarma )
in the Bhagavadgīt ā —that is, acting in the world according to d harma , but acting without
desire for results.
105. Vaman Shivaram Apte, T he Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary (Kyoto: Rinsen Book
Company, 2003), 319 .
106. Ibid. , 1669 .
107. Ibid. , 355 .
108. Ibid. , 322 .
109. Arthur Anthony Macdonell, A Practical Sanskrit Dictionary (New Delhi: Munishiram
Manoharlal, 2003), 287 .
110. A pte, The Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary , 806 .
111. Ibid. , 760 .
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 41
of their minds (u pahatacitta , v y ā kulacetana ) with suff ering and sorrow.1 12
They often fall to the earth, shake, lose their senses, are barely conscious,
cry, hiss, and/or shriek violently.
When characters describe their own suff ering, they often emphasize
the fact that their minds are overwhelmed and that they are therefore con-
fused or perplexed by the experience. For example, when Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
learns of the news of the death of Duryodhana and the defeat of his army,
he tells Sa ṃ jaya that his mind (m anas ) “seems unsteady” (v ihvalatīva ) and
that he cannot recover (n a upa √ labh ) his wits ( sa ṃ jñ ā m ). 113 Arjuna, “whose
mind is agitated with grief” (ś okasaṃ vignam ā naḥ ) in the opening chapters
of the Bhagavadgīt ā over the prospect of having to kill his kinsmen, tells
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a that his mind (m anas ) seems to whirl (b hramatīva ).1 14 G ā ndh ā rī,
reeling from the pain that she feels over the death of her sons, tells Kṛ ṣ ṇ a
that her mind (m anas ) “is almost reeling” (v ihvalatīva ).1 15 The fact that
112. For example, when the Pā ṇ ḍ avas are forced to renounce their kingdom and enter the
forest, Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira describes his brothers as “perplexed by the sorrows that spring from their
suff erings” (ś okajair duḥkhair . . . vimohit ā ḥ ) (3.2.9). Arjuna’s “mind is anguished with grief”
( śokasa ṃ vignam ā nasaḥ ) when he realizes he must kill his family members in battle (6.23.47).
Throughout the war and especially in its aftermath countless characters are overwhelmed
with sorrow over the deaths of their fathers, brothers, teachers, and sons. Aśvatthā man is
described as “completely fi lled with grief and sorrow” ( duḥkhaśokasamanvitaḥ ) and “burning
with grief like a fi re that is blazing” ( dahyam ā nas tu śokena pradīpten ā gnin ā yath ā ) over the
killing of his father, Droṇ a, and the particularly dishonorable way it was carried out. (10.3.1–2).
When Draupadī learns of the slaughter of her sons, her countenance ( vadanam ) is “emaci-
ated with sorrow” (ś okakarśitam ) and she is “tormented by grief” (s ok ā rt ā ). Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira is
“fi lled with grief for his sons” ( putraśokasamanvitaḥ ) and “barely conscious” (v isa ṃ jñaḥ )
(10.11.6–7; 10.10.7, 10.10.30). When the Kuru women learn of the defeat of their army, they are
described as “out of their minds with grief” ( śoken ā bhy ā hatajñ ā n āḥ ) and when they go to the
battlefi eld seeking the remains of their sons, fathers, and brothers, they are “stricken with
pain” (d uḥkh ā rt ā ḥ ) (11.9.14 and 11.16.14). Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira, falling into a postwar malaise, is
described as “withered by grief” ( śokakarśitaḥ ) and “having a mind bewildered with grief”
( śokavy ā kulacetanaḥ ) (12.7.1–2). Arjuna describes Yudhiṣ ṭ hira at this point as “drowning in an
ocean of grief” (ś ok ā rṇ ave magnaḥ ) (12.29.2). The P ā ṇ ḍ avas are “destroyed by sorrow and
grief” (d uḥkhaśokasam ā hat ā ḥ ) when their mother, Kuntī, abandons them for the forest, and
when they learn of the slaughter of the Vṛ ṣ ṇ is and the death of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a, they are “fi lled with
grief and sorrow”(d uḥkhaśokasamanvit āḥ ) and despondent ( viṣ a ṇ ṇ ā ḥ ) (15.28.1 and 16.1.11).
When Arjuna witnesses his twin brothers and Draupadī fall to their deaths in the epic’s
penultimate book, he “burns with grief” ( śokasaṃ taptaḥ ) (17.2.18). And Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira, realizing
that the voices he hears in hell begging him to stay to ease their suff ering belong to his brothers
and wife, is described as “completely fi lled with sorrow and grief” (d uḥkhaśokasam ā viṣ ṭ aḥ )
and “one whose senses are confused by anxiety” (c int ā vy ā kulitendriyaḥ ) (18.2.49).
113. 1.1.159.
114. 6.23.30.
115. 11.13.12.
42 disorienting dharma
characters often describe their own experience of suff ering in this manner
underscores the epic’s basic point that once one succumbs to sorrow, one
loses control of one’s mind and is no longer able to “see” a situation clearly
and make good decisions.1 16 Indeed, many actions that are undertaken by
the confused grief-stricken in an eff ort to quell the “burning” of their grief
further their own suff ering and the sorrow of all the characters in the epic,
a phenomenon clearly demonstrated by Aśvatthā man’s desperate actions
in The Book of the Night Massacre . Aśvatth ā man (a Kaurava), in order to
extinguish his own grief over the dishonorable way his father Dro ṇ a was
killed, sneaks into the Pā ṇ ḍ ava camp at night and slays all the surviving
warriors while they are sleeping, an act that wins him eternal ignominy
and leads a devastated Yudhiṣ ṭ hira to declare in perhaps the most de-
spairing statement in the entire epic that the Pā ṇ ḍ avas’ hard-won victory
at such a mind-boggling cost was in truth a crippling defeat.1 17
Victims of sorrow in the Mah ā bh ā rata are often advised by wise coun-
selors who urge them to let go of their grief. Several recurring ideas are
expressed in these “arguments against grief.” First is the notion that suff ering
is a condition to which all living beings are subject because time, or the tran-
sitory nature of life, is the root of everything.1 18 Sorrow caused by the transitory
nature of existence should be avoided because it leads to confusion, madness,
inaction, and therefore further sorrow. Thus Vidura says to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a:
Grief destroys beauty, grief destroys strength, grief destroys wis-
dom, from grief one acquires disease. Nothing is gained from
sorrow; the body suff ers and one’s enemies rejoice. Do not let your
mind turn to sorrow.1 19
The means to move beyond suff ering, according to many of these wise
advisors, is acceptance of the transitory nature of life, an acceptance that
entails greeting death and impermanence with a calm and controlled mind,
in short with tranquility (s a ṃ to ṣ a , p raś ā nti ). Thus, as already mentioned,
116. For a discussion of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s madness (u nm ā da ) in the context of his grief over the
loss of his sons and kingdom, see J. P. Sinha, T he Mah ā bh ā rata: A Literary Study (New Delhi:
Meharchand Lachhmandas, 1977), 81 .
117. 10.10.9–14.
118. See, for example, Saṃ jaya’s statements to Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira at 5.27.3.
119. 5.36.42–43.
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 43
when Yudhiṣ ṭh ira is unable to rise above his grief after the war Bhīma tells
him that the real battle that faces him is with his mind, a battle that he
must face alone and fi ght singlehandedly.1 20 The contented person is
described as “that person who greets everything with equanimity, who is
not troublesome, who speaks truthfully, and who is indiff erent to worldly
objects.” 121 Such persons not only move beyond sorrow but they conduct
themselves in a manner that ensures that they will not bring harm or
sorrow to others because they have full mental control.
Two important and related distinctions are embedded in the
Mah ā bh ā rata’s didactic discussions as well as its literary representa-
tions of suff ering. The fi rst is the distinction between physical and
mental suff ering. While both types of suff ering are discussed in the
epic,1 22 emphasis, as has been suggested, is given to mental suff ering,
particularly in terms of locating both the source and the remedy for
human sorrow.1 23 Second is the distinction between “refl exive” (i.e.,
self-directed) and “transitive” (i.e., other-directed) suff ering. The depic-
tion of suff ering in the Mah ā bh ār ata reveals the close alliance between
these two phenomena. Once a person succumbs to mental despair
(i.e,. self-directed suff ering), one literally loses one’s mind and makes
decisions and takes actions that have disastrous consequences both for
oneself and for others, thus unleashing further suff ering (i.e., transi-
tive suff ering).
The Mah ā bh ā rata did not develop its ideas about, and its intense pre-
occupation with, suff ering, its causes, and the means to move beyond it,
in a vacuum. As B. K. Matilal notes, “Almost all Indian philosophical and
religious systems start with apparently a very similar thesis of universal
suff ering, sarvaṃ duḥkham .” 124 “All is suff ering to the sage” writes Patañ-
jali at the beginning of his Y oga Sūtra (a text composed sometime between
100 BCE and 400 CE, but most likely containing ideas that circulated
much earlier) echoing what Eliade calls “a leitmotiv of all post-Upanisadic
120. 12.16.21–25.
121. 12.171.2–3.
122. See Śaunaka’s discourse to Yudhiṣ ṭ hira at 3.2.15–3.3.1.
123. See, for example, Bhīma’s speech to Yudhiṣ ṭ hira at 12.16.1–17.1 and K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s speech to
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira at 14.12.1.
124. Bimal Krishna Matilal, “On the Universality of Suff ering,” in Suff ering: Indian Perspec-
tives , ed. Kapil Tiwari (New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1986), 13 .
44 disorienting dharma
speculation.”1 25 Patañjali then turns to the task of laying out a practice of
mental discipline that enables the practitioner to move beyond suff ering.
Īśvarakṛ ṣ ṇ a, author of the earliest S ā ṃ khya treatise, declares at the begin-
ning of his work that the purpose and essence of Sā ṃ khya is “the elimi-
nation of the torment of the threefold suff ering ( duḥkha )”—bodily or
physical suff ering, environmental suff ering, and mental suff ering.1 26 In a
Nik ā ya passage the Buddha states that he has always made known just
two things, namely suff ering (d uḥkha ) and the cessation of suff ering. 127
This essential teaching of the Buddha is embodied in the Four Noble
Truths: the truth of the nature of suff ering; the truth of the nature of its
cause (which is desire [t ṛ ṣ ṇ ā ]); the truth of the nature of its cessation; and
the nature of the path leading to its cessation. As Rupert Gethin points
out, few English speakers would defi ne the word “religion” as a “prac-
tical way of dealing with the reality of suff ering.” However, in the premod-
ern Indian cultural context, this is essentially how many of the traditions
that we in the academy classify as “religious” conceived of themselves.
One of the ancient and recurring images of Indian religious discourse is
“crossing the ocean of existence,” that is, crossing over from the near
shore, which is fraught with dangers and endless miseries, to the further
shore, which is free of danger, a crossing that is equivalent to escaping the
condition of d uḥkha , or suff ering. 128
Where and when did the idea of universal suff ering emerge in pre-
modern South Asian religious thought? The answer to this question has
been the subject of some scholarly debate. While most scholars agree that
the Vedas were not centrally concerned with the problem of suff ering, at
some point during this time period (many scholars point to the rise of the
anti-Vedic reform movements, such as Buddhism, Jainism, and the
Ājīvikas) we see the emergence of the idea that the world, as it is experi-
enced by all living creatures, is characterized by bondage and suff ering. In
125. Mircea Eliade, Yoga: Immortality and Freedom (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1969), 11–12 .
126. Gerald Larson, C lassical S āṃ khya (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979) 8–9 and Matilal,
“On the Universality of Suff ering,” 13. While the Indian tradition considers Sā ṃ khya to be
one of the oldest classical schools, no distinct S ā ṃ khyan text prior to Iśvarak ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s
S ā ṃ khyak ā rik ā (350–450 CE) is extant. Basic S ā ṃ khyan models underlie important por-
tions of the epic, especially the B hagavadgīt ā and M ok ṣ adharmaparvan .
127. Majjhima Nik ā ya i.140 as cited in Gethin, T he Foundations of Buddhism , 59.
128. Gethin, T he Foundations of Buddhism , 64.
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 45
most cases, this idea is accompanied by the practice of renunciation and
the call to transcend suff ering. Many scholars associate the characteriza-
tion of the world as a place of bondage and suff ering with the emergence of
the idea of s aṃ s ā ra . 129 The term “s aṃ s ā ra” has two closely linked meanings,
both of which are found in the M ah ā bh ār ata : (1) the transient and cyclical
nature of phenomenal existence (or, more simply, transience) and (2) the
beginning-less and endless cycle of birth, death, and rebirth (i.e., transmi-
gration). 130 S a ṃ s ā ra is a central idea in the Brahmanical, Buddhist, and Jain
traditions and in general all three traditions concur in characterizing
sa ṃ s ā ra in terms of the ideas of suff ering and impermanence. Further, for
Buddhist, Jain, and nearly all Brahmanical religions1 31 the soteriological
goal is defi ned as liberation ( mokṣ a ) from s a ṃ s ā ra , that is, release from the
cycle of rebirth or the endless cyclical revolutions of time.
By the sixth century BCE, the time of the rise of early Buddhism and Jain-
ism, the theory of s a ṃ s ā ra (keeping in mind both defi nitions of the term)
was widely accepted.1 32 However, what seems to have been still a matter of
intense debate was the question of the driving force behind the wheel of
sa ṃ s ā ra , and hence suff ering. For the Buddhists and Jains, the impetus was
karma (the result of past actions). However, for the Ājīvikas, ascetics who
were contemporaries of the early Buddhists and Jains and who were strict
determinists, n iyati or fate, not karma, was responsible for the endless cycles
of birth, death, and rebirth and by extension the force behind suff ering. 133
In the Mah ā bh ā rata , a Brahmanical text that is both assimilating and
responding to Buddhist, Jain, and Ājīvika ideas concerning the origin and
existence of universal suff ering, the question of the force behind the cycle of
sa ṃ s ā ra (again keeping in mind both defi nitions of the term) is still a matter
of intense debate. Time, fate, human exertion, the will of the gods/God, and
karma (less frequently) are among the many candidates considered. True to
its riddle design, the M ah ā bh ā rata raises the question of which one of these
129. For example, see Richard H. Davis, introduction to R eligions of India in Practice , ed.
Donald S. Lopez Jr. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995), 15 and Gavin Flood, A n
Introduction to Hinduism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 86 .
130. Brian K. Smith, “Samsara,” in The Encyclopedia of Religion , 2nd edition, ed. Lindsay
Jones (Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2005), 12: 8097–8 .
131. The Mīmā ṃ s ā kas are a notable exception.
132. Smith, “Samsara,” 8098.
133. A. L. Basham, H istory and Doctrines of the Ājīvikas: A Vanished Indian Religion (London:
Luzac, 1951), 224 .
46 disorienting dharma
forces is most powerful and answers the question simply by raising more
questions. Without doubt, the question of the origin of suff ering acquires a
degree of immediacy and urgency in the epic since it is raised in the context
of the story of the Bhā rata war and the enormous human toll that it exerts.
As the depiction of human suff ering mounts, the epic inexorably leads to
the palpable and inescapable conclusion that suff ering exists on a mind-
boggling scale. At the same time, the epic’s riddles encourage the audience
to wrestle with questions of why: Why did this war happen? Why does suf-
fering exist? What makes the narrative connection between the war and the
large-scale human suff ering so disturbing is the fact that the war itself is
interlinked with the concept of d harma in a number of ways. After all, this
apocalyptic war was fought in the name of d harma , it is referred to by some
as a “d harmayuddha ” or “d harma -battle,” and it was sanctioned by the son of
the god Dharma, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira. Many warriors fi ght in the name of kṣ atriya
dharma and expect to gain heaven by following their dharmic path. This
trope is the source of one of the epic’s most baffl ing as well as one of its
concluding riddles: Does Duryodhana, the ostensible villain of the story and
the principal agent behind the confl ict between the two sets of cousins and
hence all the suff ering that this confl ict causes, really win heaven or not?1 34
Suff ering has long been considered an important category in the study
of religion. As Jack Bemporad points out, “suff ering, more than any other
fact of human life, raises the philosophical questions that religion is cus-
tomarily called to answer.”1 35 However, “Hinduism(s)” is often omitted in
discussions on the topic.1 36 Even when suff ering is discussed in the context
134. This riddle is addressed at length in chapter 5 .
135. Jack Bemporad, “Suff ering,” in T he Encyclopedia of Religion , 2nd ed, ed. Lindsay Jones
(Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2005), 13: 8804–09 .
136. For example, the entry on “suff ering” in The Encyclopedia of Religion focuses on Christi-
anity and Islam ( Ibid. ); The Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics considers only Christian doc-
trine ( T. B. Kilpatrick, “Suff ering,” in T he Encyclopedia of Religious Ethics , ed. James Hastings
[New York: Scribner, 1961], 12:1–10) ; in T he Harper Collins Dictionary of Religion , again only
Buddhism is considered ( “Suff ering” in The Harper Collins Dictionary of Religion , ed. Jona-
than Z. Smith [San Francisco: Harper Collins, 1995], 1028–1029 ); and the Routledge Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy includes only Buddhist points of view on the origination of suff ering
( Marek Mejor, “Buddhist Views of Origination of Suff ering” in the R outledge Encyclopedia of
Philosophy , ed. Edward Craig [New York: Routledge, 1998], 9: 215–519 ). For discussions on
suff ering in the Hindu context, see John Bowker, Problems of Suff ering in Religions of the World
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970), 193–237 ; Arthur Herman, T he Problem of
Evil and Indian Thought (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1976) ; Brian K. Smith, “Hinduism,” in
Evil and Suff ering , ed. Jacob Neusner (Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim Press, 1998), 7–35 ; and Kapil
N. Tiwari, ed., S uff ering: Indian Perspectives (New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1986).
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 47
of Hindu traditions, the M ah ā bh ā rata is rarely considered.1 37 Thus one ad-
ditional aim of this book is to argue for the addition of the Mah ā bh ā rata to
the list of “sacred texts” (i.e., those texts that are important to scholars in
the study of religion) that off er powerful meditations on the philosophical,
theological, and ethical issues raised by the phenomenon of human sorrow.
Chapter Overview
Having laid out the basic argument of this book by discussing the aesthetics
of suff ering in this introduction, in chapter 1 I turn to the task of examining
the possibility of whether or not the M ah ā bh ā rata contains an implicit lit-
erary theory that can be “lifted out” of its aesthetics of suff ering. This chap-
ter discusses three theoretical resources—namely Sanskrit literary theory,
reader-response theory, and narrative ethics—that are used to identify and
articulate the broader ideas about how literature works that are embedded
in the Mah ā bh ā rata ’s aesthetics of suff ering. The discussion is weighted
heavily toward Sanskrit literary theory, and the ideas of the ninth-century
literary theorist Ānandavardhana in particular. Specifi cally, this chapter fo-
cuses on three aesthetic categories that are borrowed from Ānanda, namely
dhvani or “meaning-without-saying” or “suggestion”; s ah ṛ daya , or “the sen-
sitive reader/spectator”; and r asa or “aestheticized emotion.” By showing
how these categories help one to locate meaning in the Mah ā bh ā rata , this
chapter points to the enormous interpretive potential that could be opened
up by bringing such concepts to bear on other works of religious and
literary art, South Asian and beyond.
Chapters 2 through 5 turn to the task of demonstrating how the aes-
thetics of suff ering “works” by showing how the text uses some combina-
tion of the fi ve components mentioned above in order to build a threefold
ethical “argument” about the existence of suff ering, the forces that cause
it, and the specifi c emotional and psychological responses that allow one
to move beyond it. Chapters 2 and 3 explore how specifi c narrative strat-
egies in the M ah ā bh ā rata use the theme of suff ering to “disorient and
reorient” the audience’s relationship to specifi c characters. Chapters 4 and
5 examine how the text’s narrative strategies use the theme of suff ering to
“disorient and reorient” the audience’s relationship to specifi c conceptual
137. A notable exception is Greg Bailey’s article in Tiwari, ed., S uff ering: Indian Perspectives ,
38–60.
48 disorienting dharma
categories. The overarching purpose of each chapter is to examine and
explain how the aesthetics of suff ering transforms the sensitive reader/
spectator’s understanding of the world through refi guring his or her un-
derstanding of suff ering as well as to explore the implications of this refi g-
uration for determining what the M ah ā bh ā rata is ultimately “saying”
about d harma and the religious and moral life more broadly.
More specifi cally, c hapter 2 examines how the epic’s aesthetics of suf-
fering builds its threefold argument concerning the pervasive presence of
suff ering through examining the depiction of four characters and one con-
ceptual category in the epic’s most pivotal scene, the episode of the dice
game. First this chapter examines how the actions of three characters
(Duryodhana, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, and Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira) lead to the game of dice and
Draupadī’s subsequent abuse. It argues that the strategies of estrangement
promote insights into the causes of suff ering. Next the chapter explores
the detailed description of Draupadī’s violation in the assembly hall and
how the strategies of proximity encourage the audience to confront the
existence of suff ering. Finally, this chapter focuses on Draupadī’s question
to Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira concerning the validity of his stake, examining what this
question communicates about d harma and about suff ering.
Chapter 3 investigates the depiction of a single character, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra,
as both a victim and an agent of suff ering. While Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra has received
little attention from M ah ā bh ā rata scholars, this chapter argues that he is a
central character for the text’s aesthetics of suff ering. The chapter exam-
ines the relationship between the characterization of the blind king, the
narrative’s construction of time, and the problem of grief. It considers
four instances in the epic where, with respect to these issues, the depic-
tion of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a is important: (1) Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s lament in the epic’s out-
ermost frame in T he Book of the Beginning , (2) Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s role in the
failed peace negotiations in T he Book of the Eff ort , (3) Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s articu-
lations of grief in the frame of the battle books, and (4) Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s
despair after the war and the three “arguments against grief” that he
receives in T he Book of the Women . In addition, the chapter considers three
types of narrative strategies—estrangement, ambiguity, and temporal
manipulation—and their role in the text’s “argument” about the causes
of despair.
Chapter 4 explores the theme of time. First, two dominant “theories of
time,” the system of world ages or “y ugas ” and what scholars have called the
epic’s “doctrine of time” (k ā lav ā da ) are examined. The chapter focuses on
these two conceptions of time because both depict time as an oppressive,
Introduction: The Aesthetics of Suff ering in the Mahā bh ā rata 49
destructive force that is implicated in the presence of suff ering. Second, the
chapter considers what the text’s narrative strategies “do” with time. It
examines four diff erent strategies that manipulate time and how they en-
courage specifi c insights into the nature of time and its role in the produc-
tion of suff ering as well as the elimination of despair.
Chapter 5 analyzes the epic’s treatment of several important themes
through considering whether the M ah ā bh ā rata provides a rationale for the
existence of suff ering (i.e., a theodicy). First, this chapter considers the
epic’s treatment of both fate (d aiva ) and human endeavor (p uru ṣ ak ā ra ) as
potential theodicies by examining their role in the dicing scene. Next the
chapter investigates whether karma and Kṛ ṣ ṇ a provide rationales for the
existence of suff ering. Finally, this chapter examines the epic’s enigmatic
conclusion (when the Pā ṇ ḍ avas journey to heaven). It argues that, due to
the strategies of ambiguity, neither fate, human endeavor, karma, nor
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a provide conclusive answers to the theodicy question. Rather, the
epic rejects a “straightforward” approach and addresses the issue in a
more dramatic fashion. Through the deployment of the strategies of rup-
ture, proximity, and estrangement in the journey-to-heaven episode, the
epic prepares its audiences for its stark revelation of the structure of the
world, a revelation that is the epic’s “answer” to the problem of suff ering
in the world.
The concluding chapter argues that the M ah ā bh ā rata provides us with
a new template for how to read works of religious and literary art, particu-
larly with respect to the task of locating those moments where such texts
are suggesting ideas rather than directly stating them. The conclusion also
recommends that academic discussions of ethics in the M ah ā bh ā rata
should be de-centered from the topic of dharma and re-centered on the
issue of suff ering, particularly on the relationship between suff ering and
dharma . Suff ering, I argue, is the primary aesthetic ground for ethics in
the epic.
1
Meaning-Without-Saying
- -
t he i mplicit l iterary t heory of the M AHABH A RATA
“D harma and adharma do not go about saying ‘Here we
are!’ Nor do the Gods, Gandharvas, or Ancestors tell us
‘This is dharma ,’ ‘This is a dharma .’”
—āpastamba dharmasūtra1
in “where mirrors Are Windows: Toward An Anthology of Refl ec-
tions” A. K. Ramanujan tells us that works of Indian literature are inher-
ently self-refl exive in that they off er refl ections on themselves as stories.
For example, the Indian epics, as discussed earlier, come with frame
stories, stories that tell the tale of how and why the epics were composed
and told. Many Indian stories contain p halaśruti- s, passages where a story-
teller describes what his or her story “does” by enumerating the many
positive eff ects it bestows on its audience members. For example, in the
Story of Nala , an embedded story in the M ah ā bh ā rata , B ṛ hadaśva the
storyteller tells the recipient of his tale, a grieving Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira,
Misfortune will never be experienced by those who tell or listen
continuously to this great story of Nala. Wealth will fl ow to them
and they will have good fortune. After ceaselessly hearing this
ancient and supreme story, one will know sons, grandsons, cattle,
and also prominence among men, and, without a doubt, one will be
healthy and full of love.2
1. “ Adharma” is the opposite of d harma . Āpastamba Dharma Sūtra 1.7.20.6. This is the trans-
lation of James L. Fitzgerald (“Dharma and Its Translation in the M ah ā bhā rata ,”671) .
2. 3.78.12–13.
Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 51
This chapter takes Ramanujan’s insight one step further by proposing
that the M ah ā bh ā rata not only off ers refl ections on itself as a narrative, as
a work of literature, but also contains implicit ideas about the nature and
work of literature itself. If we take this claim seriously—the idea that the
Mah ā bh ā rata contains an implicit literary theory—then how might we
locate it? In this chapter we will delve more deeply into the aesthetics of
suff ering—that is my articulation of the specifi c way the M ah ā bh ā rata
works as a literary text—to see if it is possible to lift out of it a more gen-
eral literary theory embedded in it. This chapter uses three theoretical
resources—namely, Sanskrit literary theory, Euro-American reader-
response theory, and narrative ethics—to help identify and articulate the
broader ideas about how literature works that are embedded in the aes-
thetics of suff ering. The discussion is weighted heavily toward Sanskrit
literary theory, and the ideas of the ninth-century literary theorist
Ānandavardhana in particular. Specifi cally, it relies on three aesthetic cat-
egories taken from Ānandavardhana, namely d hvani or “meaning-with-
out-saying” or “suggestion”; r asa or “aestheticized emotion”; and s ahṛ daya ,
or “the sensitive reader/spectator.” This chapter discusses these three the-
oretical resources and describes their points of convergence and infl uence
with respect to the Mahā bh ā rata’s aesthetics of suff ering in ways that are
both specifi c to the M ahā bh ā rata and yet also point to the epic’s broader
ideas about how literary texts do their aesthetic, religious, and moral work.
By showing how these three aesthetic categories help us locate meaning in
the Mah ā bh ā rata , this chapter attempts to point to the enormous interpre-
tive potential that could be opened up by bringing these concepts to bear
on other works of religious and literary art, South Asian and beyond.
-
Sanskrit Literary Theory: Anandavardhana’s Concept
- -
of Dhvani and His Reading of the M ahabh a rata
One of the fi rst recorded readers and literary critics of the M ahā bh ā rata was
Ānandavardhana (hereafter Ānanda), a ninth-century Kashmiri poet and
one of the most infl uential thinkers in the tradition of Sanskrit literary theory
( ala ṅ k ā raś ā stra ). His magnum opus, the L ight on Suggestion ( Dhvanyā loka ),
revolutionized the tradition by introducing a new way of analyzing how
great works of literature convey meaning. According to Ānanda, a work of
literature expresses meaning through d hvani or “meaning-without-saying,”
most commonly translated as “suggestion.” In the L ight on Suggestion he
52 disorienting dharma
set out to prove that d hvani exists by demonstrating its presence in the
received classics of Prakrit and Sanskrit literature, the R ā m ā yaṇ a and the
Mah ā bh ā rata in particular. He also set out to show that it plays a central
role in the aesthetic eff ectiveness of these works, that it is what makes
them beautiful. 3 An examination of his work provides an example of
how a premodern South Asian literary theorist read the M ah ā bhā rata ; it
also gives us a window into premodern South Asian ideas about the
nature of literature itself and what fulfi llments were thought to be derived
from it.
This section has three goals. The fi rst is to lay out Ānanda’s general
ideas about how all works of great literary merit convey meaning. In the
course of this discussion I will also appeal to the ideas of Abhinavagupta,
a tenth-century Śaiva philosopher and theologian who wrote a commen-
tary on the L ight on Suggestion called the L ocana or “The Eye.” The Locana
has come to be as famous and infl uential as the L ight on Suggestion itself.
The second is to discuss Ānanda’s ideas about how meaning is conveyed
in the M ah ā bhā rata specifi cally.4 Finally, this section discusses the areas
of overlap between Ānanda’s (and, in some cases, Abhinavagupta’s) ideas
and the epic’s aesthetics of suff ering.
-
Ananda’s Ideas about How Literature Conveys Meaning
As mentioned above, Ānanda argued that works of great literature convey
meaning through d hvani , or suggestion. In the L ight on Suggestion , Ānanda
defi ned suggestion as “that type of poetry in which either a meaning
or a word, subordinating itself or its own meaning suggests that [non-
expressed] meaning.”5 According to Ānanda, suggested meaning is dif-
ferent from literal meaning. While it depends on the literal meaning,
suggested meaning is predominant over the literal and the two remain
distinct. Ānanda off ered the following humorous verse as an example of a
passage where the literal meaning and the suggested meaning are distinct
and the suggested meaning is predominant:
3. Lawrence McCrea, The Teleology of Poetics in Medieval Kashmir (Cambridge, MA: Depart-
ment of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, Harvard University, 2008), 24 .
4. It is important to note that Ānanda lived several centuries after the composition of the
Mah ā bh ā rata .
5. McCrea, T he Teleology of Poetics , 133 .
Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 53
Mother-in-law sleeps here, I there:
look, traveler, while it is light
For at night when you cannot see
you must not fall in my bed.6
According to Ānanda, the literal meaning in this verse is a prohibition.
However, the suggested meaning is an invitation: a young woman is in-
viting a traveler to sleep with her. Thus, the actual intent of her statement
is the opposite of what it literally means, and the literal and the suggested
meaning of the verse are clearly distinct. Further, the suggested meaning
is predominant because it communicates the intent of the speaker.
How does suggestion become manifest? According to Ānanda, it fl ashes
forth in an instant “in the minds of intelligent auditors who are averse to
the literal meaning and in quest of the real meaning.”7 Ānanda likened the
appearance of suggestion to the resonance of a bell after it is struck. First
comes the stroke by which the primary, or literal, meaning of the word
enters the mind. Then the mind is suddenly aware of something related
but distinct from this—an overtone or suggestion.8 For Ānanda, the most
important messages of a work of literature are delivered through sugges-
tion. According to him, an essential matter carries far greater luster by not
being stated literally. For example, if we say, “A young man and his bride
were very much in love,” we give the hearer no fl avor at all of what the love
was like. This can be conveyed only through suggestion. And precisely
what makes most if not all instances of suggestion so powerful are that
they enlist the emotions and sympathies of the audience, a subject to which
I will return to momentarily.
According to Ānanda, there are three types of suggestion: narrative el-
ement (v astu , of which the above verse is an example), fi gure of speech
6. Dhv . 1.4c A, in D aniel H. H. Ingalls, Jeff rey Moussaieff Masson, and M. V. Patwardhan,
trans., T he Dhvanyā loka of Ānandavardhana with the Locana of Abhinavagupta , Harvard Ori-
ental Series, no. 49 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990), 98 .
7. Ibid. , 130 .
8. Daniel Ingalls, S anskrit Poetry: From Vidyā kara’s Treasury , 2nd Ed. (Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2000), 9 . Ravi Shankar Nagar off ers the fol-
lowing analogy to characterize how the suggested meaning is predominant over the literal:
“As the beauty of a star lies not so much in what we catch at the fi rst glance but the twinkle
that follows.” Nagar, “Suggestiveness (Dhvani) in the Mahā bhā rata,” in Modern Evaluation of
the Mah ā bhā rata: Prof. R. K. Sharma Felicitation Volume , ed. Satya Pal Narang (Delhi: Nag
Publishers, 1995), 245 .
54 disorienting dharma
( ala ṅ k ā ra ), and aestheticized emotion (r asa ). The most important of the
three types is r asa , or aestheticized emotion, because it is r asa that makes
a work of literature beautiful. Further, according to Ānanda, it is the essen-
tial characteristic of great poetry. Any coherent literary work, in Ānanda’s
view, communicates a single dominant r asa , to which all the component
elements of the work are directly or indirectly subordinated.
The word r asa in its most literal sense means “juice,” “taste,” “fl avor.”
It is an aestheticized emotion that is suggested by the “underlying emo-
tion” of a character. Originally, the theory of r asa had been applied to the
theater. According to the N ā ṭ yaś ā stra there are eight possible r asas or aes-
theticized emotions that a play can exhibit: the erotic, the comic, the tragic,
the furious or cruel, the heroic, the fearsome or terrible, the gruesome,
and the wondrous. To this list of eight, the tradition later added a ninth,
ś ā ntarasa , the aestheticized emotion of tranquility.9
Each rasa is based on the aesthetic transformation of an underlying
basic human emotion termed a “s thā yībh ā va” (literally, a “permanent
feeling”). For example, the erotic is based on sexual desire, the comic on
laughter, and the tragic on grief (ś oka ). Precisely how does the aestheti-
cized emotion ( rasa ) diff er from the underlying emotion? While Ānanda
was silent on this issue, Abhinavagupta (hereafter Abhinava) provided
an answer. Abhinava reasoned that the aestheticized emotion cannot be
the original underlying emotion itself or we would not enjoy hearing
sad poetry like the R ā mā yaṇ a and the Mahā bh ā rata . Rasa , then, accord-
ing to Abhinava, is not a “worldly” state, but rather it is a depersonal-
ized condition of the self. R asa is other-worldly, for in the world, pity,
disgust, and horror are not enjoyed as they are in poetry. While the un-
derlying emotion is personal, the aestheticized emotion is universal.
Thus, according to Abhinava, for poetry to be properly appreciated, a
distancing should ideally occur between what is represented by a text
9. For scholarship on the theoretical problems connected specifi cally with ś ā ntarasa , see
Shashthi Prasad Bhattacharya, Ś ā nta Rasa and Its Scope in Literature (Calcutta: Sanskrit Col-
lege, 1976) ; Sushil Kumar De, “The Śā nta Rasa in the Nā ṭ ya-Ś ā stra and the Daśa-Rūpaka,” in
Some Problems of Sanskrit Poetics (Calcutta: Firma K. L Mukhopadhyay, 1959), 139–143 ; Edwin
Gerow and Ashok Aklujar, “On Śā nta Rasa in Sanskrit Poetics,” J ournal of the American Ori-
ental Society , 92 (1972): 80–87) ; J. L Masson and M. V.Patwardhan, Śā ntarasa and Abhi-
navagupta’s Philosophy of Aesthetics , Bhandarkar Oriental Series 9 (Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1969); V. Raghavan, T he Number of Rasas (Madras: Adyar Li-
brary, 1940) ; and Gary A. Tubb “Ś ā ntarasa in the M ah ā bhā rata ” in E ssays on the Mahā bhā rata ,
ed. Arvind Sharma (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991), 177 .
Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 55
and its appreciator. With rasa , we are at one remove from our personal
emotions; we are feeling about emotions rather than directly experi-
encing them.1 0
Both Ānanda and Abhinava were aware of the fact that the aestheti-
cized emotion conveyed by a verse is not apparent to everyone. Accord-
ing to them, this is due to the fact that r asa is not a property of literal
meaning but of suggestion. Therefore, both thinkers held that the ap-
preciation of a literary work requires aesthetic competence, an aesthetic
sensitivity (s ah ṛ dayatva ) not common to all people. Thus in the L ight on
Suggestion emphasis was placed for the fi rst time in the tradition on
how readers understand a literary text.1 1 Ānanda’s term for the aestheti-
cally competent audience member is the s ah ṛ daya , or the sensitive
reader or spectator (literally “having the same heart”—i.e., capable of
sharing the aesthetic experience crafted by the poet). Abhinava defi ned
the sah ṛ daya as:
[t]hose people who are capable of identifying with the subject
matter, since the mirror of their hearts have been polished through
constant recitation and study of poetry, and who sympathetically
respond in their own hearts, are known as sensitive readers
( sah ṛ daya ).1 2
The sensitive reader/spectator is, in eff ect, defi ned as the person who is
capable of apprehending the r asa conveyed by a work. This concept was so
important to Ānanda and so central to his ideas that the L ight on Suggestion
( Dhvanyā loka ) was originally entitled the L ight on the Sensitive Reader
( Sah ṛ day ā loka ).1 3
10. See J. L. Masson and M.V. Patwardhan, A esthetic Rapture: The Rasā dhy ā ya of the
N ā ṭ yaś ā stra (Poona: Deccan College, 1970), 35 . For a thoughtful meditation on how r asa
relates to religious experience, see J. N. Mohanty, “Feeling, Poetics, and Religion,” in Explo-
rations in Philosophy: Essays by J. N. Mohanty , ed. Bina Gupta (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2001), 189–194 .
11. Sheldon Pollock, “Bhoja’s Ś ṛ ṅ gā raprakā śa and the Problem of Rasa : A Historical Intro-
duction and Annotated Translation,” Asiatische Studien/ Etudes Asiatiques 52/11 (1998),
124–125 .
12. Translated by Masson and Patwardhan (A esthetic Rapture , 6) .
13. Daniel Ingalls, “Introduction” in T he Dhvanyā loka of Ānandavardhana with the Locana of
Abhinavagupta , 12 .
56 disorienting dharma
- - -
Ananda’s Reading of the M ah a bh a rata
In the context of proving the existence of suggestion in the Light on Sugges-
tion , Ānanda turned to his analysis of the M ah ā bh ā rata and the R ā mā ya ṇ a .
“How do we know that suggestion exists?” Ānanda asked. His answer:
Because it can be found in works of literature that are endowed with special
imaginative genius, such as the Mah ā bh ā rata and the R ā m ā ya ṇ a . Some
of Ānanda’s most powerful examples of suggestion are taken from the
Mah ā bh ā rata .
Ānanda had two startling things to say about the M ahā bh ā rata in par-
ticular. First, he argued that the M ahā bh ā rata is a supreme example of a
work of literary unity because all the disparate parts of the poem are
working toward a single goal. 14 Second, he contended that the Mahā bh ā rata
contains a single predominant aesthetic tone or rasa , ś ā ntarasa , or the aes-
theticized emotion of tranquility. Before we interrogate these two ideas,
particularly the second, it is important to consider how innovative, even
radical, these ideas most likely were in Ānanda’s day. Before Ānanda no
known critic had considered the possibility of looking at a work of litera-
ture as a unifi ed whole with a single predominant r asa , particularly some-
thing as gigantic and sprawling as the M ahā bh ā rata . 15
What precisely is the aestheticized emotion of tranquility ( śā ntarasa ),
and why did Ānanda believe that it is the predominant rasa of the
Mah ā bh ā rata ? According to Ānanda, the aestheticized emotion of tran-
quility is characterized by “the full development of the happiness that
comes from the dying off of desire.”1 6 To explain the nature of ś ā ntarasa ,
Ānanda quoted a verse from the M ah ā bh ā rata (12.168.36):
The joy of pleasure in this world and the greater joy of pleasures
found in heaven are not worth a sixteenth of the joy that comes
from the dying of desire.1 7
14. McCrea, T he Teleology of Poetics , 123 .
15. Tubb “Ś ā ntarasa in the Mah ā bhā rata ,” 171 .
16. Dhv . 3.26a A, in Ingalls, Masson, and Patwardhan, T he Dhvanyā loka , 520 . As Deutsch
notes, ś ā ntarasa has to do with spiritual insight and aesthetic understanding. Eliot Deutsch,
Review of Ś ā ntarasa and Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Aesthetics . By J. L. Masson and M. V.
Patwardhan, The Journal of Asian Studies , 30/1 (1970): 215–216 .
17. D hv . 3.26a A, in Ingalls, Masson, and Patwardhan, T he Dhvanyā loka , 520 .
Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 57
The underlying emotion of ś ā ntarasa , according to Ānanda, is v air ā gya ,
which generally means “disgust,” “aversion,” or “indiff erence to worldly
objects and life.”1 8 Lest we be tempted to rush to label Ānanda’s reading of
the Mah ā bh ā rata as “pessimistic” or “world-negating,” however, we should
be very clear about what the disillusionment denoted by the term v air ā gya
is targeting. Ś ā ntarasa and its related underlying emotion (s th ā yibhā va ) of
vair ā gya are deeply connected with the issue of time and transitoriness in
the M ah ā bh ā rata according to Ānanda.1 9 As Gerow and Aklujkar argue,
Ānanda used the term ś ā ntarasa to refer to “an intense experience of de-
tachment that comes from reading or witnessing a work of art depicting
ruin, impermanence, the transitory character of worldly existence, and the
futility of ambition.”2 0 From the eight or so passages that Ānanda quotes
from the M ah ā bh ā rata , it is clear that he was interested in those passages
that conveyed a sense of the transience, futility, and the insubstantiality of
all worldly aff airs.2 1 This suggests that what the sensitive reader/spectator
is being encouraged to feel aversion toward, according to Ānanda, is not
the empirical/natural world p er se , but a particular psychological state or
attitude with regard to the empirical world—namely egoism—that ren-
ders human beings emotionally vulnerable to feelings of suff ering and
grief over the losses that are brought about by the inevitable ravages
of time.2 2
18. D hv . 4.5 A, in Ingalls, Masson, and Patwardhan, T he Dhvanyā loka , 690 . I am disagree-
ing with Gary Tubb here who argues that, for Ānanda, ś ama , not v airā gya , is the underlying
emotion of ś ā ntarasa . However, Ānanda states that vairā gya is the sthā yibh ā va of ś ā ntarasa .
Tubb himself admits that he is interpreting Ānanda through Abhinava. This seems to be the
source of the disagreement. See Tubb, “Ś ā ntarasa in the Mah ā bhā rata ,” 180 .
19. Peter Gaeff ke argues that ś ā ntarasa has to be understood in the context of “Buddhistic
dramas and k ā vyas.” See Gaeff ke, Review of S tudies in Comparative Aesthetics by Eliot
Deutsch, J ournal of the American Oriental Society , 99/1 (1979): 16768 .
20. Gerow and Aklujkar, “On Śā nta Rasa in Sanskrit Poetics,” 8 .
21. See, for example, Ānanda’s interest in Vyā sa’s haunting statement about time (D hv .
3.16a) and his focus on the moving lament of Bhuriśravas’s wife as she stands amidst the
dead warriors on the Kuru Field (D hv . 320e).
22. For an illuminating discussion of how the experience of ś ā ntarasa is transformative and
whether this transformative experience is transitory or permanent, see Deutsch, R eview of
Śā ntarasa , 216 .
58 disorienting dharma
On what grounds did Ānanda argue that ś ā ntarasa or the aestheticized
emotion of tranquility is the predominant r asa of the M ahā bhā rata ? To
make his case, Ānanda turned to the epic’s conclusion. In perhaps his
most famous statement about the M ah ā bh ā rata , Ānanda declared:
Likewise in the Mah ā bh ā rata , which has the beauty of a k ā vya while
being in the form of a śā stra , the great sage [Vy ā sa] has demon-
strated that the creation of dispassion is the principal purport of his
work, by composing a conclusion that produces a despondent
feeling [ vair ā gya ] in response to the sorry end of the V ṛ ṣ ṇ is and the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas, and in doing so he has suggested that what he intended
as the principal subject of his poem is the peaceful fl avor [ś ā ntarasa ]
and the human aim characterized by liberation [m ok ṣ a ].2 3
Why did Ānanda turn to the epic’s conclusion to locate the epic’s predom-
inant r asa ? While Ānanda never explicitly explained why the predominant
rasa of the Mah ā bh ā rata could be located in its conclusion, it is clear from
his comments that it is because it is here that one can assess the success
or failure of the actions of the epic’s principal characters.2 4 In the case of
the Mah ā bh ā rata , the conclusion shows that the activities and strivings of
the epic’s principal characters lead only to misery (the V ṛ ṣ ṇ is kill one an-
other in a drunken brawl, and the Pā ṇ ḍ avas, still mired in grief at the end
of the epic, renounce the kingdom, retire to the mountains, and commit
ascetic suicide). Because the M ah ā bh ā rata concludes by depicting the mis-
erable end of the principal characters, according to Ānanda, Vyā sa’s inten-
tion is to show the emptiness of human eff ort and to generate in the
sensitive reader/spectator a dispassion for worldly aff airs and human am-
bition. When heightened through suggestion, this dispassion is trans-
muted into ś ā ntarasa , or the aestheticized emotion of tranquility.
Ānanda’s aim was not to argue that the aestheticized emotion of tran-
quility is the o nly rasa that is suggested in the M ah ā bhā rata . Rather, his
aim was to argue that it is the predominant r asa . Certainly Ānanda would
have agreed with the assertion that the Mah ā bh ā rata contains most if not
23. Dhv . 4.5 A, in Tubb, “Ś ā ntarasa in the M ahā bhā rata ,” 176 . Also translated in Ingalls,
Masson, and Patwardhan, D hvany ā loka , 690 .
24. Ānanda also focuses on the conclusion of the R ā m ā ya ṇ a to locate the predominant rasa
of that work, ostensibly for the same reason. I am thankful to Guy Leavitt for this insight.
Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 59
all the nine rasa s. It is a narrative after all that seeks to contain everything.
However, Ānanda would have also argued that while most, if not all, the
rasa- s are found in the M ah ā bh ā rata , each is not given equal aesthetic
weight. While other r asa- s may be regarded as paramount at particular
moments in the text, they are all subordinated to ś ā ntarasa in the work as
a whole.
turning now to the task of pointing out the connections between
Ānanda’s ideas and the epic’s aesthetics of suff ering, let us focus on three
key ideas that Ānanda relies on to discuss how literature conveys meaning
in general: (1) suggestion or meaning-without-saying (d hvani ), (2) the sen-
sitive reader/spectator (s ah ṛ daya ), and (3) the role of identifi cation (or prox-
imity) and distance in the evocation of the aestheticized emotion, or r asa .
Ānanda, as we have discovered, argued that great works of literature con-
vey meaning through suggestion. According to Ānanda, it is only through
suggestion that the meaning of a text is allowed to blossom in the minds
of the audience, a phenomenon characterized by Ingalls as the “sudden
rushing of the mind into a delightful, calm expansion.”2 5 Similarly, the
aesthetics of suff ering conveys meaning primarily through what I have
called “narrative strategies,” which refer to the complex dynamic between
content (what the text says or literal meaning) and form (how what the
text says is actually presented) and audience. What this concept captures
is the dynamic activity that arises in those moments in which “form” and
“content” are at cross purposes (i.e., the text literally says one thing but the
way it presents what it says “suggests” something very diff erent) and how
the audience experiences meaning from the dynamic interaction, or ten-
sion, between the two. Thus, a narrative-strategy approach, which argues
that meaning comes from what a text “does,” as opposed to simply what it
literally says, is an approach that utilizes a similar literary mode to that of
suggestion. To put it more succinctly, both narrative strategies and dhvani
convey meaning “more through doing and less through saying.”
Perhaps the most signifi cant diff erence between these two concepts—
dhvani and the narrative strategy—is that Ānanda’s concept of suggestion
is concerned primarily with isolated features of a work of literature (for
example, a fi gure of speech, a narrative element, or the emotion of a char-
acter in a particular scene), while the concept of the narrative strategy
25. Ingalls, S anskrit Poetry , 31 .
60 disorienting dharma
deals with broader portions of the text, such as the way a theme or a char-
acter is developed over time.2 6 This diff erence is due to the fact that the
text’s narrative strategies work, to a large degree, through setting the audi-
ence up to expect certain outcomes (with respect to the behavior of a char-
acter such as Yudhṣ ṭ hira, for example, see below), and then delivering a
very diff erent outcome than the one the audience was set up to expect.
The second category is the s ahṛ daya , or sensitive reader/spectator. As
we have seen, the notion of the s ahṛ daya is built into the concept of sug-
gestion, for there is no birth of such meaning, if there is no sensitive
reader/spectator to detect it. Similarly, the notion of the sensitive reader/
spectator is built into the concept of the narrative strategy, because the
dynamic interaction of form and content is activated only in the pres-
ence of a reader or spectator who is sensitive to the tension created by
the two.
The third point of connection entails ideas about the fundamental fea-
tures of aesthetic experience. According to Abhinava, the sensitive reader/
spectator is the one who identifi es, who literally “feels with,” the subject
matter of the literary work. However, Abhinava also suggests that the pin-
nacle of aesthetic experience, r asa , requires distance. When one is experi-
encing rasa , one is no longer simply feeling with characters, one is feeling
about feelings, one is “meta-feeling,” one is at one remove from the world
of the text. So, according to Abhinava, the aesthetic experience depends
upon both proximity—or closeness—with elements of the text and a sub-
sequent distancing or separation from them. Similarly, as the following
chapters will demonstrate, the Mah ā bhā rata’s narrative strategies work
largely through the manipulation of the experience of proximity and
distance. Through the work of the narrative strategies, the audience is set
up to feel close to or comfortable with certain conceptual categories and/
or characters, and then, further down the road, the strategies manipulate
them to feel suddenly “disoriented” or distanced from them. Through this
distance, one is encouraged to stand back and refl ect on the feelings and
beliefs that one was manipulated by the text to have. This distance allows
for the space of meta-feeling, or more precisely “meta-refl ecting,” that is,
refl ecting on the emotions that the text manipulated one to have and why
it did so. The chapters that follow seek to show that this is where the “real
work” of the text takes place.
26. I am thankful to Guy Leavitt for this insight.
Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 61
Additionally, there are signifi cant areas of overlap between Ānanda’s
specifi c reading of the Mah ā bh ā rata— his contention that it contains a
single predominant r asa , ś ā ntarasa —and the aesthetics of suff ering.
For example, both readings locate the central aesthetic experience of
the text in the epic’s preoccupation with death, destruction, and ruin.
While Ānanda focused predominantly on the epic’s depiction of transito-
riness, the aesthetics of suff ering centers on the epic’s depiction of
suff ering, which is often portrayed as a direct result of transitoriness, as
chapter 4 demonstrates. A second point of convergence concerns the
kinds of claims both readings are making, specifi cally since both readings
could be misconstrued as being reductive. However, as mentioned earlier,
Ānanda did not argue that the only rasa evoked by the M ahā bh ā rata is
ś ā ntarasa . Neither does the aesthetics of suff ering suggest that the
Mah ā bhā rata is only about suff ering. Both readings acknowledge that the
Mah ā bhā rata carries many emotional valences and is about many things.
However, both would argue that in terms of “aesthetic weight,” these con-
cerns are given predominant emphasis. A fi nal point of partial convergence
concerns the teleology of both readings. In his reading of the M ah ā bhā rata ,
Ānanda argues that the point or goal of the M ah ā bh ā rata is to evoke in the
reader/spectator the aesthetic experience of ś ā ntarasa or the aestheticized
emotion of tranquility. According to the aesthetics of suff ering, the goal of
the Mah ā bh ā rata is ethical, and “ethics” in this context is defi ned in terms
of confronting, appropriately responding to, and moving beyond suff ering.
Signifi cantly, moving beyond suff ering, as discussed in this chapter,
involves cultivating the habits of mental restraint or tranquility (s aṃ to ṣ a ,
praśā nti ). To be sure, Ānanda himself believed that literature (k ā vya ) has
an ethical dimension. He also argued that the goal of k ā vya is delight, and
it seems clear that for him, as well as for other Sanskrit literary theorists
such as Abhinava, ethics and delight were intricately linked.2 7 Unfortu-
nately, however, Ānanda never elaborated on the subject.
Reader-Response Theory
A second theoretical resource that we will consider in this chapter is
reader-response theory. Because a number of Ānanda and Abhinava’s
ideas about how literature “works” resonate with reader-response theory
27. Masson and Patwardhan, Ś ā ntarasa , 55 .
62 disorienting dharma
(particularly with respect to the works of Wolfgang Iser and Umberto Eco),
it provides a set of conceptual tools in English that helps one better under-
stand and articulate the ideas of the Indian literary theorists. Therefore, in
formulating the aesthetics of suff ering, this project has drawn from some
of the concepts and vocabulary of reader-response discourse.
While reader-response criticism is not a conceptually unifi ed position,
all reader-response theorists argue—as do Ānanda and Abhinava—that a
work of literature can best be understood in terms of its results, and that its
eff ects on a reader are inextricably linked to its meaning.2 8 Reader-response
theory and Indian aesthetics share additional intellectual commitments as
well. Both foreground the role of the emotions in the transmission of
literary meaning, and both highlight the importance of implication in sig-
nifi cation (“d hvani ,” or suggestion, in Ānanda and Abhinava’s terminology,
and “gaps” in Eco and Iser’s).2 9
For example, Wolfgang Iser argues that the reader actively participates
in the production of textual meaning because he or she supplies the por-
tion of the text, or gaps, that are not written but only implied. According to
him it is only through this encounter with the inevitable omissions and
unexpected moments in a work of literature that the reader’s imagination
is rendered active—and the text indeed comes to life for him or her—
because the reader is given the opportunity to bring his or her own emo-
tional and cognitive faculties into play in the process of discovering the
meaning of the text. Just as Ingalls characterizes the discovery of a text’s
suggested meaning (d hvani ) as a pleasurable experience, as a “sudden
rushing of the mind into a delightful calm expansion,” so too does Iser
characterize the discovery of meaning through the gaps in a text as a form
of aesthetic pleasure.3 0
28. Jane P. Tompkins, “An Introduction to Reader-Response Criticism,” in R eader-Response
Criticism: From Formalism to Post-Structuralism , ed. Jane P. Tompkins (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins Press, 1980), ix .
29. For scholarship on the areas of overlap between these two discourses, see William
Haney, Literary Theory and Sanskrit Poetics: Language, Consciousness, and Meaning (Lewiston,
ME: Edwin Mellen Press, 1993) ; Anne E. Monius, I magining a Place for Buddhism: Literary
Culture and Religious Community in Tamil-Speaking South India (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2001) ; Pollock,”Bhoja’s Ś ṛ ṅ gā raprak ā śa ,” 117–193 ; Krishna Rayan, T he Lamp and the
Jar: Explorations of a New Horizon in Literary Criticism (New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 2002) ;
K. M. Tharakan, W estern and Eastern Poetics: A Comparative Study of Reader Response in I. A.
Richards and Abhinavagupta (New Delhi: Prestige Books, 1998) .
30. W olfgang Iser, T he Implied Reader: Patterns of Communication in Prose Fiction from Bun-
yan to Beckett (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974), xiii .
Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 63
Iser does not, however, grant the reader autonomy or even partial inde-
pendence from textual constraints in the process of meaning production.
The reader’s activity in this regard is only a fulfi llment of what is already
implicit in the structure of the work. By reading, according to Iser, we
uncover the unformulated part of a literary work and what we uncover
represents the text’s intention.3 1 Ānanda and Abhinava would have argued
(though they never explicitly did so) that the sensitive reader/spectator’s
role in the production of meaning is similarly constrained by the struc-
ture of the text. Indeed, they have been criticized for constraining the
sensitive reader’s freedom to such a degree that they do not allow even for
the possibility of diff erences in responses, something Iser does allow as a
possibility. 32
Just as Iser delimits the reader’s relative freedom in interpreting the
gaps of a literary work through the concept of the “implied reader,”3 3 so too
does Umberto Eco through his concepts of the “model author” and the
“model reader.” The model author, according to Eco, is “manifested as a
narrative strategy, as a set of instructions which is given to us step by step
and which we have to follow when we decide to act as the model reader.”3 4
The model reader is “a sort of ideal type whom the text not only foresees
as a collaborator but also tries to create.” 35 He or she is the reader who is
guided by the model author’s rules, which Eco calls its “narrative strat-
egies.” While the model reader’s task is to follow the text’s set of instruc-
tions, the reader’s role is not passive since, according to Eco, every text “is
a lazy machine asking the reader to do some of its work.”3 6 Unable to say
everything about the world, the text has gaps; the reader’s task is to fi ll in
these gaps. The model reader is the person who fi lls in the gaps responsi-
bly by allowing himself or herself to be guided by the text’s instructions, or
in Ānanda’s terminology, “suggestions.”
31. Tompkins, “An Introduction to Reader-Response Criticism,” xv .
32. Pollock, “Bhoja’s Ś ṛ ṅ gā raprakā śa ,” 139 .
33. The implied reader is defi ned as both a textual condition and a process of meaning pro-
duction. Iser, T he Implied Reader , xii .
34. Umberto Eco, S ix Walks in the Fictional Wood , Charles Eliot Norton Lectures, 1993 (Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994), 15 .
35. Ibid. , 9 .
36. Ibid. , 3 .
64 disorienting dharma
Eco raises a crucial issue here, one that Ānanda left relatively untouched:
the issue of interpretive access. After all, Ānanda had very little to say about
how one cultivates the skills to become a s ah ṛ daya , a sensitive reader/spec-
tator. According to Eco, however, a literary text contains instructions for how
it is to be read and the person who allows himself or herself to be guided by
these instructions—or, to put it another way, who is open and responsive to
the “doing” or the “suggesting” of the text—becomes the model reader, or in
the language of Ānanda the sensitive reader/spectator. Eco discusses the
metaphor of the common woods through which all readers of a particular
text travel. The world of the narrative, he says, brackets the larger “real
world.” In the narrative world, the model author tells the model reader/
spectator what he or she needs to know to walk through that world.3 7
The Mah ā bh ā rata shares ideas that are remarkably similar to Eco’s,
particularly through the implications that can be drawn from the inclu-
sion of the epic’s two outer frame stories, which contextualize the
Mah ā bh ā rata ’s telling and reception. It is important to note that these
outer frame stories are part of the Mahā bh ā rata . If we take this insight
and extend it logically, the Mah ā bh ā rata seems to be suggesting that the
circumstances under which it is told or received become part of the
Mah ā bhā rata itself.3 8 In other words, all readers/spectators of the text
are invited into its common woods. By inviting us into its woods in this
way, it is reasonable to assume that the M ah ā bh ā rata also provides the
tools with which we may navigate its many landscapes.3 9 Chapters 2
through 5 , which execute an aesthetics-of-suff ering reading of the epic,
discuss the eff ects of the epic’s narrative strategies on its audiences.
These chapters at times make use of personal pronouns such as “we”
and “us” to refer to the epic’s model audiences/s ah ṛ daya -s (the readers
and/or spectators that the Mahā bhā rata’s strategies encourage “us” to
become). This language is adopted for the purpose of inclusivity. The
intention in these chapters is to invite the reader into the Mah ā bh ā rata’s
literary landscape—as this book argues that the M ahā bh ā rata itself
37. Ibid. , 6 .
38. For slightly diff erent interpretations, see Minkowski, “Janamejaya’s S attra ,” 406 , and
Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahā bhā rata , 95 .
39. Black argues that the epic’s “textualized audiences” created by its framing device provide
an indication of the ideal receivers who were in the imagination of the composers or com-
pilers of the poem. See Black, “Eavesdropping,” 57 .
Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 65
does—rather than to exclude him or her by suggesting these woods are
accessible only to some “model” or historical other.4 0
Narrative Ethics
The idea that there is a relationship between the way in which literature
conveys meaning and the ethical transformation of the reader/spectator
is implicit in both Sanskrit literary theory and reader-response theory
(especially in Iser’s formulation). However, neither school develops this
connection in a systematic and sustained fashion. Therefore, in order to
fl esh out this link in terms of how the M ah ā bh ā rata functions as an
aesthetic text, we turn to the Euro-American school of discourse called
“narrative ethics.” This school developed in the past few decades out of
a growing dissatisfaction within moral philosophy with rule-oriented
moral theory. The objection was that rule-driven moral theory, in its at-
tempt to universalize ethics, neglected to take into account individual
experience as well as contexts such as space and time in the formation
and expression of moral understanding.4 1 The recognition that narrative
takes into account these dimensions of human experience has informed
the ideas of various scholars working in a variety of disciplines (pri-
marily moral philosophy, but also literary criticism) who share the view
that it is predominantly through narrative—more so than through prop-
ositions or rules—that moral being and knowing are formed and
shaped. 42
Precisely how narrative informs moral being and knowing, however,
has been conceptualized in diverse ways within narrative ethics. In this
regard, narrative ethics can be subdivided in terms of two broad trajec-
tories: (1) those narrative ethicists, such as Wayne Booth4 3 and Martha
40. Several scholars have argued that the M ahā bh ā rata was designed to be accessible to a
wide, indeed universal audience. See Brian Black, “Eavesdropping,” 54–55 and James L.
Fitzgerald, “India’s Fifth Veda: The Mahā bhā rata ’s Presentation of Itself,” in Essays on the
Mahā bh ā rata , ed. Arvind Sharma (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991), 150–170 .
41. Leela Prasad, Poetics of Conduct: Oral Narrative and Moral Being in a South Indian Town
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2007), 17 .
42. Ibid. , 17 .
43. See, for example, T he Company We Keep: An Ethics of Fiction (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1988) .
66 disorienting dharma
Nussbaum4 4 , who locate and articulate the ethical value of reading litera-
ture and (2) those, such as Paul Ricoeur4 5 and Alasdair MacIntyre,4 6 who
explore the relationship between narrativity (as a human endeavor, not
necessarily limited to literature) and the construction of identity. In what
follows we will focus on the fi rst group, particularly the narrative ethicists
who examine the link between ethics and tragic literature, such as Simone
Weil, Iris Murdoch, and Martha Nussbaum. Tragic literature with its focus
on suff ering, grief, and loss shares many of the same themes and con-
cerns of the M ah ā bh ā rata . Specifi cally, the work of Nussbaum focuses on
the theme of tragic blindness; the work of Weil and Murdoch centers on
the theme of tragic suff ering and death. The M ahā bh ā rata explores both
these themes of tragic literature and both are pertinent to the way it trans-
mits its ethical messages through its aesthetics of suff ering.
In T he Fragility of Goodness , Martha Nussbaum argues that the works of
the tragic poets (particularly Sophocles) are morally edifying because they
combat the human tendency to oversimplify the world and thus render
oneself blind to the richness and complexity of life. For Nussbaum, tragedy
off ers insights into the rich texture of the matters of choice and delibera-
tion. In tragedy, causes and events are presented in such a complex
manner that they expose the truth of indeterminacy and the sheer diffi -
culty of human deliberation. Because of this richness and specifi city of
circumstantial detail, tragedy forces us as interpreters to be active. Fur-
ther, tragedy elucidates what is lost when one endeavors to oversimplify
life. Oftentimes, the tragic hero’s downfall is caused by a kind of blind-
ness, a tendency to oversimplify the world of values. With the tragic hero
or heroine’s downfall, tragedy reveals the cost that is involved in closing
oneself off from the multiplicity of the world of values.
Building on the insights of Nussbaum, the chapters that follow will be
concerned with articulating the ways in which the M ah ā bh ā rata ’s narra-
tive strategies serve to sharpen our moral perceptions—our ability to dis-
cern acutely and responsively the salient features of a particular situation.
44. See, for example, The Fragility of Goodness: Luck and Ethics in Greek Tragedy and Philos-
ophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986) and L ove’s Knowledge: Essays on Philos-
ophy and Literature (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990) .
45. See Time and Narrative and Oneself as Another (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992).
46. See A fter Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame
Press, 1981) .
Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 67
In this regard, there are two recurring situations in which “watching” the
behavior of characters is particularly important: (1) situations that involve
dilemmas in which the character in question—no matter how virtuous—
inevitably makes a bad decision due to an inability to see the situation
with mental clarity, and (2) situations that take place after the bad decisions
have been made and the catastrophe occurs wherein characters are either
incapacitated by their sorrow and thus unable to take positive action or
they are stupefi ed by their despair, which in turn causes them to make
additional bad decisions that trigger further suff ering. The Mahā bh ā rata ’s
recurring interest in these situations suggests that it is fascinated by how
human beings are rendered blind, incapacitated, and/or stupefi ed by
their responses to what one may call “situations of extreme urgency.”4 7
The text’s aesthetics of suff ering seems to pinpoint the crucial ethical mo-
ment here, in moments where one more link is created in the chain of
despair that runs through the course of the epic due to a character’s in-
ability to see or “foresee” the inextricable link between his or her action
and its consequences.
Turning now to the theme of tragic suff ering and death, Simone Weil
and Iris Murdoch argue that reading tragic literature is morally useful
because it teaches us to see the truth of the human condition, which is our
vulnerability to radical suff ering and death. In her classic essay “The Iliad,
Poem of Might” Simone Weil marvels at the fact that the great tragic poets
have found the words to capture and communicate this truth because,
according to her, confronting suff ering is a nearly impossible task for
human beings. Because the tragic poets are able to depict this reality in a
way that can be apprehended by the human mind as true and beautiful,
and because, according to Weil, it is only through the radiance of beauty
that human thought has access to this truth, the tragic poets are able to
eff ect what she calls a miracle. For Weil, the ability to “see” the prevalence
of suff ering is the ultimate moral stance to the world.
Building on Weil’s ideas, Murdoch argues that what prevents human
beings from seeing the truth of the human condition is what she calls “the
fat relentless ego,” which is prone to daydream and fantasy.4 8 Tragedy,
according to her, is morally benefi cial because it helps to disillusion the
47. As David Gitomer notes, the M ahā bhā rata depicts a world “in permanent crisis.” “King
Duryodhana,” 222.
48. Iris Murdoch, T he Sovereignty of Good (London: Routledge & K. Paul, 1971), 52 .
68 disorienting dharma
egoistic self. Since tragedy contains some dreadful realization of the re-
ality and signifi cance of suff ering and death, tragedy threatens the ego’s
dream of eternal life, happiness, and power. Murdoch insists that to break
the ego, tragedies must really distress us—they must show us the reality
of our situation, which is that “life is chancy and incomplete,” there is no
goal or t elos , and every single thing including one’s mind is subject to the
vagaries of chance. This way of seeing the world is what she calls “re-
alism,” 49 and for her virtue starts with it.
Both Weil and Murdoch place the ability to recognize the truth of
human vulnerability to suff ering and death at the center of ethics, as does
the M ah ā bh ā rata’s aesthetics of suff ering. For Weil and Murdoch, it is the
ability to confront suff ering—to have the courage to face the truth about
the human condition—that opens one up to ethical transformation. This
transformation is characterized by the silencing of the ego and the purifi -
cation of one’s consciousness; it results in the ability to see the world as it
is, what both Weil and Murdoch refer to as the virtue of “attention.” Atten-
tion is ethically crucial for both thinkers because it determines behavior in
matters of choice. As Murdoch notes, at crucial moments of choice, most
of the business of choosing is already over. Why? Because we can choose
only based on what we see and therefore only on what we desire and are
controlled by. 50 Thus it is the quality of our seeing rather than the quality
of our thinking and deliberating that determines our choices and conse-
quently our actions. For Weil and Murdoch, seeing and evaluation go hand
in hand; they are simultaneous. Thus moral thinking is closer to aesthetics
than to reasoning.
Similarly, through training our attention on the fact of the existence
of universal suff ering, the Mah ā bhā rata ’s aesthetics, this book argues, is
attempting to refi gure less what we think and more what we see and
desire and thus how we respond to the world. This “refi guration” entails
a repatterning of desires away from the self and toward a larger truth
that takes into consideration the condition of all living creatures. For
example, as mentioned several times, the point of the argument against
grief is to shift the lamenter from the narrow lens of his or her particular
viewpoint to the level of the experience of all living creatures. Such a
shift is meant to snap lamenters out of their despair by distancing them
49. Ibid. , 87 .
50. Ibid. , 39–40 .
Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 69
from their own situation and opening up their eyes to the condition of all
living creatures—universal suff ering and ultimately death. This shift
also involves a transformation of their emotional responses from grief
and self-pity to stoic acceptance and fortitude, emotions that are akin to
Murdoch and Weil’s concept of attention. Through the depiction of cer-
tain characters, particularly Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, the blind king (perhaps the
most human of all the characters, see chapter 3 ), the epic’s aesthetics of
suff ering shows time and again that a person can “know” the right thing
to do, but still not do it. It is right vision, not right reason, that deter-
mines moral behavior in matters of choice.
thus far this chapter has discussed three categories of theoretical
resources and their points of convergence with the Mahā bh ā rata’s aes-
thetics of suff ering. However, one should also note what a study of the
Mahā bh ā rata has to “off er back” to these resources, particularly narrative
ethics. Narrative ethics has rarely ventured beyond the genres of the novel
and tragic drama into the world of epic. However, for all the reasons for
which the novel is considered an ideal genre for the exploration of ethical
matters—the complexity of its form, its focus on particulars, the fact that
it off ers a refl ection on human action and character, and so forth—the
epic genre too is ideal, often providing even more complexity and detail.
In addition, narrative ethics has, for the most part, limited its purview to
the Anglo-Christian world.5 1 This book off ers an examination of the con-
nections between ethics, religion, and narrative in a work of South Asian
literature, contextualized in South Asian literary theory.5 2
ā ā
The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah bh rata
Having developed a relatively detailed understanding of the epic’s aes-
thetics of suff ering through a description of its constitutive elements in
the introduction of this book and its points of contact with Sanskrit literary
theory, reader-response theory, and narrative ethics in the fi rst part of this
chapter, we are now in a good position to “look through” it in order to
abstract out the more general but implicit literary theory contained in it.
51. Prasad, P oetics of Conduct , 187 .
52. For the intimate connection between ethics (here defi ned as confronting, responding to,
and moving beyond suff ering) and religion, see Gethin, T he Foundations of Buddhism , 64 .
70 disorienting dharma
In what follows four basic features of this implicit theory are sketched out.
However, this sketch is preliminary because we have not yet turned to the
task of closely reading the M ah ā bh ā rata and showing how the aesthetics
of suff ering works, which we will do in the following four chapters.
The fi rst feature is the idea that a work of literature conveys meaning
less through what it says and more through what it does, and by “what it
does” is meant the responses it evokes from its audiences. Just as Ānanda
argued that works of literature convey meaning less through directly
“saying” and more through “doing” or suggesting—through initiating a
process by which meaning blossoms in the mind of the sensitive audience
member—so too do Eco and Iser argue that literary texts do much of their
work through their gaps—that is, those moments in which a text “does”
something precisely by not saying it. The M ah ā bh ā rata’s aesthetics of suf-
fering makes an implicit argument in this regard. It does so in those in-
stances where the text directly states one thing and then down the road
contradicts what it has said with no literal, explicit acknowledgment that
it is doing so. In these instances meaning is created by the emotional ex-
perience of the disjuncture between the explicit saying and the implicit
contradicting or “doing.” To explain further, let me briefl y provide an ex-
ample from the text. Yudhiṣ ṭ hira is a paragon of virtue and the audience is
explicitly encouraged by the text to view him as such. He is the son of the
god Dharma and he is frequently referred to as “the Dharma king”
( dharmar ā ja ). However, early on in the text, in the dicing scene of Book 2,
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira displays morally troubling behavior. He gambles irrespon-
sibly and as a result loses his kingdom and his wealth, as well as himself,
his four brothers, and their common wife Draupadī. Moreover, he pas-
sively watches as the Kauravas violate Draupadī in the assembly hall, re-
fusing all appeals to help her. Given this disturbing behavior, what
precisely are we, the audience, supposed to make of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira? Is he
really meant to serve as our eyes and ears for determining the dharmic
path? Or is the message the opposite of this, namely that Yudhiṣ ṭh ira, in
truth, is not virtuous? The answer is neither. Instead, the messages that
the text ultimately conveys through its depiction of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira have to
do with the audience’s emotional experience derived from the disjunc-
ture between these two ideas (i.e., the idea that Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira is a paradigm
of virtue on the one hand and his morally troubling behavior in the
dicing scene on the other) and the audience’s intense bewilderment—or
disorientation—of not receiving the easy answer that the text itself on the
surface appears to give (i.e., to know dharma, look to Yudhiṣ ṭh ira). These
Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 71
ideas will be expanded upon in chapter 2 which links these kinds of
disjunctures to the narrative strategies of rupture and explores what the
text is ultimately “suggesting” through them about both the character
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and the concept of d harma .
Other scholars of Indian religions have made strikingly similar argu-
ments concerning how premodern Indian texts convey meaning. For ex-
ample, Joel Brereton off ers a remarkably similar argument concerning the
aesthetic function of riddle hymns in the Ṛ g Veda . In his article “Edifying
Puzzlement: Ṛ gveda 10.129 and the uses of Enigma” Brereton focuses on
a notoriously puzzling Vedic hymn concerning the origins of the world.
The hymn concludes with a riddle-question asking whether anyone truly
knows how the world arose, a question that seems to undermine the fi rst
part of the poem, which describes the world’s origins. By concentrating on
the hymn’s rhetorical structure and other formal features, Brereton argues
that the solution to the riddles posed by the hymn rests both in what the
poem says and “even more in the response it evokes in its audience” (i.e.,
what it does).5 3
The second feature is the idea that a work of literature assumes a sen-
sitive reader/spectator (s ah ṛ daya ). This feature is inextricably linked to the
fi rst, since what a literary text “does” it does to an audience, and in partic-
ular to those audience members who are open to the strategies of the text.
Such openness requires sensitivity, literally “feeling with” or “having the
same heart,” as theorized by the Sanskrit literary theorists; it also requires
courage. Why courage? Because the M ahā bh ā rata’s aesthetics of suff ering
assumes a reader who is sensitive and open to the discomforting experi-
ence of being handed comforting truths and then having those truths
wrenched away by the type of disjunctures discussed above. Such an expe-
rience, while powerful and potentially transformative, is also intensely be-
wildering and disorienting. Therefore, it requires a willingness to be and
remain open to the experience—what is meant by “courage.” In the fol-
lowing pages, references to the epic’s “audience,” will be referring specifi -
cally to the sensitive reader/spectator.
A third feature involves the kind of work that a text can “do” through
the provocation of the aesthetic experiences of proximity and estrange-
ment. According to Abhinava, the sensitive reader/spectator—the one who
is capable of apprehending r asa —is the one who identifi es, who literally
53. Brereton, “Edifying Puzzlement,” 249 .
72 disorienting dharma
“feels with” the subject matter of the literary text. However, for rasa , or
aestheticized emotion, to be successfully suggested, a distancing should
occur between the text and its appreciator. Thus the aesthetic experience
depends both on proximity—or closeness—with elements of the text as
well as on a subsequent distancing from them. Similarly, according to the
aesthetics of suff ering, one important way in which a literary text does its
work is through setting up its audience members to feel close to or com-
fortable with certain conceptual categories and/or characters, and then
subsequently manipulating audience members to feel suddenly “disori-
ented” or estranged from them. Through this distance, the sensitive
reader/spectator is encouraged to stand back and refl ect on the feelings
and beliefs that he or she was manipulated by the text to have and why.
Thus the text creates a space for meta-refl ecting, which is precisely where
meaning “blossoms” in the mind of the sensitive audience member.
The fourth feature is the inextricable link that the epic’s aesthetics of
suff ering makes between the aesthetic goals of literature and the themes
of suff ering, loss, separation, death, and impermanence, which, as men-
tioned earlier, constitutes, to a large degree, the dominant worldview of
the three major religious traditions of premodern India. Implicit in the
Mah ā bhā rata’s aesthetics is an argument for why narrative is a distinc-
tively successful genre for exposing this truth. Just as Weil and Murdoch
point out that human thought is unable to accept our vulnerability to rad-
ical suff ering and death, so too does M ahā bh ā rata’s aesthetics of suff ering
imply that human beings have an enormous conceptual resistance to
facing the fact of universal suff ering. It also implies that neither telling
them in a straightforward or literal fashion nor showing them through
depictions of instances of suff ering will break through this resistance.
Why? Because most of the conceptual categories that human beings “see
through” to order and understand the world are constructed in such a way
that they protect them from seeing the truth of universal suff ering. Narra-
tive, however, through the work of its aesthetic features, is able to target
and “disorient” the sensitive reader/spectator’s assumptions, beliefs, and
expectations concerning these very conceptual categories, and, in so
doing, create a space where one can begin to see beyond them.
Further, according to the M ah ā bh ā rata’s aesthetics, how a human being
sees is inherently a matter of ethics, because it inevitably aff ects one’s
decisions in matters of choice, a point the M ah ā bhā rata demonstrates
time and again through its interest in confl ict-ridden situations and the
weight that it gives to the moment of moral deliberation. However, it is
Meaning-Without-Saying: The Implicit Literary Theory of the M ah ā bh ā rata 73
important to note that the Mah ā bh ā rata rarely if ever provides a positive
role model in these situations.5 4 Instead, in the majority of cases, charac-
ters make bad decisions and suff er terrible consequences. In this, the
Mah ā bh ā rata’s aesthetics of suff ering seems to suggest that readers or
spectators of narrative literature do not learn from characters through wit-
nessing positive role models in action. Rather, they learn from characters
by watching them fail, and by assessing the reasons for the failure as well
as witnessing and experiencing the inevitable disastrous consequences of
the bad decisions. In chapter 3 we will consider the depiction of the char-
acter Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra as a negative role model and the extensive moral work
that this characterization does in the text.
Having sketched four basic features of the implicit literary theory of
the Mahā bh ā rata , let us now turn to the task of reading the epic with its
aesthetics of suff ering in mind. In chapter 2 we begin by close-reading
perhaps the most famous episode in the epic: the game of dice. Our task
will be to examine the depiction of three character types—the victim, the
agent, and the passive witness to suff ering—in the context of one of the
predominant narrative situations of the aesthetics of suff ering: situations
that involve dilemmas. Indeed, the dicing scene is the quintessential ex-
ample of this type of situation in the epic, for it is here that characters
make decisions and take actions that make the inevitable march toward
whole-scale destruction irreversible.
54. John Smith also makes the point that the heroes and heroines of Indian epics are not
meant to be taken as moral paragons. See “Scapegoats of the Gods: The Ideology of the
Indian Epics,” in Oral Epics in India , ed. Stuart Blackburn et al. (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1989), 194 .
2
Dharma and Rupture in the
Game of Dice
What is more wretched than this, that I, a woman of
virtue and beauty, was forced to enter the assembly hall of
men. Where is the dharma of kings?
—draupadī To The Assembled Kings1
If anything, grief is the one quality or sign which marks
women in epic Mahā bh ā rata , and Draupadī is excep-
tional in this respect.
—kevin mcgrath2
as david shulman notes, in the unfolding of the central narrative line of
the Mah ā bh ā rata , “all roads lead to and from the pivotal moment of the
dice game ( dyūta ).” 3 In this episode, the Kauravas (led by Duryodhana)
challenge the Pā ṇ ḍ avas to a crooked dice match, rob them of their king-
dom, violate their queen Draupadī, and exile them for thirteen years.
Because of these egregious acts, war between the two sets of cousins is
inevitable. Furthermore, this episode contains one of the most disturbing
instances of cruelty and suff ering in the text: Draupadī ’s violation at the
hands of the Kauravas in the presence of the Bh ā rata elders who do noth-
ing to save her.4 What is particularly disturbing about the fact that the el-
ders act as “passive witnesses” to Draupadī ’s abuse is that they claim they
1. 2.62.8.
2. Kevin McGrath, S trī: Women in Epic Mahā bhā rata (Boston, MA: Ilex Foundation, 2009),
192 .
3. Shulman, “Devana and Daiva,” 351 .
4. The dicing scene takes place in T he Book of the Assembly Hall ( Sabh ā parvan ), 2.43.–72.37.
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 75
are paralyzed by the “subtle” ( sūk ṣ ma ) nature of dharma , a claim that im-
plicates dharma in this instance of violence and sorrow.
In this chapter we will explore how the epic’s aesthetics of suff ering
makes its threefold argument about the existence of suff ering, the forces
that cause it, and the appropriate emotional and psychological responses
that allow one to move beyond it through examining the depiction of four
characters—Duryodhana, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira, and Draupadī—and
one conceptual category—d harma . Following a brief summary of this epi-
sode, we will fi rst explore how the actions of three potential agents of
suff ering—Duryodhana, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, and Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira—lead to the game
of dice and Draupadī ’s subsequent abuse. Next we will focus on how the
depiction of Draupadī encourages us to critically confront disturbing
truths about the prevalence of suff ering in the world.5 Finally, we will
examine Draupadī ’s question to Yudhiṣ ṭ hira concerning the validity of his
stake and the silence of the elders and Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira in response to this
question. What does the Pā ñcalī princess’s question, which leads to a tan-
gled discussion about the nature of dharma among the elders in the as-
sembly hall, and the absence of an answer, tell us about the disconcerting
relationship between dharma and suff ering?
Summary of the Episode of the Dice Game
Duryodhana, the Kaurava prince, has just witnessed his cousin
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s spectacular rise to universal sovereign at the royal consecra-
tion and is “burning”(d ahyam ā na )6 with envy. Due to this impassioned
state, he falls prey to the “tricks”(p ralambha )7 of Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s grand hall,
stumbling into ponds that he mistakes for land and lifting his skirts to
keep them dry on crystal pavements that he “sees” (√d ṛ ś ) and “thinks”
(√ man ) are ponds. (The use of these two verbs suggests that Duryodhana’s
mistake has to do with how he cognitively responds to what he sees.)
Arjuna, Bhīma, and their servants witness these “mistakes” and ridicule
him, adding to Duryodhana’s humiliation. Note that the themes of illu-
sion, mockery, and public humiliation that are present here will resurface
5. My use of personal pronouns such as “we” and “us” in this context refers to the sensitive
reader/ sah ṛ daya . See chapter 1 .
6. Literally, “being tormented.” 2.43.21.
7. 2.43.11.
76 disorienting dharma
later when Draupadī, upon Duryodhana’s orders, is brought into the Kau-
ravas’ assembly hall.
Now Duryodhana wants revenge; specifi cally, he wants to wrest
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s glory and power from him, but he knows he cannot do so
through force; the Pā ṇ ḍ avas are too powerful. Śakuni, his uncle, comes up
with another idea: a game of dice. Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira, according to Śakuni, is
fond of dice ( dyūtapriya ) but does not know how to play; Śakuni, on the
other hand, is an expert at dice, and he assures Duryodhana that he will be
able to wrest Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s kingdom from him.8
Duryodhana approaches his father, King Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, in order to obtain
his approval for Śakuni’s plan. Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra refuses; gambling, he says, will
lead to a division in the family. Duryodhana heatedly persists; Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
wavers, ultimately gives in, and sends his brother and wise councilor
Vidura to summon Yudhiṣ ṭ hira to the Kaurava assembly hall. Yudhiṣ ṭ hira
submits to Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s summons unwillingly (he feels that he has no
choice but to accept, appealing to both fate [d aiva ] and dharma as forces
that bind him) and upon his arrival in Hā stinapura, the game begins.
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s fi rst stake is a modest string of pearls. Śakuni wins.
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira accuses him of defeating him with a “trick” (k aitavaka )9 and
begins to stake wildly. In the course of the next seventeen throws, he gam-
bles away his entire kingdom, his four brothers, and himself. His nine-
teenth stake is his wife and queen, Draupadī. He loses and Duryodhana
orders Draupadī to be brought into the hall as his slave:
Come, steward, bring Draupadī, the beloved, honored wife of the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas. Let her sweep the house! Make her move quickly! What
a joy for us—let her be with the female slaves!1 0
Draupadī, at her most magnifi cent, responds to her summons with a
question for Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira: “Bh ā rata, whom did you lose fi rst—yourself or
me?”1 1 This question, posed several times to Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and to the elders
in the hall, is met with stupefi ed silence.
8. 2.44.18.
9. 2.54.1.
10. 2.59.1.
11. 2.60.7.
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 77
Draupadī is dragged into the hall and sexually violated by Duryodhana
and his cronies in the presence of the kings and elders in the assembly
hall who watch but do nothing to help her. Finally, the howls of jackals
and other inauspicious omens prompt Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra to put an end to the
madness. He gives the Pā ṇ ḍ ava queen three boons, and she requests
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s freedom fi rst followed by the freedom of her other four
husbands. The Pā ṇ ḍ avas, free again, leave for their kingdom, Indra-
prastha, but are then summoned back by Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra (at Duryodhana’s
prompting) for one last throw. After losing yet again, they are exiled for
twelve years in the forest and for one year in the city, where they are to live
in disguise; if they are recognized during this year, they are to spend
another twelve years in the forest.
At the conclusion of the dice game, there is a sense of impending
doom. Almost every character knows that war between the two sets of
cousins is inevitable; it is only a matter of time. Further, a sensibility that
I call the “weight of affl iction” enters the text in this episode and is sus-
tained throughout the remaining sixteen books. Before the game of dice,
suff ering, particularly the Pā ṇ ḍ avas’ suff ering, is punctuated by resolu-
tion; misfortune is followed by periods of happiness and fruition. How-
ever, beginning with the game of dice, the P ā ṇ ḍ avas (and most of the
characters who are sympathetic to them) experience unyielding suf-
fering. From here on out there is no end to the P ā ṇ ḍ avas’ misfortune,
just as there is no end to their despair. This is borne out in the narrative
by the continuous line of travails that they undergo during and after the
game: loss of kingdom, exile, failed peace negotiations, war, victory at
unthinkable cost, a joyless return to power as rulers of an empty kingdom,
and death. From the point of the “fated” dice game onward, suff ering
for the Pā ṇ ḍ ava family is followed by more suff ering, and then fi nally
death.
Proximity and Estrangement in the Episode
of the Dice Game
In the opening passages of the episode of the dice game, the text fore-
warns the audience about two narrative outcomes: it tells us that the dice
game will take place and it tells us that it will have disastrous conse-
quences. For example, early on in the episode Janamejaya interrupts the
narrator Vaiśaṃ p ā yana and asks him,
78 disorienting dharma
How did that very unfortunate dice game between brothers come
about that brought that calamity to the Pā ṇ ḍ avas, my paternal
grandfathers? . . . I want you to tell me this in great detail, noble
brahmin, for this was the root of the destruction of the world.1 2
Here Janamejaya, whose perspective is informed by the future, tells us
that the game will indeed take place and that it will have tragic and violent
consequences. Why does the text forewarn us about the outcomes of both
the episode (the game will take place) and the game (familial division and
war) and rob us of the opportunity for suspense about these matters? One
plausible reason is in order to arouse curiosity about issues that extend
beyond the question of “what happens next?” Of course, one must assume
that most audiences would already know the outcome of this episode,
since, as A. K. Ramanujan has famously said, no one ever “reads” the
Mah ā bhā rata for the fi rst time.1 3 Still, by beginning in this way, the text
sets us up to pay attention to certain things, namely to the question of
precisely what c aused the game. How did it come about? Why did it lead to
such division and strife? Thus, suspense is transferred from the “what
happens next” question to questions about how and why certain events
happened—that is, questions about the details.
The epic’s strategies provide answers to the “how” and the “why” of the
game through a carefully crafted presentation of the decision-making pro-
cesses of the three principal characters whose combined decisions lead to
the game: Duryodhana, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, and Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira. Here, the closely
related motifs of vision and blindness on the one hand and mental clarity
and confusion on the other are particularly important. The manner in
which the epic’s narrative strategies present these three characters in this
scene encourages proximity (i.e., sympathy) and/or estrangement (i.e.,
emotional and critical distance) from them. Further, our emotional ties to
these characters, or the lack thereof, have a great deal to do with what we
ultimately learn from them about suff ering, both their own and the sorrow
that their decisions and actions cause others.
12. 2.46.1–3. This break occurs after Vaiśaṃ pā yana has narrated the events of the dicing
scene up to the point where Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra submits to Duryodhana’s request. Janamejaya’s
question causes Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana to retell the conversation between Duryodhana and
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a in more detail.
13. Ramanujan, “Repetition in the M ahā bhā rata ,” 419 .
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 79
In this section we will explore how the epic’s strategies depict the men-
tal states and decision-making processes of Duryodhana, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, and
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira, focusing on four issues: (1) how the narrative strategies depict
the characters and how these characters make their decisions, (2) how the
narrative strategies present the behavior of these characters a fter they
make their decisions, particularly with respect to their treatment of
Draupadī, (3) how the narrative strategies encourage either proximity and/
or estrangement from each character, and (4) the “work” of the estrange-
ment. Our journey with each one of the characters begins with sympa-
thetic proximity and ends with emotional distance. This distance is
inevitable because each one of these characters makes decisions that lead
to the dice game. In addition, since the epic has forewarned us that the
consequences of the game will lead to a great disaster and large-scale suf-
fering, we are encouraged to feel distanced from whoever in the narrative
promotes the game.1 4
Duryodhana
Prince Duryodhana is the driving force of the dice game. While the game is
originally his uncle Śakuni’s idea, Duryodhana seizes upon it and mobilizes
those around him to eff ect its implementation. Therefore, an analysis of his
emotions and mental states is crucial for understanding why and how the
game came to be, as well as why it had such disastrous consequences. Such
14. For the symbolic import of dicing in ancient India, see Don Handelman and David
Shulman, God Inside Out: Śiva’s Game of Dice (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992).
Their work suggests that the dicing motif is, in some sense, the antithesis of order. It repre-
sents the destructive aspects of the cosmos. Similarly, I believe that the M ahā bh ā rata is in-
terested in the dicing motif because it, like war (to which it is compared often), brings out
extreme emotions in people. It provides a context where people lose control of their senses
and become violent and destructive. The text is very interested in examining how people
respond psychologically to extreme situations. The gambler’s lament in the Ṛ g Veda (10.34)
also explores the dicing motif vis-à-vis the destructive emotions that gambling can elicit. See
Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty, tr., The Rig Veda: An Anthology (Harmondsworth: Penguin
Books, 1981), 239–241 . For scholarship on the particulars of the dice game in ancient India,
see C. Panduranga Bhatta, D ice-play in Sanskrit Literature: A Study (Delhi: Amar Prakashan,
1985) ; N. N. Bhattacharya, “The King and the Dice: A Study in Rituals of the R ā jasūya,”
Journal of the Oriental Institute of Baroda 23/4 (1974), 288–307 ; K. de Vreese, “The Dice
Game in Ancient India,” in Orientalia Neerlandica: A Volume of Oriental Studies (Leiden:
A. W. Sitjhoff , 1948), 349–362 ; A. B. Keith, “The Game of Dice,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society (1908): 824–828 ; J. C. Heesterman, The Ancient Indian Royal Consecration (The
Hague: Mouton & Co., 1957), 143–157; David Shulman, “Devana and Daiva,” 351–353 ; and
David Gordon White, “Dogs Die,” H istory of Religions 23/4 (1989): 283–303 .
80 disorienting dharma
an analysis also provides clues as to how the narrative strategies of prox-
imity and estrangement make a point about the psychological forces that
contribute to the pervasive presence of suff ering in the world.
At the opening of the episode, Duryodhana surveys the P ā ṇ ḍ avas’ grand
assembly hall along with Śakuni and falls prey to the “tricks”(p ralambhā n )1 5
of the hall. He “thinks” he sees a pond where only a crystal slab exists, and
he pulls up his robe to avoid getting wet. Next, he falls into a pond that he
mistakes for crystalline water. Witnessing this, Bhīma, Arjuna, and the
twins laugh mockingly. Ashamed, Duryodhana roams the hall dejected
( durmanas ). 16 Again, he mistakes dry land for water, pulling up his robes;
again, his cousins mock him.
Why does Duryodhana fall prey to the “deceptions” or tricks in the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas’ hall? The epic does not provide an explicit answer to this ques-
tion, so we are left in the dark as to whether “the divine designs”1 7 are in-
tentionally planted there by the Pā ṇ ḍ avas (or by Maya, the divine architect,
for that matter) 1 8 to shame Duryodhana or whether there is something
about Duryodhana that makes him susceptible to the power of these
objects.1 9 In any event, Duryodhana is humiliated; the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and their
servants mock him cruelly, and their actions contribute to his misery.2 0
As Duryodhana returns to his kingdom with Śakuni, he is preoccupied
and deep in thought; his uncle asks him the source of his distraction.
Duryodhana’s long response to Śakuni together with his extensive
speeches to his father about the powerful emotions he experiences as a
result of witnessing Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s royal consecration provides one of the
largest windows into the inner workings of Duryodhana’s mind in the
15. 2.43.11.
16. 2.43.4.
17. 2.43.2.
18. Maya is saved from the fi re of the Kh ā ṇ ḍ ava Forest by Arjuna. To return the favor, Maya
builds the Pā ṇ ḍ avas a great assembly hall. For more on Maya as the architect of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas’
assembly hall, see van Buitenen, T he Mah ā bhā rata , Vol . 2, 6–9 .
19. See 2.3.30. There is something “fi shy” about this hall; some kings are fooled by its ponds
for mysterious reasons.
20. 2.43.2–43.13. For examples of other literary texts that encourage us to sympathize with
“villains,” see Wayne Booth, The Rhetoric of Fiction (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1978), 243–264 . This scene is undoubtedly meant to be funny, but it is the human dimen-
sion of Duryodhana that is being brought out here, not the villainous side. For an overview
of humor in Sanskrit literature, see Lee Siegel, Laughing Matters: Comic Traditions in India
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987) .
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 81
entire epic. By opening up Duryodhana’s internal world to us, the text
encourages us to understand his situation from his point of view. These
speeches contain three basic themes: (1) that Duryodhana suff ers bitterly;
(2) that the cause of Duryodhana’s suff ering is the Pā ṇ ḍ avas’ spectacular
rise to power and glory; and (3) that he intends to ease his suff ering by
seeking revenge. In these speeches, Duryodhana moves from the persona
of victim to that of would-be aggressor; at the same time, he moves from a
fi gure of tentative sympathy to an object of suspicion.
In his speeches to his father and his uncle, Duryodhana emphasizes
his misery. Duryodhana tells Śakuni that he “suff ers bitterly” (s uduh.-
khita ), 21 that he is “suff ering” ( dahyamā na )2 2 night and day. To Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra,
Duryodhana communicates that he is “pale” (v ivar ṇ a ), “miserable” ( dīna ),
“yellowish” (h ari ṇ a ), and “feeble” (k ṛ śa). 23 He tells his father that he can
fi nd no peace “in his mind which is suff ering” ( dahyamā nena cetasā )2 4
and that he no longer fi nds himself fi rm ( na vinde dṛ ḍ ham ā tm ā na ṃ ). 25
For Duryodhana this is a matter of life or death, because he cannot bear
to go on suff ering like this. He tells Śakuni that he will enter the fi re or
drink poison or drown himself, for he will not be able to go on living.2 6
What is the source of Duryodhana’s despair? Duryodhana tells Śakuni
that since he saw Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s grand sacrifi ce, during which he wit-
nessed the entire earth under Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s sway, he has fallen prey to
“resentment” ( amar ṣ a ), which he is tormented by. 27 Likewise, Duryod-
hana tells Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra that it is because he saw śrī , or royal splendor, in
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and not in himself, he has become pale and wasted. 28 While
jealousy in a character is not an emotion that encourages proximity, the
things that keep us from feeling alienated from Duryodhana, and indeed
encourage us to sympathize with him to some extent here are the fact that
21. 2.43.36.
22. 2.43.23.
23. 2.45.16.
24. 2.45.35.
25. 2.47.2.
26. 2.43.27
27. 2.43.21.
28. 2.45.15–16. For scholarship on the royal value of ś ri in both Vedic and post-Vedic texts,
see Jan Gonda, A spects of Early Viṣ ṇ uism (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1969), 176–231 and
Minoru Hara, “Śrī: Mistress of a King,” O rientalia Suecana 45–46 (1996): 45–46 .
82 disorienting dharma
he is suff ering and that we have just witnessed the P ā ṇ ḍ avas (with the
exception of Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira) treat him cruelly.2 9 In this momentary reversal
of roles (the P ā ṇ ḍ avas as “bad guys” and Duryodhana, briefl y, as their
prey) the text encourages us to question our assumptions about who is
the victim and who is the aggressor, toying with our sympathies in the
process. To see the Pā ṇ ḍ avas briefl y from this less than fl attering per-
spective gives us the opportunity to see them from Duryodhana’s point
of view, and while Duryodhana is not a fi gure to be admired here, he is
still, in both his anguish and his envy, granted the full measure of his
humanity.
However, as Duryodhana seizes upon the idea of revenge and tries to
convince his father to sanction the game, he begins to spin out of control
and loses his grip on his reason and on reality. At the same time, he begins
to arouse our suspicion. Duryodhana’s growing anger and hatred toward
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira contribute to a steady yet illogical progression of thought that
leads him to the dangerous conclusion that he must take the P ā ṇ ḍ avas’
wealth away from them at any cost, and this leads him ultimately to the
decision to implement the dice game.3 0 The steps in his thinking, all
extracted from his speeches to his father and his uncle, run something
like this: (1) I suff er, 31 (2) I suff er because I “saw” Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s immense
wealth,3 2 (3) in order to stop my suff ering I must win even greater glory or
kill myself,3 3 (4) I must take the Pā ṇ ḍ avas’ wealth away from them or die,
because a man who watches the prosperity of his enemies without acting
(a) is not human,3 4 (b) is evil (p ā pa ), 35 and fi nally because (c) if I do act not
my enemies are sure to destroy me.3 6 This progression of thought is not
29. Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira does not laugh at Duryodhana in this scene; neither does Draupadī. See
2.43.7.
30. For a slightly diff erent interpretation of Duryodhana’s reasons for inciting war with the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas, see B. K. Matilal, “The Throne: Was Duryodhana Wrong?” in E thics and Epics: The
Collected Essays of Bimal Krishna Matilal , ed.Jonardon Ganeri (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2002), 109–122 .
31. 2.43.21, 2.45.16, 2.45.35, 2.47.2.
32. 2.43.19–21.
33. 2.43.7.
34. He says, “If I were to tolerate such wealth that has come (to them) now, I would be nei-
ther a woman nor not a woman, neither a man nor not a man.” 2.43.29.
35. 2.48.18.
36. 2.50.23–24.
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 83
only illogical but delusional. There is absolutely no indication in the text
that Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira has had any intention of destroying the Kauravas. Indeed,
it seems that his intentions are quite the opposite, for there is textual evi-
dence that Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira is attempting to bring the families closer together.3 7
As Duryodhana spins more and more out of control, he moves from
victim to villain, further encouraging distance. He becomes increasingly
childish and spoiled as he tries to convince Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra to sanction the
game, using his suicidal impulses, which seemed genuine in his speeches
to Śakuni, as a tool to manipulate his father. He says to his father,
If Vidura were to come, he would turn you back. If you were stopped,
I would die, let there be no doubt, best of kings. When I am dead,
be happy with your Vidura, king! You will enjoy the entire earth,
why bother about me? 3 8
During the actual dice game, he commits the defi ning act of cruelty
( n ṛ śamsya ) in the epic: he causes Draupadī, half-naked and in her menses,
to be brought into the assembly hall before the gaze of men, opening the
fl oodgates to her violation. The inconceivability of this act forecloses any
possibility of lingering sympathetic proximity to Duryodhana; our es-
trangement from him at this point is total and complete.3 9
Proximity and estrangement in the M ah ā bh ā rata are almost always
connected to characters and their relation to two thematic elements: suf-
fering and comprehensibility. We sympathize with those characters who
are either victims of or prevent suff ering, and we are distanced from those
who cause suff ering. Similarly, we feel close to characters whose motives
and modes of behavior make sense to us, and we feel estranged from
those characters whose motives and modes of behavior do not. It is in part
due to moments of great distance from and great proximity toward char-
acters in the epic that the text is able to refi gure our understanding of
suff ering.
37. During the Royal Consecration, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira invited the Kauravas to participate as mem-
bers of his family. However, he was most likely “sticking it” to Duryodhana by assigning him
the duty of receiving the gifts of homage. Surely Yudhiṣ ṭ hira knew this would incite Duryod-
hana’s greed and envy. 2.32.1–10.
38. 2.45.43–44.
39. Matilal, “The Throne,” 112 .
84 disorienting dharma
What is the purpose of our estrangement from Duryodhana? By cre-
ating distance between the audience and the character, the text’s strategies
encourage us to stand back and question Duryodhana’s almost inconceiv-
able behavior. Here the question is obvious: What caused Duryodhana to
go so horribly astray? The text provides us with clues that help to answer
this question through its careful depiction of Duryodhana in the opening
passages of the episode, particularly in the way they focus on (1) what
Duryodhana sees, (2) what he thinks, and (3) the condition of his mind
( manas , m ati ). So what precisely does Duryodhana see and how does this
contribute to his moral decline? In his speeches to his father and his
uncle, Duryodhana refers self-refl exively to the act of seeing at least ten
times.4 0 While the objects of his vision range from treasures that he saw at
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s royal consecration to the “tricks” of the lotus pond built by
Maya, what he focuses on as the source of his suff ering and resentment is
the fact that he “saw” ś rī in Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira and not in himself.4 1 Similarly, the
object of his thoughts centers on Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s magnifi cent wealth and
power, symbols of his śrī , which he thinks about continuously.4 2 What the
narrative strategies provide through their depiction of Duryodhana is a
meditation on the psychological eff ects of greed and envy (closely related
emotions in the Mahā bh ā rata ). The text notes that once Duryodhana
“saw” the magnifi cent wealth of the P ā ṇ ḍ avas, his mind became evil
( p ā p ā matir ajā yata) .4 3 Duryodhana himself speaks of becoming mentally
unsteady and confused. This confusion causes him to settle upon a lose-
lose solution to his troubles: suicide or victory at any cost through the
game of dice, which he pursues with monomaniacal blindness to the
point of madness, and which culminates in the cruel abuse of Draupadī.
To return to our question, what caused Duryodhana to go astray?
A close analysis of the text suggests that the turbulent quality of Duryod-
hana’s mind, caused by his responses to what he witnesses in the world,
leads to his despicable behavior.4 4 At the same time, it suggests that virtue
and vice have less to do with conduct and more to do with quality of mind.
40. √d ṛ ś . 2.47.1–2.49.1.
41. 2.45.15–16. Van Buitenen translates the use of the locative here as “at Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s place”
instead of “in Yudhiṣ ṭ hira.”
42. For example, 2.43.35.
43. 2.43.13.
44. Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a provides a similar analysis of Duryodhana’s behavior at 1.1.98.
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 85
This point may be articulated diff erently in light of our concern with the
Mah ā bh ā rata ’s depiction of human sorrow: those who generate suff ering
(both for themselves and others) do so as a result of confusion caused by
an unbalanced mind.
Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s role in the dice game is crucial for two reasons. First, Duryod-
hana would not be able to move forward with his plan without his father’s
approval. Second, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira would not accept the invitation to play dice
if it were extended by anyone other than his uncle. Therefore, an analysis
of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s emotions and mental states in this episode is also critical
for understanding why the disastrous game took place. With Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra,
we take a journey that begins with clear vision, lapses into blindness, and
then returns to clear vision again.4 5
When Śakuni and Duryodhana fi rst approach Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra and present
their plan to him, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra exhibits remarkable farsightedness. He im-
mediately recognizes the dangers of the game, which he believes will cause
a quarrel in the family. He also recognizes that his son is not of sound mind,
but operates out of delusion (m oha ). 46 Based on these correct assessments,
he refuses to grant his approval of the game. He even off ers Duryodhana
sound advice by telling him that longing for another’s property is “fruitless
behavior.”4 7 Thus, Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra’s preliminary response to his son’s request
that he sanction the dice game displays wisdom and insight, and insofar as
he seems genuinely interested in obviating a family quarrel, we are encour-
aged to stand by him and to even feel a sense of relief that he is going to
check Duryodhana, who, at this point, is spinning out of control.
However, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a suddenly changes his mind and submits to
Duryodhana’s request saying,
Your speech does not please me, but do what you want, king of
men. You will suff er afterwards.4 8
45. While the discussion centers on Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s moral blindness here, remember that the
king is also physically blind. On the importance of seeing and observation in the epic, see
Angelika Malinar, “Blindheit und Sehen in der Erzählung des Mahā bhā rata,” in O dysee-
Rezeptionen , ed. A. Luther (Frankfurt: Verlag Antike), 97–114 .
46. 2.50.3.
47. 2.50.6.
48. 2.51.14.
86 disorienting dharma
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s reversal here is abrupt; there is no narrative event that
explains his sudden change of heart. Attention to the narrative sequence
does not seem to help us here because directly before Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra speaks
these words, Duryodhana has told him that if they gamble with the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas, then they can stand on equal footing with them.4 9 Duryod-
hana has made similar points before, so it is diffi cult to see why this
statement in particular persuades Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra. What makes Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra’s
sudden change of heart so puzzling is that he gives in at the precise mo-
ment when he sees clearly that the game will have disastrous conse-
quences.5 0 So why does Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra give in? The text suggests several
causes without privileging one. Was he beaten down by Duryodhana’s
relentless harangue? 51 Did Duryodhana’s threats of suicide tug at his
heart? 52 Did wisdom fi nally give way to desire for power? Was he impelled
by fate (d aiva , dh ā t ṛ )5 3 or by his aff ection for his son (s utapriya )? 54 What-
ever the cause of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s change of heart, the text’s strategies, by
fl ooding the text with possible causes without privileging one, transform
this question into a riddle-question. In so doing, it deliberately keeps
Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra’s reasons and emotions hidden from us.
Once Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra acquiesces to his son’s wishes, he descends into con-
fusion. His perturbed state of mind and the unfortunate decisions that he
makes as a result further encourage alienation from him. His conversa-
tion with Vidura right after he agrees to allow the game illustrates his
befuddlement most clearly. Here Vidura, who has just learned that
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra has given in to his son, tells Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a that he (Vidura) does
not approve of the game because dicing will lead to a quarrel (k alaha ).5 5
49. 2.51.13.
50. Immediately after Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra submits to his son he says, “For all this was previously
seen in just this way by Vidura who is wise and intelligent. It is just this that leads to the
great calamity of the one who is powerless, destroying the seeds of the k ṣ atriyas .” 2.51.15.
51. Duryodhana expends considerable verbal and emotional energy in an eff ort to convince his
father to sanction the game. Almost one hundred ś lokas are devoted to his report to his father
concerning the treasures that he received on Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s behalf at the royal consecration.
52. See 2.45.45.
53. 2.45.55, 2.45.57, and 2.51.25. See chapter 5 for a discussion of the various Sanskrit terms
used for fate in the M ahā bhā rata and their semantic nuances. Also see chapter 5 for a more
extensive discussion of the role of fate in the dicing scene.
54. The narrative voice suggests this at line 2.66.27 and Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra suggests this at line
2.72.36.
55. 2.51.24.
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 87
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra refuses to listen to Vidura’s advice, even though he himself
had expressed similar concerns earlier.5 6 Mysteriously, he says to his
brother:
Steward, there will be no quarrel between my sons and my other
sons.5 7 The gods in heaven will favor us, there is no doubt.5 8
What is curious about Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s response to Vidura here is that where
he saw danger moments before, he now sees the favor of the gods. In a
very short period of time, it seems, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s vision of the world has
been upended, prompting the question, again, of the source of his sudden
reversal.
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s silence during the dice game encourages estrangement
from him. The fact that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a says nothing as the unthinkable
events unfold, as Draupadī is summoned into the hall by Duryodhana,
dragged by her hair, stripped, and abused, is astounding. Other characters
note his silence and take him to task for it (Draupadī does so at 2.60.34
and Vikarṇ a does so at 2.61.13). In spite of their admonishment, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
continues to say and do nothing. Since he is perhaps the only character
who has the power to stop Duryodhana, his silence is a tacit approval of
his son’s actions. And while Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a is the one who fi nally off ers
Draupadī the boons that save her and her husbands, the text is careful to
note that he does so only at Vidura and Gā ndh ā rī’s bidding.5 9 It is not at all
clear that he would have done so on his own.
At the end of the game of dice, after the Pā ṇ ḍ avas have left for the
forest and after the enmity between the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and Kauravas seems ir-
reversible, clarity of vision returns to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a just as suddenly and
inexplicably as blindness struck earlier. His lucidity here is staggering. He
sees that a war between the P ā ṇ ḍ avas and Kauravas is inevitable,6 0 he
understands that Vidura’s advice was correct and that he was unable to
heed it because of his attachment to his son (literally, “his desire for that
56. 2.46.12.
57. Literally, “by my sons on my other sons” (p utreṣ u putrair m e).
58. 2.45.53.
59. 2.63.24.
60. 2.72.1.
88 disorienting dharma
which is advantageous for his son” [p utrahitepsā ]).6 1 What is so heart-
breaking about Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s clarity here is that it comes too late. If only he
had been able to maintain a balanced mind as the events unfolded and
restrained his son as a result, the outcome of this episode could have been
so diff erent, and untold suff ering—not only Draupadī ’s, but that of virtu-
ally every other character in the epic (suff ering caused by the war and its
devastation)—could have been avoided. Because the text deliberately em-
phasizes the abruptness of the return of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s mental clarity and
provides no real account of its sources, it encourages us to remain dis-
tanced from him.
What kind of work does this estrangement from Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra do? From
this distanced viewpoint, we are encouraged to refl ect on the question of
what motivated Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s sudden reversals from clear vision to blind-
ness and then from blindness to clear vision again. Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a himself
provides a partial answer to this question at the very end of the episode.
Listen as he speaks to Saṃ jaya:
When the gods wish to bring disaster to a person, they remove that
person’s intelligence so that one sees matters backwards. When de-
struction is imminent and one’s intelligence is perverted the wrong
course appears as the right one and does not leave one’s heart.
When destruction is near that which is fruitless appears fruitful
and that which is fruitful appears fruitless and one is pleased. Time
does not raise a club and clobber a person’s head. The power of
time is just this inverted vision of matters.6 2
While Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra makes several important points here, I want to high-
light two of them: fi rst, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra focuses on the mind as the root of
misfortune; second, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a provides an account of the confused or
“perverted” mind, which he says causes the right course to appear wrong
(or more precisely, fruitless, a nartha ) and the wrong course to appear right
(fruitful, artha ).
What we learn about the role of mental confusion in human suff ering
from Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s speech here conjoined with what we learned about the
61. 2.72.36.
62. 2.72.8–11. Interestingly, in the Vulgate, this speech is put in the mouth of Sa ṃ jaya.
Vidura repeats the speech almost word for word to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a when he off ers words of
comfort and advice to the blind king in T he Book of the Eff ort (5.34.78–79).
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 89
signifi cance of the quality of a person’s mental attitude in our analysis of
Duryodhana provide specifi c insights into the forces that impel human
beings to commit acts of cruelty and thus produce suff ering. How? In our
analysis of the depiction of both Duryodhana and Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, we noticed
that both characters were overcome by powerful emotions;6 3 subsequently
they succumbed to mental confusion which, as in Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s words,
caused them to see “the wrong course” as “the right one” and vice versa.
As a direct result of this inverted vision, both characters committed acts
and/or made decisions that resulted in cruelty, acts and decisions that
caused the suff ering of others (Draupadī in particular). Neither of the two
characters saw their actions as cruel; instead they saw them as somehow
proper. We must understand, however, that while both Duryodhana and
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra are agents of suff ering,6 4 they are also victims of despair. Their
own inner turmoil impels them to make the decisions they make. Suf-
fering, it seems, only begets more suff ering. More precisely, once one
succumbs to sorrow (caused by one’s emotional responses to what one
sees in the world), one becomes confused, one’s vision becomes inverted,
and the wrong course appears as the right one and vice versa. Conse-
quently, one commits acts of cruelty (acts that cause others to suff er),
without seeing these acts as wrong, but, on the contrary, seeing them as
somehow proper.6 5
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira
The presentation of Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira in this episode constitutes a somewhat
special case. While we have witnessed Duryodhana and Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a
commit morally questionable acts before the dicing scene, 66 Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira
63. Duryodhana is overcome by jealousy and despair due to the grand success of his
cousins. Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a is overcome by sorrow caused by witnessing Duryodhana’s anguish
and possibly his own desire for power.
64. To be more precise, one might say that Duryodhana is an active agent, while Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
is a passive one because he “gives into” his weakness for his son, his greed, and so on. See
B. K. Matilal, “Dharma and Rationality,” in E thics and Epics: The Collected Essays of Bimal
Krishna Matilal , ed. Jonardon Ganeri (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 61–62 .
65. See 2.62–63 of the Bhagavadgīt ā where K ṛ ṣ ṇ a discusses a similar chain of events that
lead to a person’s downfall. Irawati Karve comments on this passage in Y ug ā nta: The End of
an Epoch (New Delhi: Sangam Press, 1974), 136 .
66. Most notably, Duryodhana attempted to kill Bhīma and both Duryodhana and
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra exiled the Pā ṇ ḍ avas to Vā raṇ ā vata in order to gain control of the throne.
90 disorienting dharma
up to this point has been, for the most part, a paragon of virtue. Signifi -
cantly, he is the son of Dharma and is frequently referred to as “the
Dharma king” (d harmar ā ja ). Therefore, at the outset, we have a tremen-
dous amount of trust in him and his abilities to perceive d harma . Further,
we have been encouraged by the epic’s strategies to travel with him. Up to
this point he has served, for the most part, as our eyes and ears for dis-
cerning right and wrong in the epic. However, in this episode Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira,
for perhaps the fi rst time in the text, explicitly displays morally troubling
behavior: he accepts the invitation to dice for mysterious reasons, he gam-
bles irresponsibly, and he is a passive witness to Draupadī ’s violation in
the assembly hall.6 7 In what follows I explore how the text encourages es-
trangement from Yudhiṣ ṭ hira. As in the case of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s
journey begins with clear vision and then degenerates rapidly into confu-
sion. However, unlike Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira never regains clear vision
in the dicing episode; we do not witness him return to balance and control
until we meet him again in the next book, in The Forest Book, when the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas begin their thirteen years in exile.
When Vidura approaches Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira to summon him to Hā stinapura,
Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira sees the dangers of the game immediately and is reluctant to
acquiesce. He tells Vidura:
Dicing will bring destruction upon us, steward. Who, knowing this,
would consent to a game?6 8
67. Van Buitenen argues that the motivating factors of Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s remarkable behavior
can be found in the structure of the Vedic r ā jasūya ritual and thus Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s morality was
not aff ected by engaging in the gaming. See J. A. B. van Buitenen, “On the Structure of the
Sabh ā parvan of the Mahā bhā rata ” in India Maior: Congratulatory Volume Presented to J.
Gonda , ed. J. Ensink and P. Gaeff ke (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1972), 68–84 and van Buitenen, in-
troduction to T he Mahā bhā rata , Vol . 2, 5 . For a rebuttal of this view, see Renate Söhnen-
Thieme, “On the Composition of the D yūtaparvan in the Mahā bhā rata ” in Composing a
Tradition: Concepts, Techniques and Relationships: Proceedings of the First Dubrovnik Interna-
tional Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purā na.s, August 1997 , ed. Mary Brockington and
Peter Schreiner (Zagrab: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts, 1999), 139–154 . Shulman
too is somewhat skeptical of van Buitenen’s thesis, noting that “[if] the epic dice-match is a
refl ection of, or even a commentary upon the Vedic model, then it clearly stands in a some-
what ironic relation to the prototype.” S hulman, “Devana and Daiva,” 353 . Shulman justifi es
his position by noting that in the Vedic royal consecration (which leads up to a game of dice
played by the king) the king never loses the match, whereas Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira “fails spectacularly
to win.” For additional scholarship on the position of the Vedic dice game in the life of the
king see Paul Bowlby, “Kings without Authority: The Obligation of the Ruler to Gamble in
the Mah ā bhā rata ,” Studies in Religion /Sciences Religieuses 20 (1991): 3–17 .
68. 2.52.10.
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 91
Next, he asks Vidura to name the specifi c gamblers whom he will play.
After Vidura tells him, Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira remarks that they are all very dan-
gerous and play with tricks ( m ā y ā ).6 9 At the very outset, then, Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira
seems to assess the situation correctly, just as we might expect him to. He
even seeks Vidura’s advice, and Vidura tells him that although the game
will bring disaster, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira is “wise” (v idv ā ṃ s ),7 0 and he should do as
he sees fi t.7 1 Therefore, there is every indication that Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira has the
means and the opportunity to act wisely in this situation.
However, instead of refusing the game, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira informs Vidura
that he will accept the challenge because he feels obligated to do so. Why?
Again, the epic provides several answers without privileging any one.
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira himself gives three reasons: (1) because he must obey his
“father” (presumably in accordance with kula , or family, dharma );7 2
(2) because he has vowed to accept all challenges (in accordance with
k ṣ atriya dharma ); 73 and (3) because of fate (d h ā t ṛ ).7 4 Taken together, these
reasons generate more questions than answers. 7 5 Was Yudhiṣ ṭ hira moti-
vated by only o ne of them, or by all three? If the answer is the latter, then
what does it mean to be impelled by d harma and by fate at the same time?
What is the relationship between the two? Is Yudhiṣ ṭ hira simply confused
here? If so, why? By fl ooding the text with several possible motivating
forces without privileging one, the epic’s strategies transform the question
of what caused Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira to accept the challenge to dice into another
riddle-question. By rendering Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s reasons and motives a mys-
tery to us, the text encourages us to feel estranged from Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira, King
Dharma, for what may be one of the fi rst times in the epic.
Once Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira agrees to play dice, he, like Duryodhana and
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra before him, begins to spin out of control; his erratic behavior
69. 2 .52.14.
70. L iterally, Vidura says that the dice game is the root of meaninglessness ( anarthamūla ).
2.52.11.
71. 2.52.11.
72. 2.52.15.
73. 2.52.16 and 2.53.13.
74. 2.52.18. For an analysis of the diff erent terms for fate, see chapter 5 .
75. Later, in the forest in an astonishing moment, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira tells Bhīma that he accepted
the dice game because he wanted to take the Kauravas’ kingdom away from Duryodhana.
3.35.2.
92 disorienting dharma
further encourages distance from him. When Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira fi rst sits down
to play with Śakuni, he is wary, telling Śakuni that gambling is evil (p ā p ā ).7 6
He begins the game cautiously: his fi rst stake is a string of pearls. But after
he loses the fi rst throw, he seems to become unhinged for mysterious
reasons. Accusing Śakuni of confusing him with a “trick”,7 7 he stakes a
thousand jars full of gold pieces. In the following seventeen throws,
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira loses all his wealth, his kingdom, his brothers, himself, and
his beloved wife, Draupadī. Such reckless behavior is utterly disconsonant
with the calm, judicious character that we have come to know up to this
point in the text.
After staking and losing Draupadī, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s behavior takes an-
other surprising turn. His confused and reckless behavior gives way to
stupefi ed silence. When the usher poses Draupadī ’s famous question to
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira (Whom did you lose fi rst—yourself or me?), Yudhiṣ ṭ hira is
“motionless” (n iśce ṣ ṭ a ), “lifeless” ( gatasattva ), and fails to reply.7 8 His fail-
ure to respond mobilizes Duryodhana, who orders Draupadī to be brought
into the hall a third and fi nal time. Duh.ś ā sana complies, and Draupadī is
molested and humiliated before all the kings including Yudhiṣ ṭ hira. When
Bhī ṣ ma fi nally calls on Yudhiṣ ṭ hira to decide the matter according to his
interpretation of d harma , that is whether Draupadī has really been won or
not, Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira does not utter a single word. Indeed, the text does not
even register a reaction from the Dharma King. What is so troubling about
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s decision to act as a silent/passive witness to Draupadī ’s
abuse is that it paves the way for further abuses that his wife must endure,
which makes his behavior seem not only puzzling, but cruel. 79 The ob-
vious question is, why is he silent? Is he too dejected to speak? Does he
know that he will entrap himself if he answers Draupadī ’s question?8 0 Is
he simply unfeeling? This question is another of the dicing episode’s
many riddle-questions, and because the epic’s strategies do not provide an
explicit reason for why Yudhiṣ ṭ hira acts as a passive witness, his failure to
76. 2.53.2.
77. 2.54.1.
78. 2.60.9.
79. Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira makes this point himself at 3.35.17; it haunts him.
80. See v an Buitenen, T he Mah ā bhā rata, Vol. 2, 817 , and Hiltebeitel, R ethinking the Mahabhā rata ,
262.
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 93
speak up and attempt to stop the molestation of his wife renders our alien-
ation from Yudhiṣ ṭ hira complete.8 1
Disengaged from Yudhiṣ ṭ hira, we are encouraged to refl ect on the
sources of his erratic and mysterious behavior. Much is at stake in this
question, for Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira is, after all, King Dharma. With respect to the
depiction of Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira in this episode, the epic’s narrative strategies
make two things clear: that Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira felt obligated to accept the game of
dice because of d harma and because of fate and that once he began to play
dice, he became maddened (or confused) by the dice game. 82 The rub is
this: like Duryodhana and Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira makes a decision that
leads to the dice game, but unlike his cousin and his uncle he makes this
decision, at least in part, in the name of d harma —that is, because of his
commitment to upholding virtue. (Note that while Duryodhana is con-
cerned with the “conduct” (v ṛ tta ) of kings, he is not concerned with the
“dharma” of kings and explicitly states this at 2.50.16.)8 3 Several uncom-
fortable implications follow. First, the path of d harma potentially leads to
suff ering, and/or second, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s ability to perceive d harma is some-
how fl awed, for how could Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira feel morally obligated to accept the
81. For diff erent interpretations of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s silence, see Mary Brockington, “Husband
or King? Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s Dilemma in the Mahā bh ā rata ,” I ndo-Iranian Journal 44/3 (2001):
253–263 and Mary Brockington, “Husband or Slave? Interpreting the Hero of the
Mah ā bhā rata ,” in E pic Undertakings , ed. Robert P. Goldman and Muneo Tokunaga (Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 2009), 23–32 . In the latter article Brockington justifi es Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s
behavior by arguing that as a slave, his d harma is to say and do nothing. However, this inter-
pretation does not explain his reckless behavior during the actual game, before he becomes
a slave. In Dharma, Adharma, and Morality in the Mah ā bh ā rata , A. N. Bhattacharya justifi es
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s disturbing behavior here in terms of a narrative requirement to bring about
the war, an unsatisfactory solution from a literary standpoint because it shortchanges the
literary genius of the epic. See A. N. Bhattacarya, Dharma, Adharma, and Morality in the
Mahā bh ā rata (Delhi: S.S. Publishers, 1992), 8 . These various attempts to justify Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s
behavior point to just how disturbing this scene is. It is also important to note that charac-
ters themselves are critical of Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s behavior, most notably, Draupadī (see 3.31.1–6
where she suggests that Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira is overly attached to d harma and 4.17.1–29 for her
speech verbalizing the sorrows of having a husband like Yudhiṣ ṭ hira). On this issue, see also
Nancy Falk, “Draupadī and the Dharma,” in B eyond Androcentrism: New Essays on Women
and Religion , ed. Rita M. Gross (Missoula, MT: Scholars Press, 1977), 97 , and Bailey, “Suf-
fering in the M ahā bhā rata ,” 41–51 .
82. He himself says he was confused (m atta ) by Śakuni’s trick (at 2.54.1) as does the usher
(at 2.60.4). Draupadī says that he was bewildered ( mū ḍ ha ) and maddened (m atta ) by his
passion (m ada ). She says this, however, when she fi rst learns of his stake and before she sees
him. 2.60.5.
83. For a discussion of Duryodhana and his version of k ṣ atriya dharma , see David Gitomer,
“King Duryodhana,” 222–232 .
94 disorienting dharma
invitation to dice at the same time that he knew that it would lead to a di-
vision in the family and to disaster? 84 By encouraging us to contemplate
both these possibilities, the text directs us to question our assumptions
and our expectations with respect to Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira as a moral guide and with
respect to d harma as a category that helps us navigate the world. Perhaps
we have too much confi dence in either the character or the category, or
both. An important question that we should keep in mind is “What is the
reason for eroding our confi dence in both characters (particularly “vir-
tuous” characters) and conceptual categories (particularly moral ones) in
this manner?” One thing, however, is clear from the depiction of
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira in this episode: from the dice game forward, we are encour-
aged to abandon our trust in King Dharma as a moral guide. What, if
anything, is off ered as a replacement?
What sort of “clues” do the narrative strategies provide to help us deci-
pher Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s mysterious behavior? Do they suggest that he became
confused and succumbed to inverted vision as Duryodhana and Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
before him? While the text does not explicitly state that he became con-
fused b efore he entered the game, his behavior seems to indicate that this
is the case. When Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira accepts the invitation to the dice game, he
repeats Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s fatalistic statements almost word for word. At 2.51.25
when Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra tells Vidura that he must sanction the game, he says
mysteriously, “It is well known that this [world] is under the control of
destiny through the Ordainer.” At 2.52.14 Yudhiṣ ṭ hira tells Vidura exactly
the same thing. This parallel suggests that whatever motivated Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
to sanction the game (confusion, as noted above), most likely motivated
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira to agree to participate in it.8 5
The Work of Estrangement
In light of our analysis of the depiction of Duryodhana, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, and
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira in the episode of the dice game, we can now stand back and
ask: What is the purpose of the distancing eff ect that the epic’s narrative
strategies encourage? As discussed above, this estrangement promotes “a
84. Perhaps Yudhiṣ ṭ hira is overly attached to d harma and his desire obstructs his vision. As
previously mentioned, Draupadī suggests this at 3.31.1–10.
85. Whether or not these parallel statements mean that these characters actually were
impelled by fate or by other forces is a question that is left unanswered by the text.
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 95
moment of refl ection.” By creating distance between the audience and the
characters, the epic’s strategies direct us to stand back and question why
each one of these characters made the disastrous decisions that he did.
While the narrative strategies do not provide an explicit answer to this
question (instead they mystify the issue by fl ooding the text with several
possible causes in order to eff ect the distance), they do provide “clues” that
enable us to refl ect critically on the mystery through their strategic deploy-
ment of the motifs of clear vision and blindness on the one hand, and
mental clarity and confusion on the other. These clues, aggregative in
their eff ect, encourage specifi c insights into the forces that produce
despair. If we piece together these clues, we see the following dynamic at
work. Each character who agreed to either implement, sanction, or partic-
ipate in the game of dice was overtaken by powerful emotions. Duryod-
hana was overtaken by jealousy and greed, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a by anxiousness
over the well-being of his son and possibly a desire for power, and
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira by anger and possibly greed (see his statement at 3.52.2). Sub-
sequently, each character succumbed to mental confusion and inverted
vision.8 6 As a result of this inverted vision, each character made decisions
and took actions (that is, to move forward with the game) that had disas-
trous consequences, decisions and actions that caused great suff ering
both to the character and to those around him, and each did so without
seeing these decisions and actions as “wrong,” or fruitless ( anartha ).
Instead, each saw his decisions and actions as somehow “good,” or fruitful
( artha ), or necessary. In sum, what the narrative strategies of estrange-
ment encourage is the following insight into the forces that produce suf-
fering, which can be articulated in the form of a chain of events: improper
responses (like greed, envy, or anger) to what one “sees” in the external
world generate mental turbulence. Mental turbulence, in turn, causes
inverted vision (where the wrong course appears as the right one and vice
versa). Inverted vision then leads to bad decisions which have disastrous
consequences and can lead to great suff ering. In this case, the misguided
decisions of the three characters under review lead not only to Draupadī ’s
despair, but to the suff ering of virtually every character in the epic, since
the dice game provides a direct route to war.
The text, then, through its strategies of estrangement provides a cer-
tain kind of argument about the existence of suff ering and the forces that
86. For each character the “right course” appears as the wrong one, etc.
96 disorienting dharma
cause it through its strategies of estrangement. To probe into the work of
estrangement even further, let us consider its implications for psycholog-
ically overcoming suff ering: If one were to gain the abovementioned
insights into the roots of suff ering, one would both be motivated to change
in way “ x” by the content of the argument and c hanged in way “y ” by the
form of the argument.
First, let us look at how one would be motivated to change by the
content of the argument. The assumption here is that if one “saw” into
the nature of the roots of suff ering, then one would at the same time be
encouraged to transform oneself in such a way that one would no longer
be subject to despair. In what specifi c way would one be encouraged to
change? The abovementioned argument not only provides an account of
the forces that produce suff ering (i.e., strong emotions and a turbulent
mind), but also, at the same time, contains implicit recommendations
for how to free oneself from suff ering (i.e., by cultivating a balanced
mind that is not subject to being overwhelmed). Here the concept of
contentment (s aṃ to ṣ a, śama ) that is praised by Saṃ jaya, Vidura, and
other advisors (i.e., those characters in the text who work to, among
other things, eliminate suff ering, “the advisors against grief”) seems
particularly relevant.
Further, one is changed in way “y” by the form of the argument. Just as
important as the content of this argument (articulated above) is the form
in which it is delivered. To determine this argument’s form, it is helpful to
think about the way in which the “clues” discussed above were presented
to us. They were not “spoon-fed” to us; no explicit answers were provided
by the text with respect to the motivational forces that led each of the three
characters to make their disastrous decisions. Instead, we noted that the
text directed us to work for our insights into why the characters behaved
the way they did. This “work” took place at the moment of estrangement
where, as argued above, the narrative strategies disengaged us from the
characters and directed us to refl ect for ourselves on the forces that caused
Duryodhana, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, and Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira to make the decisions that they
did, decisions that caused suff ering both for themselves and for those
around them. This moment of refl ection is where the “real work” of the
narrative takes place because it is precisely at such moments that the text
directs us to search inside ourselves for understanding. Further, it is pre-
cisely this refl exive activity that is encouraged by the text’s strategies that
attempts to make us not only active and open participants in the drama
of the characters, but encourages us to develop the faculties that will
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 97
transform the act of “seeing” itself. (Abhinavagupta uses the image of the
heart being polished like a mirror to describe what happens to the s ahṛ daya ,
or the sensitive reader/listener, when he or she becomes able to sympa-
thetically respond to the poem or drama.)8 7
ī
The Depiction of Draupad in the Dice Game
As mentioned earlier, the depiction of Draupadī ’s abuse in the dicing epi-
sode is one of the most disturbing scenes of human cruelty and affl iction
in Indian literature.8 8 In this section we will consider the “work” of the
depiction of Draupadī as a victim of cruelty and suff ering. Immediately
after Yudhiṣ ṭ hira stakes and loses Draupadī, Duryodhana orders her to be
brought into the hall as his slave. Draupadī refuses, sending the usher
back with a question. Duryodhana sends Duh.ś ā sana after her. He seizes
her by the hair and drags her half-naked and in her menses into the as-
sembly hall of men, a place where virtuous women are not supposed to be
seen. In this wretched state, Draupadī stands before her husbands and
elders, humiliated and shamed, pleading the injustice of her treatment,
and urging the members of the hall to save her from Duryodhana’s vil-
lainous designs (designs that result in what Nancy Falk has called “a
sequence of the most intense insults to be found anywhere in the litera-
ture of the world”).8 9 She asks how it is possible that she, surrounded by
her family, has no protectors:
The Pā ṇ ḍ avas who did not allow me to be touched by the wind in
my house, they now allow me to be touched by this villain. The
Kauravas allow their undeserving daughter-in-law to be tormented.
I think of the changes brought about by time. What is more
87. See Masson and Patwardhan, A esthetic Rapture , 5–6 .
88. See Falk, “Draupadī and the Dharma,” 89–114 and Sally J. Sutherland, “Sītā and
Draupadī: Aggressive Behavior and Female Role Models in the Sanskrit Epics,” J ournal of the
American Oriental Society 109/1 (1989): 63–79 .
89. Falk, “Draupadī and the Dharma,” 99–101 . These insults, according to Falk, include
Duryodhana’s comments about sweeping (the occupation of low-caste groups and a pol-
luting act); being subjected to the public gaze (wives of kings were not to be subjected to the
view of others), doubly off ensive because she is menstruating and thus a source of pollution;
being dragged by her hair (the head was considered sacred; to touch it violently was consid-
ered to be an act of defi lement); and being exposed to Duryodhana’s left thigh (a seat
reserved for wives and lovers).
98 disorienting dharma
wretched than this, that I, a virtuous woman, was forced to enter
the assembly hall of men? Where is the d harma of kings?9 0
Shockingly, her entreaties are met with stupefi ed silence. This silence pro-
vides Duryodhana and his cronies with the freedom to proceed with their
cruelty. Kar ṇ a deems her a whore and orders her to be stripped.9 1 The fi nal
insult comes when Duryodhana exposes his left thigh to her, an explicit
sexual invitation and attempt at utter humiliation.
Draupadī is dragged, seized, held down, shaken, ridiculed, called “a
slave” ( d ā sī ), and almost fully stripped. 92 Further, the text notes “her
pallid (v ivar ṇ a ) face,” “her bleak spirits” (d urmanas ), and “her shameful-
ness” ( hrīmant ).9 3 By emphasizing the fact that she is violated precisely
where she should be most safe (literally, that she is “unprotected amongst
her protectors” [n ā thavatīm anā thavat ]), the Mah ā bh ā rata points to a
dark truth: if Draupadī can be treated in this way, among precisely these
people, then absolutely no human being is protected from a reversal of
fortune so extreme that a queen may be reduced to a slave (here defi ned
as someone who is divested of everything, even his/her self) in the
matter of moments.
However, more should be said here about the kind of sensitivities
and intuitions that the strategies promote here, for it could be main-
tained that this one episode transforms the sensibility of the entire epic
by introducing an aesthetic of despair that permeates the remaining
sixteen books of the text. Why does Draupadī ’s violation cut so deep?
What is it about this episode that is so unsettling for almost every char-
acter in the text?9 4 I suggest that it is the presence of those elders, kings,
90. 2.62.6–8.
91. 2.61.40. Draupadī is never fully stripped, however, because of her miraculous, inex-
haustible sarīs . For a good discussion of this scene and its variants, see Hiltebeitel,
“Rethinking the M ahā bh ā rata ,” 250–257 . Both the Northern and Southern recensions
include Draupadī ’s appeal to Kṛ ṣ ṇ a during the time of her stripping, implying that
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a was the source of the miracle. This plea to K ṛ ṣ ṇ a, however, is not included in the
Critical Edition.
92. 2.60.24–41.
93. 2.60.21, 2.60.28, 2.60.35.
94. Examples of characters who refer to Draupadī ’s violation and how it haunts them are
Kuntī (in a very moving speech at 5.8. 84–87), Kṛ ṣ ṇ a (3.13.5–6), and Yudhiṣ ṭ hira (5.26.15 and
18.1.7–7).
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 99
and family members in the assembly hall who act as passive witnesses
to Draupadī ’s abuse. The elders, who have studied the ś ā stras and per-
formed the rituals are speechless in the face of what appears to be a
gross transgression of d harma . 95 Draupadī ’s husbands and protectors,
perhaps the most powerful men in the world, are mute and powerless
before this unthinkable violation of their wife. They fail her in one of
their most important dharmic duties as kings: protection.9 6 Not only
do Draupadī ’s husbands and her elders fail her, but, by extension,
ś ā stric learning fails her; ritual sacrifices fail her; familial ties fail her;
her standing in society fails her. So too does her virtue fail her; d harma
fails her. By calling into question these categories that serve to main-
tain and uphold societal structures, the depiction of Draupadī in this
episode encourages us to question their effectiveness. For example,
what is the purpose of class (i.e., v ar ṇ a ) if a queen can be treated as a
slave? What becomes of the categories “wife,” “husband,” “daughter,”
when Draupadī is treated thus before her husbands and her father-in-
law? Draupadī later in the forest will say that she has no husbands, no
father, no friends precisely because these familial ties failed her during
the dice game.9 7 If such categories are shown to be ineffective, as they
are for Draupadī here, then the question becomes: “Precisely what pro-
tects human beings from cruelty and suffering?” Nothing? At the most
basic level—stripped of all protective categories—what is a human
being? 98
One of the overarching questions that the text encourages us to ask in
light of Draupadī ’s gross violation is “How does one conduct oneself in a
world that holds out the possibility of sudden misfortune?” None of the
epic’s characters forget what happened to Draupadī in the assembly
hall. 99 Nor does the text ever allow its audiences to forget. The trope of the
95. Draupadī says: “In the hall are men who have studied the books. All follow the rites and
are like Indras.” 2.60.29.
96. Nancy Falk, “Draupadī and the Dharma,” 102 . For more on the signifi cance of rakṣ a ṇ a ,
or protection, in the M ahā bh ā rata , see Fitzgerald, The Mah ā bhā rata , Vol. 7, 10–13 .
97. 3.13.59–110.
98. Or, as Hiltebeitel formulates it, “What is the self?” See Rethinking the Mahabhā rata ,
260–261.
99. For more on the theme of Draupadī ’s suff ering in the epic, see Bailey, “Suff ering in the
Mahā bh ā rata ,” 41–51 .
100 disorienting dharma
abandoned, unprotected wife is reenacted over and over, but never as dra-
matically and poignantly as in this scene.1 00
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice
Now let us leave the sphere of character (the fi rst sphere in the aesthetics
of suff ering) and move to that of the conceptual category (the second
sphere) as we turn our attention to the presentation of dharma in the epi-
sode of the dice game. This discussion will center on Draupadī ’s question
to Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira (Whom did you lose fi rst—yourself or me?), its impact on
the hall (i.e., how it renders the elders in the hall silent and passive), and
its impact on us, the audience. What does this question, which leads to a
tangled discussion about the nature of d harma , and more signifi cantly its
answer, or lack thereof, reveal to us about the relationship between d harma
and human sorrow?
Before we embark on a discussion of d harma in this episode, let us fi rst
revisit the details of Draupadī ’s question to Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and to the as-
sembly hall and the response that it receives. After Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira stakes and
loses Draupadī to the Kauravas, Duryodhana orders an usher to bring
Draupadī into the hall as slave to the Kauravas. When the usher ap-
proaches her, Draupadī, not missing a beat, quizzes him about the details
of Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s stake. Upon learning the relevant information, she sends
the usher back with a question for Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira and for the hall: “Bh ā rata,
whom did you lose fi rst—yourself or me?”1 01 Upon returning to the hall,
the usher tells Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira: “Draupadī asks: ‘Whose master were you
100. Draupadī is “abandoned” and violated twice more. Once in The Book of the Forest
(3.248–257) and once in T he Book of Virā ṭ a (5.13–24). For scholarship on Draupadī ’s “other
indignities,” see Simon Brodbeck, “Gendered Soteriology: Marriage and the K armayoga,” in
Gender and Narrative in the Mah ā bhā rata , ed. Simon Bodbeck and Brian Black (New York:
Routledge: 2009), 158 . See also “The Story of Nala” where Damayantī is abandoned by her
husband, Nala (3.50–80) and “Śakuntalā ” in T he Book of the Beginning . (1.62–70). According
to Bailey, the “account of Draupadī ’s suff ering is in essence the story of the epic as a whole,”
(“Suff ering in the Mahā bhā rata ,” 43).
101. 2 .60.7. Van Buitenen calls Draupadī ’s question “the ultimate riddle.” For scholarship
on Draupadī ’s question, see S. M. Kulkarni, “An Unresolved Dilemma in ‘ Dyūta-Parvan ’:
A Question Raised by Draupadī,” in M oral Dilemmas in the Mahā bhā rata , ed. B. K. Matilal
(New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1989), 150–156 ; Alf Hiltebeitel, “Draupadī ’s Question,”
in Is God a Feminist? The Politics of South Asian Goddesses , ed. Alf Hiltebeitel and Kathleen
M. Erndl (New York: New York University Press, 2000) 113–122 ; Hiltebeitel, R ethinking the
Mahā bh ā rata , 240–277 ; and M. A. Mehendale, “Draupadī ’s Question,” J ournal of the Orien-
tal Institute, Baroda 35/3–4 (1985): 179–194 .
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 101
when you lost us? Whom did you lose fi rst—yourself or me?’”1 02 Notice the
subtle shift in emphasis in the way the usher poses the question and the
way Draupadī did. Draupadī ’s question focused on the issue of sequence,
and the usher’s question focuses on the issue of ownership.1 03
Once the usher brings Draupadī ’s question to the hall, a tangled dis-
cussion about dharma takes place between the kings and elders in the
assembly. This discussion centers on two intimately connected ques-
tions. The fi rst is whether Draupadī ’s forced entrance into the hall is a
violation of d harma . The second is the validity of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s stake.
Vidura, the fi rst to raise the issue of the legality of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s stake,
urges the kings and the elders to answer Draupadī ’s question. Bhīṣ ma
tries and fails, deeming d harma too subtle (s ūk ṣ ma ) to be interpreted. 104
Vikar ṇ a, one of Duryodhana’s ninety-nine brothers, declares Draupadī
free because Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira was under the infl uence of the dice when he
staked her, but Vikarṇ a is summarily dismissed by the others in the
hall. 105 Desperate to provide Draupadī with an answer to her question,
Bhīṣ ma appeals to Yudhiṣ ṭ hira as “the authority” ( pram ā ṇ a )1 06 in these
matters, but Yudhiṣ ṭ hira, mysteriously, refuses to say a word. Despite
Vidura, Vikar ṇ a, and Draupadī ’s pleas, Droṇ a, Kṛ pa, and the other elders
in the hall, like Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira, fail to respond; they either refuse or are not
able to speak to Draupadī ’s question.
Why is practically no one in the hall willing or able to provide an answer
to Draupadī ’s question? The epic’s strategies, once again, do not supply us
with an explicit answer to this question. Indeed, by rendering the reasons
for the elders’ silence mysterious to us, the text encourages our estrange-
ment from them just as it encouraged our distance from Duryodhana,
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, and Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira.
The “work” of this estrangement, however, is somewhat diff erent in
nature. Here the text is not just targeting our confi dence in specifi c
102. 2.60.8.
103. Arjuna also reformulates it at 2.63.21.
104. 2.60.40. Draupadī also suggests this at 2.60.31. For scholarly assessments of Bhīṣ ma’s
behavior in this scene, see Hiltebeitel, R ethinking the Mah ā bhā rata , 247 ; Karve, Yug ā nta , 14 ;
Mehendale, “Draupadī ’s Question,” 194 ; and M. M. Thakur, Thus Spake Bhīṣ ma (Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1992), 141–147 .
105. 2.61.23–25.
106. 2.62.21.
102 disorienting dharma
characters, but is disorienting our beliefs about the category of d harma
itself.1 07 The elders in the assembly hall, ostensibly among the wisest
men in the land, are, we presume, specialists in interpreting d harma .1 08
The implication is that if anyone in the world of the text should be able
to determine the d harma of a situation, aside from Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira, it would
be they. However, they are either unable or unwilling to do so, and the
point in the story where they respond to Draupadī ’s question with utter
silence is one of the most hauntingly disturbing passages in the epic.
There are few other places in the text where the presence of absence is
more felt and undoes so much.
What is so disorienting about the silence of the elders? First, it calls
into question their ability to perceive d harma . This raises the question of
whether d harma can be perceived at all, an implicit anxiety that runs
through the text. 109 Second, this silence creates a rupture, and by “rupture”
is meant a gap in meaning, in both the assembly hall and in the text.1 10 In
the assembly hall, the silence of the elders leads to the suspension of judg-
ment, which provides Duryodhana with the freedom to move forward
with his villainous designs. In the text, the silence of the elders creates a
rupture, or gap in meaning, with respect to the category of dharma .1 11 The
text’s strategies disorient us by pulling the rug out from underneath our
assumptions and expectations about d harma (specifi cally, that the wisest
men in the kingdom should be able to interpret the right course of action,
and, by extension, that d harma is an interpretable force). In so doing, they
distance us from the world of the text in the same way that they distanced
us from characters above. Here the disengagement invites us to refl ect on
the fact that the most eminent brahmins in the hall, the Vedic scholars,
the gurus, the ritual performers are unable to determine the right course
of action.
107. Hiltebeitel also argues that this scene calls d harma into question. R ethinking the
Mah ā bh ā rata , 240.
108. They have after all studied the ś ā stras .
109. See, for example, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s famous statement that “the truth of d harma lies hidden
in a secret cave” at 3.313.117 in the Vulgate. Kinjawadekar, M ah ā bhā ratam with the Commen-
tary of Nīlaka ṇ ṭ ha .
110. It is important to note that while postmodern theorists argue that a text ruptures itself
beyond meaning, I am arguing that the M ahā bhā rata uses ruptures to produce meaning.
111. For a similar interpretation, see Bhattacharya, D harma-Adharma and Morality , 27 .
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 103
The larger issues here are “What is d harma ?” and “What is its rela-
tionship to suff ering?” The rub is this: no one in the hall with the excep-
tion of Duryodhana and his companions believed that Draupadī should
be dragged to the hall, stripped, and abused. It is because they are
trapped by their inability to speak to her question, possibly because of
their inability to interpret d harma , that they fail to act. This would sug-
gest that dharma ’s inscrutability paves the way for what would seem to
be one of d harma ’s greatest transgressions, the abuse of Draupadī in the
assembly hall of kings. If this is the case, then the category of d harma
itself is implicated in Draupadī ’s molestation and affl iction.1 12 Draupadī
herself seems to have assumed that her virtue would have protected her
from such treatment.1 13 Did we assume this as well? Now we are forced
to ask ourselves: If the path of d harma not only does not protect one
from misfortune and sorrow, but, on the contrary, potentially is impli-
cated in the problem of suff ering, is the dharmic path even a noble or
worthy pursuit?1 14
What does this unsettling link between d harma and suff ering have to
do with the M ah ā bh ā rata ’s ethical project? Through targeting and disori-
enting our expectations and assumptions about key conceptual cate-
gories, here dharma , the text suggests that there is some problem with
these categories, particularly in light of the issue of suff ering. Dharma is
a category that, supposedly, off ers conceptual clarity about the way the
world is ordered and to be navigated. It also, ostensibly, provides some
degree of security against suff ering. Hence, the text, in targeting d harma ,
suggests that d harma and categories like it (that is, categories that provide
conceptual clarity and security) are, in part, what blind us to the pervasive
existence of suff ering. The fact that the text also contains ruptures, or
gaps in meaning, that target these very categories, d harma especially and
most pervasively, implies that these categories must undergo a radical
re-evaluation. Why? Because they do not provide us with the conceptual
clarity and security that we long for. This implies that to recover a deeper,
truer understanding of dharma one would need to be reoriented to an
112. See Bailey, “Suff ering in the Mahā bhā rata ,” 41–51 ; Bhattacharya, Dharma-Adharma and
Morality , 27 ; and Hiltebeitel, R ethinking the Mahā bhā rata , 259
113. 2.62.5–10.
114. As he is dying, slain by Arjuna’s arrow, Karṇ a voices precisely this criticism of dharma ,
namely that it does not protect those who follow it. See 8.66.40–44.
104 disorienting dharma
understanding of it that would be divested of all pretenses of security.
One would, according to the logic of this understanding of the concept,
follow dharma for the sake of nothing.
The work of the rupture, then, directs us to recognize not only the
failure of these conceptual categories in this regard, but exposes, at the
same time, our longing for them not to fail, that is, our longing for
them to provide us with the comfort, security, and conceptual clarity
that we require in order to believe that we are protected from suff ering.
Through the process of rupture, the text orients us to a new way of
seeing, a way of seeing that is free from the confi nes of this longing.
The transformation of our relationship to these categories is crucial to
the task of confronting the problem of suff ering, for it is precisely our
sense of security and our belief (which is false) that we possess some
degree of conceptual clarity about the world and the way it is ordered
that protects us, to some extent, from sorrow and that keeps us from
recognizing, by extension, the extreme urgency of the task of moving
beyond it.
Conclusion
Let us stand back and refl ect for a moment on how the aesthetics of suf-
fering “worked” in the episode of the dice game. Through encouraging
our proximity and then estrangement from specifi c characters (namely
Duryodhana, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, and Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira) the text’s strategies directed
us to stand back and refl ect upon why the characters made the disastrous
decisions that they did. For example, in the case of Duryodhana we deter-
mined that a close analysis of the text’s strategies suggested, but did not
state explicitly, that the turbulent quality of his mind led to his disastrous
decisions and despicable behavior, which, as stated earlier, entails the de-
fi ning moment of cruelty ( n ṛ śamsya ) in the text. Thus the strategies sug-
gest that cruelty and by extension the suff ering that it generates are caused
by mental confusion (a kind of mental confusion which, as characterized
by Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, causes the right course to appear as the wrong one and
vice versa). At the same time, by encouraging us to be active participants
in the determination of the source of these characters’ disastrous decisions,
the text’s strategies also motivate us to safeguard ourselves from the very
forces to which these three characters succumbed (i.e., strong emotions
and a turbulent mind). Thus, embedded in this formulation is a powerful,
yet silent or “suggested,” argument for the signifi cance and urgency of
Dharma and Rupture in the Game of Dice 105
cultivating mental tranquility or contentment (s a ṃ to ṣ a , śama ), virtues that
are often praised by the text’s advisors against grief.1 15
With respect to the work of the strategies of rupture, it is important to
note that when the elders in the assembly hall, the dharma specialists,
respond to Draupadī ’s question with silence, a crisis in dharma is intro-
duced that pervades the remainder of the text. This crisis is created not by
what the elders say but what they do not say and the suggestions that arise
from the absence of an answer. This episode perhaps more than any other
in the epic demonstrates Ānandavardhana’s point that the most important
messages of a work of literature are delivered through d hvani , or sugges-
tion, through not being stated directly, precisely because this “silent” mo-
ment in the text creates so many powerful and hauntingly disorienting
reverberations throughout the text.
The next chapter, chapter 3 , builds on the discussions of estrangement
in this chapter by focusing on the depiction of a character now familiar to
us, Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ r a, and his role as both an agent and victim of suff ering. This
will be explored primarily through a discussion of his three characteristic
activities: vacillating, blaming, and lamenting. It should be noted that very
few scholars have focused on Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and his signifi cance in the
epic.1 16 This is surprising, especially given the fact that he is a central
character for the text’s aesthetics of suff ering.1 17
115. Virtues that are equivalent to Fitzgerald’s second sense of dharma in the Mah ā bhā rata
are the dharma of self-discipline, mental purity, and contentment. See the introduction to
this book.
116. Two notable exceptions are Krishna Chaitanya, T he Mahā bhā rata: A Literary Study (New
Delhi: Clarion Books, 1985), 45–64 , and Sinha, T he Mahā bh ā rata , 78–81 . Chaitanya devotes
half of a chapter to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a and his role in causing the war. Sinha focuses on Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s
grief.
117. Sinha, The Mah ā bh ā rata , 78 .
3
-
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhrtarastra
. ..
and Moral Blindness
Angry Duryodhana is the great tree, Karṇ a its trunk,
Śakuni the branches, Duḥśā sana the plentiful blossoms
and fruits, and foolish King Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra the root.1
Indeed no Sanskrit poet presents any character whose grief
could match the grief of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra as presented by the
poet of the Mah ā bh ā rata .
—j. p. sinha2
in the mah ā bhā rata , the blind king Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a is at the center of the
catastrophe that befalls the Bh ā ratas. His journey from passed-over pri-
mogeniture to ruler, to the loss of his kingdom and one hundred sons in
the Bh ā rata war has the pure arc of a tragic life. Whereas the source of his
downfall belongs to the domain of the M ahā bh ā rata’s many riddles, the
text explores Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s moral failure through the contrasting motifs of
vision/wisdom and blindness/ignorance. This contrast pivots on “the par-
adox of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a”: while the blind king often “sees” with insight, he
seldom makes decisions in accordance with it. Nowhere is this paradox
more apparent than in the way that Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a perceives the virtues and
the merits of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas on the one hand and the way he chooses to
treat them on the other. His failure to connect his insights with his actions
when making decisions concerning the fate of his nephews has tragic con-
sequences, since it fuels the enmity between the two sets of cousins and
contributes signifi cantly to the forces that lead to the war.
1. 1.1.65.
2. The Mahā bhā rata : A Literary Study , 78.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 107
The characterization of Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra is a central component of the text’s
aesthetics of suff ering for several reasons. First, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra is depicted as both
the quintessential agent and the victim of suff ering. On the one hand, he is
blamed for the war and its consequent devastation (more so than any other
character I would argue),3 and, on the other, he is utterly broken by the holo-
caust.4 After the battle, having lost all of his sons save one,5 Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra falls
victim to an intense and protracted grief, a state from which he never truly
recovers. Since he is an extreme example of both agent and victim of suff ering,
Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra plays a signifi cant part in the audience’s moral refi guration.
Second, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra rarely appears in the text without an “advisor-against-
grief” by his side (most often Vidura or Saṃ jaya). These advisors encourage
him to avoid making decisions that will lead to despair (both his own and
others’) and urge him to overcome his grief. Indeed, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ tra is the recip-
ient of several of the epic’s major arguments against grief. The extent to
which the blind king heeds the advice contained in these “arguments” infl u-
ences our relationship to him; it also determines what we learn from him
about the problem of suff ering, its causes, and the means to overcome it.
Third, the characterization of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra is interwoven with the issue
of time.6 This chapter will discuss three kinds of time—cosmological
3. See Chaitanya, The Mahā bhā rata , 45–64 ; Hill, Fate, Predestination, and Human Action ,
292 . K ṛ ṣ ṇ a blames him at 9.62.37–55; Sa ṃ jaya blames him throughout the battle books;
and Vy ā sa implies that he is to blame at 6.4.6. He is not the only character who is blamed.
4. Only Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s grief after the war rivals Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s postwar malaise.
5. Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a does have one son who survives the war: Yuyutsu, a bastard son.
6. For scholarship on the subject of time in the M ah ā bh ā rata , see V. M. Bedekar, “The
Doctrines of S vabh ā va and K ā la in the M ah ā bh ā rata and Other Old Sanskrit Works,” in T ime
in Indian Philosophy: A Collection of Essays , ed. Hari Shankar Prasad (Delhi: Sri Satguru, 1992),
187–202 ; Luis González-Reimann, T he Mah ā bh ā rata and the Yugas: India’s Great Epic Poem
and the Hindu System of World Ages (New York: Peter Lang, 2002), 20–50 ; Hill, F ate, Predesti-
nation, and Human Action , 196–223 ; Hiltebeitel, R ethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , 38–39, 89, 95,
166, 97 ; Sutton, R eligious Doctrines in the Mahā bh ā rata , 247–267 ; Yaraslov Vassilkov, “K ā lavā da
(the Doctrine of Cyclical Time) in the Mah ā bh ā rata and the Concept of Heroic Didactics,” in
Composing a Tradition: Concepts, Techniques and Relationships , ed. Mary Brockington and Peter
Schreiner (Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts, 1999), 17–34 . For scholarship on
time in the Indian tradition, see Anindita Niyogi Balslev, A Study of Time in Indian Philosophy
(Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1983) ; A nindita Niyogi Balslev, “Time and the Hindu Experi-
ence” in Religion and Time , ed. Anindita Niyogi Balslev and J. N. Mohanty (Leiden: E. J. Brill,
1993), 163–181 ; Ariel Glucklick, T he Sense of Adharma (New York: Oxford University Press,
1994), 38–66 ; Alf Hiltebeitel and Randy Kloetzli, “ K ā la ,” in The Hindu World , ed. Sushil Mittal
and Gene Thursby, 553–586 ; Angelika Malinar, ed., T ime in India: Concepts and Practices (New
Delhi: Manohar, 2007) ; and Romila Thapar, “Linear Time in Historical Texts of Early India,”
in India and Beyond: Aspects of Literature, Meaning, Ritual and Thought: Essays in Honour of Frits
Stall , ed. Dick van der Meij (London: Kegan Paul International, 1997), 562–574 .
108 disorienting dharma
time (time as the creator and destroyer of all beings in the world),7 sequen-
tial time (past, present, and future time relative to the sequence of the
events of the narrative), and consequential time (the inextricable link
between past, present, and future time and between act and conse-
quence). At two important points in the story, Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra appears in the
epic’s frame in the role of both listener and lamenter, in The Book of the
Beginning and in the four battle books. 8 In both cases Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra ex-
presses his sorrow in the context of a dialogue with Sa ṃ jaya. Time is a
central theme in these discussions. It is targeted as the cause of
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s suff ering (as a destructive force, the agent of the death
of his sons) and it is identifi ed by Saṃ jaya as the key to the elimination of
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s grief. How does Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s ignorance, particularly about
the nature of time, factor into his disastrous decisions? How does Saṃ jaya
attempt to help Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra move beyond his despair by encouraging him
to develop insight into the nature of time and its role in universal suf-
fering? Precisely what is the signifi cance of the fact that Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra ap-
pears at several important junctures in the epic’s frame in the role of
lamenter par excellence ?
To explore how the characterization of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra is a key element in
the epic’s aesthetics of suff ering, we will examine his depiction in terms of
its two predominant situational contexts: dilemmas and catastrophes.
Specifi cally, we will explore four narrative episodes in which Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a
functions as the quintessential lamenter, blamer, and /or vacillator: (1)
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s “When I heard . . . ” lament in the epic’s outermost frame in
The Book of the Beginning (Ādiparvan) , (2) Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s role in the failed
peace negotiations in T he Book of the Eff ort (Udyogaparvan) , (3) Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a
as war spectator and lamenter in the frame of the battle books, and (4)
Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ r a’s despairing reactions to the news of the Kauravas’ defeat in
The Book of the Women (Strīparvan). Along the way, we will also examine
the text’s deployment of two types of narrative strategies: estrangement
and temporal manipulation, and their role in the text’s presentation of
suff ering.
7 . With cosmological time there is an emphasis on time’s destructive and oppressive
capabilities. In chapter 4 , I refer to this type of time as the epic’s “ k ā lav ā da” or doctrine of time.
8. Brian Black notes that Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a and Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira are paradigmatic receivers, since
they are the characters who are most often presented as listeners in the epic. “Eavesdrop-
ping,” 57.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 109
-
Dh.rtar a s.. t ra’s “When I heard . . . ” Dirge:
The Lament as Summary
The central role that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a plays in the epic story—particularly in
the guise of the survivor of the cataclysmic Bhā rata war who is forced to
face the consequences of his bad decisions—is underscored by the fact
that Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra appears at the opening of the text, in the text’s outer
frame, to provide a summary of the central story in the form of a lament.
This is an important moment in the epic’s aesthetics of suff ering because
the entire central story is encapsulated in Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s lament—that is, in
the idiom of sorrow and regret. To explore the implications of the epic’s
choice of introducing the central story in this way, we will consider three
aspects of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s lament/summary: (1) the lament itself and what
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra reveals about himself in the course of it, (2) Saṃ jaya’s response
to the lament (i.e., his argument against grief), and (3) the location of the
lament in the epic’s introductory passages.
The Lament
As mentioned in the introduction to this book the M ahā bhā rata begins
when Ugraśravas, an expert in telling stories about kings and gods,
encounters a group of brahmins performing a ritual and agrees to narrate
the story of the M ah ā bh ā rata to them. However, Ugraśravas does not begin
by telling the story of the lineage of the Bh ā ratas. Instead, he fi rst makes
introductory comments about the glories of the story, its origin, its author,
and its contents. In the context of these introductory comments, Ugraśravas
provides a brief summary of the M ahā bh ā rata . 9 Directly after Ugraśravas’s
summary, Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra, a character whom Ugraśravas has not yet intro-
duced into the narrative, abruptly breaks into the narrative and speaks, pro-
viding a second summary of the epic. Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra’s summary is presented
in the form of a lament articulated by an aged father who has learned that
his favored son, Duryodhana, is dead and his entire army vanquished.1 0
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra responds to the devastating news by attempting to absolve
himself of blame. He assures Sa ṃ jaya that he did not favor his sons over
9. 1.1.67–95. This summary begins with Pā ṇ ḍ u’s decision to renounce his kingdom and
ends with the decimation of the k ṣ atriyas in the war.
10. The exact timing of this lament is not made explicit by the text.
110 disorienting dharma
his nephews, the Pā ṇ ḍ avas. 11 Instead, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a blames Duryodhana
for the war, arguing that a “bewildered” (√m uh ) Duryodhana caused him
to “become bewildered” and, therefore, to make the bad decisions that
led to the confl ict. Further, because Duryodhana “lost his mind” (a cetana ),
he (Duryodhana) instigated the crooked dice game, which caused the
confl ict.1 2
Attempting to distance himself further from culpability, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a
claims to have special wisdom, namely the eyesight of insight
( prajñ ā cak ṣ us ).1 3 All along, he claims, he foresaw the approaching war and
the defeat of his sons. He says:
Sa ṃ jaya, listen to what I know just as I know it. For after hearing
my words which are truly informed with wisdom, you will know
that I possess the eyesight of insight, O son of a suta.1 4
Here Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a defi nes “the eyesight of insight” as “seeing” the outcome
of an event from the moment of the event’s inception, a virtue to which I
will refer as “far-sighted vision.”
To prove his point, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a lists some fi fty-fi ve events that accord-
ing to him, presaged the inevitable war and the defeat of the Kauravas.
Because Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a “foresaw” a Kaurava defeat when each event oc-
curred, his point is that in spite of being blind, he has the special ability to
see with insight. As mentioned, this list also functions as an introductory
summary of the central events of the epic.
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s list begins with Draupadī’s s vaya ṃ vara and ends with
Aśvatthā man’s curse of Parikṣ it in the womb,1 5 suggesting that he sees
11. 1.1.97. This statement, we will come to discover, is false. Is Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra a victim of self-
deception or is he consciously lying here? We do not know.
12. 1.1.98.
13. This term is a polite epithet for a blind person. However, it takes on a broader (even
ironic) meaning in the Mahā bhā rata , particularly with respect to its application to
Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a. The narrative voice applies this term to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra frequently (for example at
2.45.2, 3.5.1, 3.8.23, 9.1.21, 11.10.2.) The term is also linked to knowledge of karma (in
M ā rkaṇ ḍ eya’s discourse to Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira) at 3.181.26 and knowledge of impermanence at
3.200.48 (in the hunter’s discourse to the brahmin).
14. 1.1.101.
15. In the story, Aśvatthā man hurls his weapon not just at Uttarā ’s womb, but at the wombs
of all the Pā ṇ ḍ ava women. K ṛ ṣ ṇ a assures everyone that Parikṣ it will be revived in Uttarā ’s
womb. See 10.15.28–31 and 10.16.1–15.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 111
these two events as the “book-ends” of the Kaurava-Pā ṇ ḍ ava confl ict and
the defeat of his sons. His list focuses predominantly on the P ā ṇ ḍ avas’
feats of strength and virtue and the losses suff ered by the Kauravas.1 6 He
packages each event in the formula, “When I heard ‘x’, I lost hope of vic-
tory.” 17 His repetition of this formula over fi fty times fashions the lament
into a despairing, mournful meditation on the seeds of the Bhā rata con-
fl ict and the defeat of his sons.1 8 Thus, his lament encourages us to see
each of the epic’s major events from his point of view, that is, from the
perspective of a father grappling with the deaths of his sons, the end of his
royal line, and the loss of his kingdom. However, it also encourages us to
stand back from him and ask certain questions of him. One obvious ques-
tion is, if he “saw” each event as portending a Kaurava defeat, why did he
not attempt to stop the building animosity between his sons and the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas? What is the use of insight if it is not united with action?
In the last part of his lament, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a succumbs to utter despair,
telling Saṃ jaya that darkness pervades him and his mind is unsteady. He
laments:
Alas! I hear ten have survived the war, three of ours and seven of the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas’. Eighteen armies were destroyed in the battle, that war of
k ṣ atriyas . Now dark confusion seems to overpower me. I have no
clarity. Sūta, my mind seems unsteady.1 9
Tormented, he falls to the ground in a faint.2 0
16. Examples are: Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s defeat by Śakuni in the game of dice (and yet, still, his
brothers remained united in their support for him), Arjuna’s acquisition of the Paśupati
missile and his sojourn in heaven with Indra, the Pā ṇ ḍ avas’ alliance with Virā ṭ a, and the
various slayings of the Kaurava generals during the war.
17. See, for example, 1.1.102.
18. It should be noted that Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ r a’s main preoccupation here is with whether the Kaura-
vas’ fi nal defeat could have been avoided, not with whether the war could have been avoided.
19. 1.1.158–159.
20. 1.1.98. The grammar and style of this lament are entirely diff erent from those of other
Mahā bh ā rata laments, which are characterized for the most part by a string of questions con-
cerning the circumstances of the loved one’s death, the tendency to juxtapose the condition of
the deceased now with how the loved one appeared in life, and a meditation on the causes of
the victim’s misfortune (which Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra does do here). No other lament in the epic, to my
knowledge, employs this strange use of the present tense that refers to the loved one as though
he or she is still living. For some “characteristic” M ahā bhā rata laments, see Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s la-
ment at 7.49.1–21; Aśvatthā man’s lament at 9.64.12–38; and Gā ndh ā rī’s lament at 11.16.1–26.1.
112 disorienting dharma
Sam. jaya’s Argument Against Grief
Sa ṃ jaya responds to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s words of despair by urging him not to
grieve. Sa ṃ jaya makes his “argument against grief” by also discussing the
war’s cause. However, while Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a blamed Duryodhana, Sa ṃ jaya
lays the blame on several other candidates. First, Sa ṃ jaya points a fi nger
at the destructive power of time, particularly as it aff ects even the most
mighty:
You have heard about many kings, kings of great energy and
strength. You have heard talk of them from Vy ā sa and wise N ā rada.
They were born in great lineages that were prosperous with virtues.
They knew divine weapons and possessed splendor that rivalled
Indra’s. They who conquered the earth with d harma , off ered up sac-
rifi ces with many gifts, and acquired fame in this world all suc-
cumbed to the power of time.2 1
Sa ṃ jaya recites the names of twenty-four kings, and a second list of sixty-
fi ve kings, making the point that despite their strength, wisdom, and vir-
tue, these mighty kings all succumbed to death. Second, Saṃ jaya targets
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s sons whom he calls “wicked” and “consumed by anger,” and
therefore, he concludes, should not be mourned.2 2 Third, Sa ṃ jaya more
quietly and indirectly implicates Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra himself in the events, since
the blind king “knows [how to implement] both restraint and favor,”2 3 im-
plying that he went too far in protecting his son Duryodhana.2 4 Fourth,
Sa ṃ jaya turns to the topic of fate: “It was to be thus and therefore you
must not grieve. With [even] superior wisdom who can divert fate?” 25 Fi-
nally, Saṃ jaya returns to the theme of the destructive nature of time, em-
phasizing the fact that all creatures are fashioned and destroyed by
temporality.
Sa ṃ jaya devotes the most attention and art to his fi rst and last points,
both of which have to do with the destructive power of time. He also targets
21. 1.1.163–65.
22. 1.1.183.
23. 1.1. 185.
24. 1.1.185.
25. 1.1.186.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 113
fate (which he seems to assume is closely related to time), Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra’s
sons, and Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra himself. Specifi cally, Samjaya implies that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
did not do enough to prevent the confl ict. In spite of the fact that he “knew
better,” he did not restrain his wicked sons.
Why would Samjaya’s statements about the destructive nature of time
help Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra move beyond his grief? In locating the cause of the war
predominantly in the ruinous power of time, Saṃ jaya is attempting to
help Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra see that he should not grieve over the death of his sons
and the destruction of the Bh ā rata line because time does not just bring
death and destruction selectively. Time brings death to every living crea-
ture, since all life is fundamentally characterized by time. Here, Saṃ jaya
is attempting to shift Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s focus from the narrow lens of his own
particular situation, the loss of his sons, to the level of the experience of all
living creatures. From this vantage point, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s view of things
would look radically diff erent. He would see that the sorrow he feels now
has been experienced by every creature on earth, since all creatures are
creatures of time. Thus, he would see that his grief is just a tiny drop in
the ocean of sorrow caused by the ravages of all-destroying time. Such a
shift would, presumably, snap Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a out of his despair by distancing
him from his own situation and opening his eyes to the condition of all
living creatures. It would also, presumably, encourage a transformation in
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s emotional responses from grief and self-pity to emotions
like stoic acceptance and fortitude.
The Location of the Lament and the Response
Let us now consider the signifi cance of the location of this lament and
response in T he Book of the Beginning (Book 1). To do so, it is helpful to
make a distinction between where the lament and response take place in
the text and where they take place in the story. The lament is located in the
beginning of the text, but in the story, the lament takes place after the
death of Duryodhana, which occurs in Book 10 at the conclusion of the war
in the latter half of the story. Therefore, an event that takes place well into
the story is placed in the opening passages of the text.2 6 To determine what
26. This particular lament is not repeated in the battle books. However, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a does
lament Duryodhana’s death and the defeat of his army at the beginning of T he Book of Śalya
(when he fi rst hears the news of it from Saṃ jaya) and at the beginning of the S trīparvan
(when the news has sunk in). See 9.2.3–9.2.47 and 11.1.10–20 respectively.
114 disorienting dharma
kind of “work” this placement is doing, and how it is doing it, it is necessary
to turn briefl y, once again, to the function of the text’s framing device.
As mentioned several times, the Mah ā bhā rata does not begin with the
central story of the great Bhā ratas. Instead, it begins with two outer frames
that introduce the circumstances of the epic’s fi rst two tellings—who told
it to whom, where, and under what circumstances. Further, these frames
provide the opportunity for the epic’s two main storytellers, Ugraśravas
and Vai ṣ a ṃ p ā yana, to refl ect on the Mahā bh ā rata ’s genre, its central mes-
sages, its contents, and so on. Thus, these framing devices function as
narrative strategies that allow the text to present itself in specifi c ways and
thus gain control, to some extent, of the way the audience views it.2 7 They
also grant the text the power to manipulate time by giving it the ability to
move backwards and forwards in time (i.e., sequential time).2 8 In the case
of the location of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s lament, these strategies manipulate time
by altering the sequence of events in the story. To put it diff erently, an
event that has yet to come (the lament), and that is a response to other
events that have yet to come (e.g., Duryodhana’s death), is placed at the
beginning of the text. Thus it aff ects the way that the audience under-
stands the text as a whole as well as events as they come.2 9 It does so in
several ways.
First, the location of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s lament at the opening of the epic is
a strategy that encourages us to see each of the major events that the blind
king mentions through the lens of his despair—that is, through the sorrow
of a father broken by the defeat and deaths of his sons in the war and the
utter futility of the Kaurava eff ort. (See chapter 1 for a discussion of
Ānandavardhana’s ś ā ntarasa reading of the M ah ā bh ā rata ; here Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
could be understood to be conveying an emotion very close to vairā gya or
world-weariness, the underlying emotion of ś ā ntarasa , the aestheticized
emotion of tranquility.) The form of the lament, as a summary of the epic,
serves a similar function, since Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s expression of despair encap-
sulates the epic in miniature.
27. For slightly diff erent interpretations, see Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mah ā bhā rata ,
92–130 , Minkowski, “Janamejaya’s S attra ” ; and Reich, “A Battlefi eld of a Text,” 4–6, 56–64 .
28. For my defi nition of sequential time see the introduction to this chapter. For more on frames
in the Mah ā bhā rata and their relation to time, see Hiltebeitel, R ethinking the Mahā bh ā rata , 38 .
29. For a good discussion on the signifi cance of the introduction and its impact on interpre-
tation in works of literature, see Christina Swanson, “Narrative Temporality and the Aspect of
Time in Franz Kafka’s Short Fiction” (PhD diss., University of California Irvine, 1999), 107–116 .
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 115
Second, Sa ṃ jaya’s speech on the destructive nature of time also pro-
vides a critical lens, since his argument for why Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a should not
grieve for the loss of his sons prepares us, the epic’s audience, to properly
deal with our grief. Just as Sa ṃ jaya tells Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra that he should not
grieve because death comes even to the most mighty, so too the text is sug-
gesting that the audience should not despair at the deaths of the mighty
warriors encountered in this tale, because death is inevitable for all living
beings. Indeed, the M ah ā bh ā rata could be viewed as providing an ex-
tended argument for why one should not grieve over the losses that are
inevitably brought about by time.3 0
Finally, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s lament and Saṃ jaya’s response both focus on the
cause of the disaster, but they do not supply a consistent account.3 1 Thus, the
text raises at the outset the question “Who or what caused the deaths of
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s sons and the end of the great Bhā ratas?” No fi nal answer is
given, but several possibilities are suggested. One possibility is of course
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra himself, which renders Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s expressions of despair mul-
tidimensional, even ironic. Because the M ah ā bhā rata war not only brings
death to Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s sons, but also wreaks devastation on a universal scale
(universal in terms of the world of the text, because no one is untouched by
it), the broader question here is “Who or what is responsible for death?” or,
even more to the point, “Who or what is responsible for grief and sorrow?”3 2
30. For discussions on the perils of grief in the epic see, for example, 3.206.20–25 and
5.36.42–43.
31. The source of the M ahā bhā rata war is undoubtedly overdetermined. The possible candi-
dates in the text are almost endless. Various characters are blamed (e.g., Duryodhana,
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, and less frequently Kṛ ṣ ṇ a [see 18.1.7–9; 6.62.38–54; 1.1.92; 2.33.19; 15.5.7]). Im-
personal forces like time, fate, and karma are also blamed. For a good discussion of fate,
time, and karma as causal forces of the war in the epic, see Hill, Fate, Predestination, and
Human Action , 193–230 . There is even a cosmic explanation for why the war had to take
place. According to this story, Earth personifi ed goes to Brahm ā after the demons, defeated
in heaven, are born on earth as k ṣ atriyas. Earth, tormented by these demons/k ṣ atriyas asks
Brahm ā to relieve her burden. Brahmā directs the gods, gandharvas , and apsar ā s to be born
on earth for their suppression. 1.61 provides the list of “partial incarnations,” which iden-
tifi es the major participants on both sides in the war with their divine and demonic proto-
types. (1.58–61). For scholarly debate concerning the signifi cance of this story in the epic, see
note 133 of this chapter.
32. Upon the death of Abhimanyu, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira, heartbroken, asks Vyā sa, “What is the
cause of death?” Vyā sa responds by making a reference to a famous dirge, “The Passing of
the Sixteen Kings,” recited by the seer Nā rada to King S ṛ ñjaya, who mourned the death of
his young son. This speech, similar to Saṃ jaya’s in Book 1 in many ways, appears at 12.29
and Appendix I (no.7) in the Critical Edition. For a discussion of the two epic contexts for
this passage and their signifi cance, see Reich, “A Battlefi eld of a Text,” 110–152 .
116 disorienting dharma
-
Dh. r tar a s.. t ra’s Role in the Failed Peace Negotiations
Now we will put Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra on trial as a potential agent of suff ering by
examining his role in the failed peace negotiations in The Book of the Eff ort .
Signifi cantly, the text devotes much attention to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra in this book,
especially as he agonizes when making decisions concerning whether to
take measures to avert war.3 3 Therefore, the context of the peace negotia-
tions provides us with the opportunity to watch Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra as he deliber-
ates, doubts, refuses to heed good advice, and squanders his last chance to
treat his nephews as sons, not enemies, and thereby avert war. With this
aim in mind, we will explore the depiction of Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra in three dif-
ferent instances: as he reveals his inner thoughts to Sa ṃ jaya (here his
envoy) about the merits of the two parties involved;3 4 as he receives advice
from his wise brother Vidura about how to treat the Pā ṇ ḍ avas; 35 and as he
makes his fi nal decision about whether to give back to the P ā ṇ ḍ avas their
kingdom. 3 6
Our goal here is quite specifi c. Several characters blame Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
for the confl ict between the P ā ṇ ḍ avas and Kauravas and the consequent
destruction of the Bh ā ratas.3 7 They cite his failure to listen to good advice
during the dice game and during the negotiations for peace as evidence.3 8
Therefore, an examination of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s actions and decisions here will
help us assess these accusations.3 9
At this point in the text, we have traveled far from The Book of the Begin-
ning . Briefl y, Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira has gained and lost a kingdom; the crooked gam-
bling match has taken place; and the Pā ṇ ḍ avas, having honored the
conditions of losing this match (thirteen years in exile), now demand their
kingdom back. The Kauravas, however, are stalling. Thus, the two sets of
33. Van Buitenen suggests that the decision to make peace with the P ā ṇ ḍ avas is up to
Duryodhana (see van Buitenen, T he Mahā bhā rata, Vol. 3 , 133.) However, the narrative focuses
on Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s decision-making process during the peace negotiations, not on Duryodhana’s.
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira also assumes that the decision is up to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a (see 5.23–32).
34. 5.22.1–23.1.
35. 5.33.1–42.1
36. 5.46.1–60.1.
37. Most notably, Saṃ jaya (5.156.9 and 6.14.13) and Kṛ ṣ ṇ a (at the end of T he Book of Śalya ,
9.62.37–55).
38. See, for example, 6.16.4 and 9.62.37–55.
39. See chapter 2 for an analysis of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s behavior in the dicing scene.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 117
cousins stand on the brink of battle. Armies have been amassed on both
sides and only decisive action will avert war.
At the opening of The Book of the Eff ort , the P ā ṇ ḍ avas send an envoy de-
manding that the Kauravas honor the terms of their agreement and return
to the Pā ṇ ḍ avas their kingdom. 40 The envoy of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas assures the
Kauravas that if they do not act now, it will be too late and the P ā ṇ ḍ avas will
declare war. After the envoy leaves, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, worried, decides to send his
own envoy, Sa ṃ jaya, to assess the Pā ṇ ḍ avas’ position. Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s words of
instruction to Sa ṃ jaya concerning how to negotiate with the Pā ṇ ḍ avas ex-
pose a critical moral fl aw in the blind king: the wide gap between how
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a “sees” on the one hand (in this scene he sees the situation with
stunning clarity) and the course of action that he decides to take on the other.
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra begins by informing Saṃ jaya how the Pā ṇ ḍ avas should be
greeted. Rather quickly, however, he veers off track into an extended med-
itation on the virtues of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas, which he contrasts with the “vil-
lainy” of Duryodhana whom Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra calls “wicked” ( p ā p ā ), “uneven”
( vi ṣ ama ), and “foolish”(m andabuddhi ).4 1 Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a further refl ects on
the unparalleled might of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas, particularly Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s, whose
“anger” he fears most. 42 He says,
I am not as afraid of Arjuna, K ṛ ṣ ṇ a
Not even of Bhīma and the twins,
As I am always more afraid, O sūta, of the
Anger of that king burning with anger.
He possesses austerity, self-control—
His plans are sure to succeed,
Knowing his anger about the ongoing confl ict,
I am utterly fearful now, Sa ṃ jaya. 43
Finally, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a briefl y tells Sa ṃ jaya what he should say to the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas: he should kindly salute them, calling them blessed for “having
40. On the conduct of diplomacy in ancient India, see van Buitenen, T he Mahā bhā rata, Vol.
3 , 134–138 .
41. 5.22.7.
42. 5.22.33.
43. 5.22.33–34.
118 disorienting dharma
completed the miserable sojourn that they did not deserve.”4 4 After asking
about the P ā ṇ ḍ avas’ health and speaking with aff ection about whatever is
opportune for them,4 5 he should assure them that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra wants
peace4 6 and say nothing that will rouse them toward war.4 7
Given what Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra says to Saṃ jaya here about his nephews, one
would assume that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a would decide to give the P ā ṇ ḍ avas their
kingdom back, since he believes that they have not deserved the treatment
that they have received from the Kauravas. Instead, however, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
tells Saṃ jaya to ask about their health! Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra does not say one word
about what he is willing to give the Pā ṇ ḍ avas because he is willing to give
them nothing. In spite of his correct assessments of the moral qualities of
the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and the vices of his son, he refuses to take the obvious proper
course of action and give the Pā ṇ ḍ avas back what he understands as right-
fully theirs. Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a is unable, or unwilling, to connect his insight with
his actions, even when he understands the enormity of what is at stake.
We know from his speech that he sees clearly how powerful the P ā ṇ ḍ avas
are and that they will most likely destroy the Kauravas if war breaks out.4 8
Specifi cally, he tells Saṃ jaya that no one is more powerful than Arjuna
and Bhīma and that the twins, Nakula and Sahadeva, will leave no Kuru
alive. 49 Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s unwillingness to connect his actions with his insights,
even in the face of enormous and disastrous consequences, makes him a
perplexing character. This bewildering aspect of his characterization en-
courages the audience’s critical distance from him. Indeed, we are encour-
aged to stand back and refl ect on an obvious question: “Why does
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a refuse to make the eff ort to prevent a war that he knows will
devastate his family and his kingdom?”
As Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a awaits Sa ṃ jaya’s report about his mission, he has pre-
monitions that Saṃ jaya will return with bad news. Upset, tormented with
doubt, fearful of the future, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra calls upon his wise brother,
Vidura, to discourse upon d harma in order to ease his mind.5 0 Vidura’s
44. 5.22.2.
45. 5.22.39.
46. 5.22.2.
47. 5.22.39.
48. See 5.22.10–34.
49. 5.22.10–16.
50. 5.33.12 and 5.33.15.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 119
discourse to his blind brother is remarkable in its sheer length and scope.
In this “vigil” (van Buitenen calls it “one of the longest longeurs of the
Mah ā bh ā rata so far”)5 1 Vidura discusses what seems to be every topic
under the sun. Each lecture, however, ends with a peroration on the jus-
tice of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas’ cause and specifi c advice about how they should be
treated: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a should consider them as his sons and return to them
what is rightfully theirs.5 2
When Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra asks Vidura specifi cally what he should do about the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas, Vidura says,
As actions have consequences, one should look to the consequences
and, having deliberated, act. One should not act in haste.5 3
Then, applying this general principle to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s particular situation,
Vidura tells his brother that he should make peace with the P ā ṇ ḍ avas
because he will rue the consequences of his bad decisions. Failure to give
the P ā ṇ ḍ avas what they want will lead to war.5 4 Vidura assures Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a
that if there is war, either the Pā ṇ ḍ avas or Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s sons will perish,
and either result will cause Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra despair. Vidura tells Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra:
You should see the bad consequences of quarreling with the P ā ṇ ḍ avas
with regard to whom even Indra and the gods would tremble:
enmity with sons, perpetual anxiety, the loss of fame, and the joy of
your enemies.5 5
In his speech to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, Vidura highlights the connection
between act and consequence. Let us mark this point; it will return to
haunt the blind king, especially through the mouth of Saṃ jaya in the
battle books. According to Saṃ jaya, understanding this intimate link
between act and consequence will be crucial for Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra for two rea-
sons: it will help him to see how and why the destruction of the Bh ā ratas
was his fault (Saṃ jaya, however, does not blame only Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra for the
51. Van Buitenen, T he Mahā bh ā rata, Vol. 3 , 180 .
52. 5.33.103–105.
53. 5.34.8.
54. 5.39.20–30.
55. 5.37.38.
120 disorienting dharma
war; he also blames time and fate),5 6 and it will help him move beyond
his grief.
Not surprisingly, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra does not heed Vidura’s advice. In the as-
sembly hall the next morning, when Saṃ jaya reports that the Pā ṇ ḍ avas will
declare war unless the Kauravas return their kingdom to them, Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra
still refuses to give in. Instead, he questions Saṃ jaya about Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s
battle-plans. When Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭr a poses these questions, all the characters in
the Kauravas’ assembly hall “lose hope of their lives.”5 7 They realize that the
blind king has no intention of taking the necessary actions to avert war, and
that war is now inevitable. Even the perennially composed Saṃ jaya faints.5 8
What makes Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s intransigence in the face of the imminent
prospect of war so perplexing is the fact that he himself sees (and has
seen) very clearly that the P ā ṇ ḍ avas will slaughter the Kauravas. In spite
of these premonitions, he refuses to take measures to avert war—that is,
until it is too late.
Shortly after, in a remarkable about-face reminiscent of his return to
clarity in the dicing scene,5 9 Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a decides that peace should be
made with the Pā ṇ ḍ avas. Otherwise, he realizes, the destruction of the
Kauravas is imminent. He says,
I think that no war with them is best—hear this, Kauravas! If there
is war, there will certainly be the destruction of our entire family.
This is my ultimate attempt at avoiding calamity by means of which
my mind will be at peace. If war is not desired, let us strive for
peace!6 0
Sa ṃ jaya, however, tells Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra that his change of heart has come too
late; the P ā ṇ ḍ avas at this point have suff ered too many wrongs.
Great King Bh ā rata, it is just as you say: it is foreseeable that Arju-
na’s bow will destroy the k ṣ atriyas in battle. But this I fail to under-
stand about you who are always fi rm: in spite of knowing the power
56. See my discussion in the following section of this chapter.
57. 5.48.47.
58. 5.49.10–13.
59. See chapter 2 .
60. 5.52.14–16.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 121
of Arjuna, you submit to the will of your son. This is not the time,
great king!6 1
This seems an odd thing for Sa ṃ jaya to say. Only moments earlier, Bhīṣ ma
and Dro ṇ a tried to convince Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a to make peace, which suggests
that there was still time then to avert war. So, at what point did it become
too late for Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra to change his mind? While the text does not give
us an explicit answer to this question, it does make “a narrative point”
through presenting this sudden and inexplicable point of no return. The
point is this: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a always decides to do the right thing when it is too
late to reverse his course of action. Not only is it too late to reverse his
negotiations with the Pā ṇ ḍ avas, it is also too late to reverse Duryodhana’s
course. Now Duryodhana—who has been for the most part silent in T he
Book of the Eff ort —declares that he too is determined to go to war and that
nothing will stop him.6 2
Therefore, despite his change of heart, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a is now power-
less to make peace. By focusing on the brooding, doubting, hesitating
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra as the events escalate to this point, the text shows us that
the momentum that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra is now unable to reverse has much to
do with his own actions and decisions. Specifi cally, he is unable to “see”
the consequences of his actions and thus act accordingly, even when
the disastrous consequences of his actions are directly upon him. At the
same time, the text’s strategies present us with the paradox of
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra: that he sees with insight but does not act with it. This par-
adox, which lies at the core of the blind king, will have grave conse-
quences. Just how horrifi c they will be, we, at this point in the story, can
hardly fathom.
before we move on to a discussion of the depiction of the blind king in
the frame of the battle books, let us return briefl y to Vidura’s discourse on
dharma discussed above. There it was noted that Vidura’s d harma -talk touches
upon a vast array of topics. The fact that it does so raises a disorienting ques-
tion about dharma . If a discourse on d harma given by a master/specialist
61. 5.53.1–3. Note that van Buitenen translates this last line as “It is now too late, Mahā r ā ja!”
while Ganguli translates it as: “Now is not the time [to grieve].” What I interpret Saṃ jaya to
be saying here is that there was a time when peace negotiations were possible, but this time
has passed Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra by.
62. 5.57.10–20.
122 disorienting dharma
of dharma (the incarnation of Dharma, no less)6 3 includes such a wide
range of topics, then what is d harma ? To put this question another way,
if d harma is everything, then is it anything? Thus, one possible reading
of Vidura’s discourse is that, through the strategies of excess,6 4 the text
attempts once again to undermine our confi dence in the category d harma .
Another possibility, which does not necessarily negate the fi rst, is that
these strategies provide a clue about the way d harma functions in the epic.
This possibility rests on the supposition that there is a method to Vidura’s
discourse, namely, to overwhelm the blind king with what van Buitenen calls
Vidura’s “rainy-season pitter-patter of peanuts of wisdom.”6 5 The ostensible
point in so doing would be to open him up and make him receptive to what
Vidura has to say, for Vidura every now and then interrupts his rambling
discourse to give Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra very specifi c advice—namely, to consider the
consequences of his actions and to return the Pā ṇ ḍ avas’ kingdom to them.
If this is the case, then Vidura’s “strategies” suggest that d harma is less a
straightforward set of strictures and more an orientation to the world, a way
of seeing, if you will, that is characterized by insight and receptiveness.6 6
Vidura’s “method” would also suggest that what words “do” is as important
as what they signify, since here Vidura would be using words to “do work” by
attempting to make Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra receptive through sheer volume, just as the
strategies “do work” by attempting to transform us in a variety of ways.
Sam. jaya Narrates the Battle Events to the Blind King
The motif of the lamenting blind old king—the quintessential image of
the foolish, doting father reaping the consequences of his bad decisions—
is foregrounded both in the outer frame of the epic (as discussed above)
and in the frame of the battle books.6 7 As we now turn to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s
63. The god Dharma is cursed by an angry seer to be born in the womb of a ś ūdra . The
result is Vidura. 1.57.77–81.
64. Maria Heim, “The Aesthetics of Excess,” J ournal of the American Academy of Religion
71/3 (2003): 531–554 .
65. Van Buitenen, T he Mah ā bhā rata, Vol . 3 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 180 .
66. See Matilal’s discussion of d harma and insight in “Moral Dilemmas,”19–35. David Shulman
talks about the epic as a “vehicle for realistic insight.” Shulman, “Toward a Historical Poetics,” 26.
67. The fi ve battle books are, in order: T he Book of Bhī ṣ ma (Bhī ṣ maparvan) , The Book of
Dro ṇ a (Dro ṇ aparvan) , T he Book of Ka ṛ na (Kar ṇ aparvan) , T he Book of Śalya (Śalyaparvan) ,
and The Book of the Night Massacre (Sauptikaparvan) .
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 123
depiction as the quintessential victim of suff ering in the frame of these
battle books, we will be interested in the fact that we “hear” the events of
the war as we are sitting next to him while he listens to Saṃ jaya’s narra-
tion. As Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s fellow listeners, we are privy to his reactions.6 8 Since
most of the events that Saṃ jaya narrates concern the deaths of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s
sons, friends, family members, and allies, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s responses are re-
sponses of despair. What do we learn from Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a about his grief,
and about sorrow in general, by sitting next to him as we listen to Saṃ jaya
narrate the events of the war?
As discussed in the introduction to this book, the M ahā bh ā rata has
not one but several principal narrators who exist at diff erent levels of
em beddedness in the text. Ugraśravas narrates the story of the Bhā ratas
to the brahmins of the Naimi ṣ a Forest in the epic’s outermost frame.
Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana tells the story to Janamejaya in the text’s inner frame
(Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana is the most present of all the narrators), and Sa ṃ jaya nar-
rates the events of the war to Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra in the epic’s fi ve battle books.6 9
What is the signifi cance of the fact that Saṃ jaya, not Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana, is the
principal narrator of the battle books and Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, not Janamejaya, is
our fellow audience member?
Since both Saṃ jaya and Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra are characters in the central
story, they are familiar to us in ways that Vaiśaṃ p ā yana and Janamejaya
are not. While we know very little about Vaiśaṃ p ā yana, we know Saṃ jaya
as Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s aide and critic. Further, we know that he criticized the
king several times for his role in the confl ict;7 0 now Saṃ jaya will narrate
the events that he predicted and tried to prevent. 71 Similarly, while we
know very little about Janamejaya, we have traveled far with Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra.
We have watched the blind king agonize, waver, fail to make good
decisions, and thus fail to avert the events that he will now hear Saṃ jaya
narrate. Therefore, as audience members of the battle books, we not only
68. Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s immediate fellow listeners are the women of the court. We know this
because in the beginning of the Ś alyaparvan , Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra dismisses them when he hears the
news of Duryodhana’s death at 9.2.1. Also, the text notes their response to Karṇ a’s death at
8.3.1–8. See Black, “Eavesdropping,” 60–72 .
69. Sa ṃ jaya loses his divine eye at 10.9.58. He associates his loss of vision with the fact that
he was “affl icted by grief” (s ok ā rta ) when he saw Duryodhana ascend to heaven. See chapter
5 for a discussion of “the hell trick,” the M ahā bhā rata’s “answer” to whether or not Duryod-
hana really did ascend to heaven.
70. 5.32.10–30.
71. Chaitanya, T he Mah ā bh ā rata , 29 .
124 disorienting dharma
know more about our narrator, Saṃ jaya, and fellow audience member,
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, but we also know something about their relationship to the
events being narrated.7 2
To further explore the signifi cance of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s depiction in the
frame of the battle books, I off er a brief analysis of two narrative episodes:
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s request that Saṃ jaya narrate the events of the war to him in
The Book of the Eff ort and Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s lament at the news that Bhīṣ ma has
fallen in the frame of the battle books in T he Book of Bhīṣ ma .7 3 Next, I turn
to an examination of two types of narrative strategies, backshadowing and
frame-switching, that involve the framing device and the narrative con-
struction of time. The point of our analysis is to assess how specifi c narra-
tive strategies associated with the text’s frame structure make an argument
concerning the source of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s downfall and his grief.
Dh r. trar
a-
s. t. ra’s Request
At the end of T he Book of the Eff ort , when it is clear that the peace negotia-
tions have failed and war is inevitable, the blind Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra asks Saṃ jaya
to tell him everything that happens in the battle. 7 4 (It is worth noting that
Vy ā sa off ers to bestow upon Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra a divine eye so that he can see the
battle events, but the blind king refuses. He tells Vy ā sa that he does not
want to behold the deaths of his kinsmen.)7 5 In the course of posing this
request, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra also makes several revealing comments. He tells
Sa ṃ jaya that he thinks “fate is supreme and human eff ort is useless”7 6
because, despite the fact that he knows the evils of war, he cannot restrain
“his deceitful son” (i.e., Duryodhana).7 7 Upon further refl ection he off ers,
72. B rian Black points out that the epic’s inclusion of characters as audience members who
emotionally respond to the events being narrated makes their emotional response “part of
the story itself, thus connecting the audience in the text to the audience outside the text.”
“Eavesdropping,” 63.
73. Bhī ṣ ma lies mortally wounded on a bed of arrows throughout the rest of the battle. He
does not die until the end of Book 13, T he Book of the Instruction .
74. Sa ṃ jaya is given a divine eye by Vyā sa so that he can report the details of the battle to
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra. For discussion about Saṃ jaya and the powers of the divine eye, see S. K Belva-
kar, “Sa ṃ jaya’s ‘Eye Divine,’” A nnals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 27 (1946):
323–326 .
75. 6.2.4–7.
76. 5.156.4.
77. 5.156.4–5.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 125
“I do have the wisdom to foresee evil, but when I am with Duryodhana it
gets turned around again.”7 8
Sa ṃ jaya chastises Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, telling him that he should not put all
the blame ( do ṣ a ) on Duryodhana. Further, “the person who obtains that
which is inauspicious because of his own misdeeds” should not blame
time or fate.7 9 After reprimanding the king, Sa ṃ jaya agrees to report the
details of the war. Signifi cantly, he provides instructions for how
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a should listen: he should remain calm and not despair.
(Sa ṃ jaya is the only narrator in the epic who instructs his audience in this
manner, with the exception of Nā rada, who, interestingly, is reporting to
Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira the news of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s death in the forest fi re.) Saṃ jaya
says:
So, then, hear from me in full the news of the slaughter of the
horses, elephants, and kings of immeasurable splendor in the
battle. And while you are listening to what happened in the great
war that gave rise to the destruction of all the world, remain calm
and do not despair, O king.8 0
Why should Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a remain calm? Because, according to Saṃ jaya,
A person is not the agent of his good and evil karma; s/he is not free
and is manipulated like a wooden puppet. Some are assigned by
God, some by chance, and still others by previous karma.8 1
Thus, at the very outset of the war, we see that Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra is preoccupied
with his role in the confl ict. On one level, he accepts some degree of re-
sponsibility. However, by presenting himself as a passive agent who is di-
rected to act by fate and by Duryodhana (it is not clear whether or not
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a connects these two forces in his mind), he accepts responsi-
bility only minimally. Saṃ jaya focuses on the cause of the confl ict as well,
but his statements are ambiguous. On the one hand, Saṃ jaya implies that
the roots of the war have nothing to do with human infl uence and he does
78. 5.156. 6.
79. 5.156.9.
80. 5.156.12–13.
81. 5. 156. 14–15.
126 disorienting dharma
so in a manner that suggests that human power is severely if not com-
pletely limited. On the other, he blames Duryodhana for the confl ict, sug-
gesting that human beings have the power to act.
Dh r. tar
a-
s. t. ra Laments Bhī s. ma’s Fall
Samjaya’s narration of the war events commences in the Book of Bhī ṣ ma when
he, “grief stricken” ( duḥkhita ), 82 rushing from the battlefi eld to H ā stinapura,
approaches the “brooding” (d hy ā yant )8 3 Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra and tells him that Bhī ṣ ma,
the grandfather of the Pandavas and Kauravas, has fallen. To drive the magni-
tude of this point home, Saṃ jaya juxtaposes many of Bhīṣ ma’s great feats of
strength with the fact that he now lies helpless on a bed of arrows:
That great warrior who on a single chariot conquered all the assem-
bled kings in a great battle in the city of the Kā śi, the off spring of
the Vasus, who fought R ā ma J ā madagnya and was not killed by
him, now has been felled by Śikhaṇ ḍ in in battle.8 4
Signifi cantly, Sa ṃ jaya concludes his opening speech by blaming Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
for what has come to pass:
[Bhī ṣ ma] lies on the ground like a tree felled by the wind, groaning,
undeserving of his fate, because of your ill-conceived plan, B h ā rata !8 5
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra fi rst responds to the disastrous news with a string of ques-
tions. How did Bhīṣ ma fall from the chariot? Who was protecting him?
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra also expresses how he feels. He says, “Profound grief enters
me”8 6 and “I know no peace, only sorrow.”8 7 Finally, he questions how this
could have possibly happened to someone as mighty and powerful as
Bhī ṣ ma. First he blames himself,8 8 but later places the blame on time,
82. 6.14.2.
83. 6.14.2.
84. 6.14.6–7.
85. 6.14.13.
86. 6.15.4.
87. 6.15.69.
88. 6.15.15.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 127
coming to the conclusion that “time certainly is very powerful, inevitable
for the whole world,” since mighty Bhīṣ ma has been defeated.8 9 At the end
of his lament he exhorts Saṃ jaya to tell him everything that happened,
once again pinning the blame on Duryodhana:
Tell me everything that happened in battle to the kings of the earth,
whether lacking in virtue or not, all the result of the bad ideas of
that fool [Duryodhana].9 0
Sa ṃ jaya agrees to report the details of Bhīṣ ma’s fall, but before he does
so, he berates Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a for not accepting responsibility for his role in
the war. Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, Sa ṃ jaya says, should not place all the blame on
Duryodhana, for “a man who is faced with misfortune because of his own
evil actions must not blame someone else for it.”9 1 The P ā ṇ ḍ avas suff ered
the injustice of the dice game because of their loyalty to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a.9 2
Exhorting Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra to listen to what he, Sa ṃ jaya, has seen with his own
eyes, he instructs him “not to indulge his mind in sorrow” (m ā ca śoke
manaḥ k ṛ thā ḥ ) 93 because “surely all this was destined long ago.”9 4
The exchanges between Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a and Sa ṃ jaya in the frame of the
four battle books follow the format of this exchange closely: Saṃ jaya
reports the details of the war to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a responds with a
lament in which he mourns the loss of the particular character who has
died, refl ects on the implications of the event for the security of his sons,
and then turns to the broader issue of the cause of the war and blames
variously himself, fate, time, and, most frequently, Duryodhana. Saṃ jaya
chastises him for not accepting responsibility, telling him that he is reap-
ing the results of his bad acts since he did not listen to good advice9 5 and
since he allowed the Pā ṇ ḍ avas to be treated so cruelly by Duryodhana.9 6
Sa ṃ jaya then exhorts Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra to listen to what he has to tell him and
89. 6.15.56.
90. 6.15.73.
91. 6.16.2.
92. 6.16.4. A reference to the dice game.
93. 6.16.6.
94. 6.16.6.
95. 6.61.20–21.
96. 5 .156.11 and 6.16.4.
128 disorienting dharma
to remain calm and not to grieve because the war and the destruction of
the Bh ā ratas was foreordained and/or because man is not the agent of his
acts.9 7
The exchanges between Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Saṃ jaya in the frame of the
battle books are noteworthy because both characters focus on the issue of
the war’s cause and both provide inconsistent accounts, but their speeches
are inconsistent for diff erent reasons. Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, it is clear, refuses to
come to terms with his responsibility for the war. It is simply too much for
him. Therefore, he blames whatever person or force is convenient for him.
(Note that while Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra sometimes points the fi nger at himself, he
never ends a speech on this note. He always settles upon some other force.)
Sa ṃ jaya’s inconsistencies, on the other hand, are due to a distinction that
he makes between how Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra should think about the causes of the
war (i.e., Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra should blame himself) and how Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra should
listen to his narration of the battle events (i.e., the king should view the
unfortunate events as the work of destiny). While the event remains the
same (the war), the king’s responsive acts are diff erent (blaming versus
listening). According to Lawrence McCrea, there is a rationale behind
Sa ṃ jaya’s ambiguous statements: Saṃ jaya employs two diff erent rhetorical
strategies for two diff erent purposes. When Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra attempts to play
“the blame game,” Saṃ jaya stops him short by pointing to the blind king’s
own culpability; but when Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a begins to wallow in despair, Saṃ jaya
points to the inexorability of fate and the universality of death and loss. In
both cases, “his aim is essentially therapeutic—to lead him away from
self-destructive emotions and towards stoic acceptance and fortitude.”9 8
Backshadowing and Frame-switching in the
Frames of the Battle Books
Moving now to an examination of the battle books’ structure, let us explore
how certain narrative strategies related to the text’s framing structure—
backshadowing and frame-switching—make an argument about
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s role in the production of the war. Each battle book begins
with a fl ash-forward in which Sa ṃ jaya rushes back from the battlefi eld to
announce to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a the death of the Kuru general of the book (each
97. 5.156.14 and 6.16.6.
98. Personal communication.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 129
book is named after a Kaurava general who is killed). The rest of the book
contains Saṃ jaya’s narration of the days of the battle that conclude with
the general’s killing.9 9 What is notable about this structure is that each
book begins with a declaration of its own outcome (i.e., the news of the
death of a Kaurava general) and the rest of the book involves the narra-
tive’s eff ort to “catch up” with this outcome. This device will be referred to
as “backshadowing,” since Sa ṃ jaya’s reports are after-accounts, not run-
ning commentaries.1 00 While this narrative device is similar to the place-
ment of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s lament in The Book of the Beginning discussed above,
it does not function in quite the same manner. The diff erence has to do
with the fact that Duryodhana’s fall—the source of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s grief in
The Book of the Beginning —is not the outcome of the epic story (the events
that the lament frames). Bhīṣ ṃ a’s fall—the source of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s grief in
the Ś alyaparvan —on the other hand, is the outcome of the book. Thus,
while the technique is similar in both instances, it is saying something
fundamentally diff erent about time in each case. It is making a point
about cosmological time in the fi rst instance and about consequential
time in the second.
The second aspect of the battle books’ structure that we will focus on is
the strategy of frame-switching. While frame-switching is used through-
out the M ah ā bh ā rata , the use of this strategy is particularly eff ective in the
battle books because, as mentioned earlier, the audience is so well-
acquainted with Saṃ jaya and Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a. Further, the conversations
between Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a and Saṃ jaya provide a framing meta-commentary
on the events of the war. Signifi cantly, these conversations are between the
character who is, ostensibly, an agent of the war (Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a), and the
character who forces Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a to see himself as such (Saṃ jaya).
Backshadowing and frame-switching are narrative strategies that ma-
nipulate time and therefore make specifi c points about it. These points
have to do with the implicit connection in the text between causation (seed
and fruit)—a theme that has been surfacing throughout this chapter—and
99. F or a slightly diff erent interpretation of the chronological arrangements of Sa ṃ jaya’s
reports, see Belavalkar, “Saṃ jaya’s ‘Eye Divine,’” 323–326 .
100. See M. A. Mehendale, Refl ections on the Mahā bh ā rata War (Shimla: India Institute of
Advanced Study, 1995), 3 . At the start of this chapter, I discussed the use of this device in
The Book of the Beginning . Here I am focusing on slightly diff erent dimension of its use
in the battle books. For the term “backshadowing,” see Hiltebeitel and Kloetzli, “Time,”
582.
130 disorienting dharma
consequential time (i.e., the inextricable link between past, present, and
future, and between act and consequence).1 01
Backshadowing is a strategy that encourages us to view the events that
occur in a particular battle book as informed by the outcome of the book
(i.e., the death of a Kaurava general). The outcome, in this way, becomes
the defi ning hermeneutic of the book. All the events that occur in that
book are seen as an inevitable progression leading to the death of the
Kuru general. Accordingly, backshadowing is a narrative strategy that
“treats the past as though it inevitably led to the present”; it suggests that
“the present, as the future of the past, was already immanent in the past
in a more or less straight line.”1 02 The use of backshadowing in the battle
books involves “backwards causality” because it makes a past catastrophe
(the death of the general) visible in narrative advance. By treating the pre-
sent as already immanent in the past, backshadowing makes the point
that the fruit of an act is contained in the act, as seed (i.e., in the seed’s
inception).
This strategy, then, provides us with—or suggests—a clue concerning
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s role in the war, a recurring topic of Saṃ jaya and Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s
framing conversations. Following the logic of this strategy, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s
fatal error was that he did not have a proper understanding of time and
therefore of causation. When he made his decisions to give into his sons
and allow the Pā ṇ ḍ avas to be treated unfairly, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra did not properly
understand the intimate connection between past and present (as the
future of the past), and therefore between seed and fruit.1 03 Or, if he did
understand it, he failed to act on this knowledge. Either way, his failure
contributed signifi cantly to the great tragedy, for the decision to cheat the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas contained the fruit of the war and the death of his sons. It was
not a question of whether or not the war would come to pass (and
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a held out hope against hope that it would not, as we know from
his “When I heard . . . ” dirge), it was just a matter of time.
101. For examples of two discussions of karma in the epic that incorporate the seed-fruit
metaphor, see 3.225.22–27 (where, interestingly, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a himself is speaking about the
likelihood that the Pā ṇ ḍ avas will defeat the Kauravas in battle) and 5.34.1–25 (where Vidura
is attempting to convince Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra to make peace).
102. Gary Saul Morson, Narrative and Freedom: The Shadows of Time (New Haven: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 1994), 3, 234 .
103. Vidura and Sa ṃ jaya make this same point to Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a at 5.34.1–25 and 11.1.30–35
respectively.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 131
The second narrative strategy, the strategy of frame-switching, plays with
time by placing two diff erent narrative moments, the time of the war and
the time of the war’s telling and Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s grieving, in close proximity to
one another. What this strategy provides, then, is the juxtaposition of the
moment where a character (Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra) is forced to see that he is the agent
of an event (the war) and the moment of the event (the war) itself. This
switching back and forth between agent and event, or seed-sower and fruit,
suggests that the present (as the future of the past) and the future are inex-
tricably linked, that the eff ect and its cause are inseparable. As in the case
above, the suggestion here is that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra did not have a proper under-
standing of this intimate connection. Because of this fundamental misun-
derstanding, he now fi nds himself facing inconceivable consequences for
his misguided actions and his over-indulgent aff ection for his sons.
As noted above, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a claims to have the eyesight of insight,
which he defi nes as the ability to see the consequences of an action at an
event’s inception. However, if this is the case, then we encounter, once
again, the paradox of the blind king: that he sees with insight but does not
act with it. The reason why he fails to make the connection between insight
and action, following the suggestions of the narrative strategies of back-
shadowing and frame-switching, is because he is blind to the intimate link
between act and consequence. He fundamentally misjudged this connec-
tion by clinging to the small hopes he harbored that he would not reap the
bad consequences of the seeds that he sowed, even though he was able to
“see” these consequences in temporal advance. 104 It was this error, this
moral blindness, that cost him and virtually every other character in the
epic so much because it contributed signifi cantly to the war and its devas-
tation. Experienced in this way, the text through its narrative strategies
provides an argument for why we should see in the way that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
does not see. Blindness to this fundamental characteristic of time and
causality, the text argues, is at the heart of the source of suff ering.
The End of the War and the Moment of Advice:
Three Arguments Against Grief
The end of the war constitutes the moment of reckoning for Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra.
At this point in the story he is no longer able to turn a blind eye to the in-
evitable consequences of his bad decisions, since these consequences
104. For a discourse in the epic on the evils of hope, see 12.126.
132 disorienting dharma
have now come to pass. Devastated by the defeat of his army, the deaths of
his sons, and the loss of his kingdom, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra is a broken man who
utterly succumbs to grief; it is doubtful whether he will ever be able to move
beyond it. To help him begin to do so, three advisors against grief (Saṃ jaya,
Vidura, and Vy ā sa) arrive and deliver three very diff erent arguments to him.
The end of the war represents a crossroads for the audience as well.
Like Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, we have just emerged from the battle books and have
experienced “the massive shock that the account of the war produces.”1 05
Just as Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s advisors present him with three diff erent arguments
for why he should not grieve, the text also provides us with three argu-
ments for why we should not grieve. Do the text’s narrative strategies en-
courage us to be persuaded by the same arguments that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a is
persuaded by? Why or why not?
As this book has argued in its introduction, the M ahā bh ā rata contains
an extended argument for why its audiences should not succumb to grief.
One way the text makes its case is through the characterization of the
grieving king Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, who is the recipient of many arguments against
grief. It is during these crucial “moments of advice” that the text presents
us with some of its most powerful cases against despair. Why does the text
present many of its arguments through the depiction of a character who
ultimately fails to overcome his grief?
Three Arguments against Grief
At the conclusion of the war, Sa ṃ jaya approaches Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a to tell him
that it is time to perform the funeral rites for the warriors who have per-
ished in battle. Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, “pained because of the killing of his sons and
grandsons” (p utrapautravadh ā rdita ), falls to the earth and laments:
My sons have been killed! My ministers have been killed! All my allies
have been killed! Obviously I will be miserable as long as I move upon
this earth! What is the use of living now that I am deprived of my rel-
atives? I am like a decrepit old bird whose wings have been clipped. 106
105. Fitzgerald, The Mah ā bh ā rata , Vol. 7 , xvi.
106. 11.1.10–11. This image of extreme vulnerability to the implacable forces of the world is a
quintessential image in the Mah ā bhā rata . See my discussion of Draupadī’s depiction in the
dicing scene in chapter 2 .
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 133
After he expresses his grief, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra turns to the task of apportioning
blame, just as he did in the frame of the battle books. First Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a
blames himself for not heeding the advice of his friends1 07 and for giving
into his bad judgment. 1 08 Next he blames his misfortune on the machina-
tions of karma and fate (this appears to be the one instance in which
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra blames karma for his misfortune):1 09
Sa ṃ jaya, I do not remember committing bad acts in the past the
fruit of which I am experiencing here and now, fool that I am. But
certainly I did something wicked in previous births as a result of
which the Ordainer has made me act in ways that lead to suff ering.
Growing old, the destruction of all my relatives and allies, all this
has happened because of the operation of fate. Is there a person in
the world more miserable than I?1 10
In response Saṃ jaya attempts once again to help Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a move beyond
his grief. He argues that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra should not grieve since the source of his
grief, the death of his sons, was his own fault. Because Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra did not
follow his friends’ advice, because he was too greedy and “eager for results,”
and because he did not do enough to restrain Duryodhana, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra now
fi nds himself in this miserable position.1 11 Summing up Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s moral
failure with an aphorism “A person must act properly in the very beginning so
that when the matter has long passed, s/he does not suff er later,” 112 Sa ṃ jaya
concludes his sermon with a warning about the dangers of grief:
One cannot obtain wealth while grieving, nor can one fi nd happi-
ness while grieving. One cannot obtain royal splendor when grieving,
nor can one who is grieving fi nd the Ultimate.1 13
107. 11.1.13–14.
108. 11.1.15.
109. Hill, Fate, Predestination, and Human Action , 33 .
110. 1 1.1.17–19. Yudhiṣ ṭ hira asks this same question (“Is there anyone more miserable than
I?”) several times in T he Book of the Forest .
111. 11.1–27.
112. 11.1.28.
113. 11.1.31.
134 disorienting dharma
To understand Saṃ jaya’s point, we should consider why accepting re-
sponsibility for his hand in the war would dispel Dhr ṭ ar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s grief. First,
what is grief for Saṃ jaya? From Saṃ jaya’s perspective, grief is not simply
sadness over the death of a loved one. Grief, like other negative responses
(such as greed or anger) to external events, is a potentially paralyzing emo-
tion that overwhelms the senses and skews one’s vision of reality. Thus it
prevents one from taking the proper course of action. Further, grief is an
emotion to which one succumbs; it is an indulgence that entails a funda-
mental rejection of the way things are. From this perspective, we can see
why Sa ṃ jaya might assume that telling Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a that the war was his
fault might persuade Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra to overcome his despair. Saṃ jaya’s point
is that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, of all people, should not grieve, since he was not a
victim but an architect of his own misery.1 14 By forcing Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a to see
his role in the war, Saṃ jaya is attempting to snap the blind king out of his
brooding and to motivate him to act.
Before Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a has a chance to respond, Vidura jumps in and pro-
vides a second argument against grief. Because Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra does not
respond to Saṃ jaya’s speech and because a second argument is necessary,
we may assume Saṃ jaya’s speech did not accomplish its goal. (This would
not be surprising since we know that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra has heard many of
Sa ṃ jaya’s “arguments” before, and they were met with deaf ears.) Vidura’s
speech, the longest of the three, focuses on two related themes: the de-
structive quality of time and the misery of the cycle of rebirth.
Vidura exhorts Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra to take hold of himself since death is the
fi nal conclusion for all mortal beings. All accumulations end in dissolu-
tion, all unions end in separation, all life ends in death.1 15 The warriors
who died in the battle did not belong to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, nor he to them, so
why does he grieve?1 16 Suff ering and death are simply fundamental aspects
of existence.1 17 Time drags everyone and everything off ,1 18 making all things
in life temporary; knowing this, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a should slay his mental misery
with wisdom.
114. Karve, Yug ā nta , 70.
115. 11.2.3.
116. 11.2.8.
117. 11.2.16.
118. 11.2.14.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 135
Next, Vidura discusses the forces of karma and s a ṃ s ā ra , painting the
picture of sa ṃ s ā ra in the most unpleasant terms through the following
story.1 19 Once upon a time, a brahmin enters an impenetrable wood that is
fi lled with gigantic beasts of prey who hunt him. Running for his life, the
brahmin discovers that he is trapped by a large net that covers the forest. To
his horror, he also notices a gigantic, hideous-looking woman who embraces
the forest with her arms and fi ve-headed snakes whose heads touch the sky.
The brahmin falls into a well and becomes tangled up in vines. In this unfor-
tunate predicament, he discovers several additional dangers that threaten
him: a six-headed elephant, a cluster of bees gathering honey (which the
brahmin licks greedily), black and white rats that gnaw at the vines that hold
him; and a snake at the bottom of the well, coiled in anticipation.
Moved by the plight of the brahmin, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a asks Vidura how he
can escape. Vidura explains that the story is an allegory for s a ṃ s ā ra .1 20 The
forest, according to Vidura, is the vast cycle of rebirth, the wild beasts are
diseases, and the giant woman is old age that destroys beauty. The well is
the physical body and the vines from which the brahmin hangs in the well
are the desire to stay alive, a desire that all human beings have. At the
bottom of the well lies the snake, which is time, the destroyer of all beings,
that which takes everything away.
Capitalizing on Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s sympathy for the brahmin, Vidura urges
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a to save himself from the misery of rebirth, as represented in
the story, by resorting to “misery medicine” (d uḥkhabhaiṣ ajya ),1 21 or mental
restraint. Through mental control a person is able to move beyond the
suff ering caused by the endless cycle of rebirth: “not courage, not riches,
not friends can free one from misery the way that the self that is fi rmly
restrained can.”1 22
Unfortunately, Vidura’s lecture is too intense for the old king, and at its
conclusion, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a faints away. When he is revived, he declares that
he wants to commit suicide and Vy ā sa, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s father, now steps in.
Vy ā sa begins his speech by reinforcing Vidura’s basic point concerning
the transitory nature of life. He says:
119. 11.5.3–11.6.1.
120. 11.6.1–6.5.
121. 11.7.17.
122. 11.7.18 Notice the similarity between this statement and Ānanda’s defi nition of ś ā ntarasa
(see chapter 1 ).
136 disorienting dharma
No doubt you know that mortals are transient. Since the world of
the living is not eternal, existence is transient, and life has death for
its end, why do you grieve?1 23
Then, suddenly switching gears, he tells Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra that he should not
grieve because the slaughter was “destined” (b havitavya , d aiva ).1 24 To
explain, Vy ā sa tells Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a that he visited Indra’s assembly hall in
heaven. 125 There he overheard a conversation between the gods and the
goddess Earth. During this conversation, Earth requested that the gods
fulfi ll the promise they made to her and help to relieve her burden. Vi ṣ ṇ u
replied that Duryodhana would soon make his appearance in order to take
care of that job. According to Vyā sa, Viṣ ṇ u told Earth,
The kings have gathered on the battlefi eld of the Kauravas for his
(i.e., Duryodhana’s) sake. Attacking, they will kill each other with
mighty weapons. Thus, goddess, it is in war that your burden will
be removed.1 26
Vy ā sa then lectures Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra on his sons’ wickedness and urges him to
recognize the fact that his sons were born on earth in order to destroy it.1 27
Knowing that the destruction of the Bhā ratas was fated, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra should
abandon his grief, keep his life, and reconcile with the Pā ṇ ḍ avas. 128 Finally,
Vy ā sa ends his argument by returning to his fi rst point concerning the
transitory nature of life, reminding Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra that he who is “supreme in
dharma ” must accept what he already knows—that “creatures go and come
back again”. 129
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, moved by his father’s speech, agrees to try to abandon his
despair. He tells Vyā sa:
123. 11. 8.13–14.
124. 11.8.16, 11.8.28, 11.8.35.
125. 11.8.20–26.
126. 11.8.25–26.
127. 11.8.27.
128. 11.8.34–35.
129. 11.8.39. Here knowledge of d harma seems to be equated with knowledge of the tran-
sient nature of life. See also 15.40.11 where d harma and acceptance of transitoriness seem to
be closely linked if not equated.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 137
O best of brahmins, driven by a huge net of grief and perplexed in-
cessantly, I do not know myself. But listening to your statement
about what was ordained by fate, I will hold onto life and try not to
grieve.1 30
Vy ā sa, satisfi ed, disappears on the spot, and Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a summons
G ā ndh ā rī and prepares to visit the battlefi eld.
why, among all three speeches, is Vyā sa’s speech successful (or at least
partially successful, since Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a never truly overcomes his grief)?1 31
Let us consider these three arguments together. Sa ṃ jaya, Vidura, and
Vy ā sa all provide Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra with a framework for understanding the de-
struction of the Bhā ratas and its cause; they do so with the intention of
dispelling Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s despair. Simply put, these three arguments are, in
chronological order: (1) Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a should not grieve because the source
of his grief, the death of his sons and kinsmen, was his fault (Saṃ jaya’s ar-
gument); (2) Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra should not grieve because the source of his grief,
the death of his sons and death more generally, is a fact of life to which
all living creatures are subject (Vidura’s argument); and (3) Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
should not grieve because the source of his grief, the death of his sons and
kinsmen, was brought about by a divine design in order to relieve Earth
of her suff ering (Vy ā sa’s argument). It is important to keep in mind, how-
ever, that Vy ā sa’s account of the divine plan is bookended by a restatement
of Vidura’s earlier point about the transitory nature of life, an argument
that catapulted Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a into suicidal despair.
Sa ṃ jaya provides Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a with a framework for understanding the
war’s cause that is based on Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s particular situation and that
encourages self-understanding. Through directing Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a to see his
role in bringing about the war, Saṃ jaya encourages Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a to face
reality and move on. Saṃ jaya’s strategy fails, however, because Dhṛ atr ā ṣ ṭ ra
has neither the strength of mind nor the courage to accept his role in the
events that led to the war.
Vidura encourages Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra to understand the devastation through
the dual lenses of time and sa ṃ s ā ra . Since destruction comes to all creatures,
130. 11.8.46–47.
131. See 15.36.26–33 where Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a at the end of his life still speaks of being tormented
by the memory of the destruction of the Bhā ratas and where he still blames Duryodhana for
the catastrophe. See also Chaitanya, T he Mah ā bhā rata , 62 .
138 disorienting dharma
why does Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra grieve? He is by no means the only person who has
experienced sorrow because of loss and death. Since all life is characterized
by loss and hence suff ering, because all creatures are endlessly born into a
world where they face the ravages and sorrows of time, then why would one
be shocked and overwhelmed when it comes one’s way? This argument, like
Sa ṃ jaya’s, fails to persuade Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra to abandon his grief. Dhṛ tara ṣ ṭ ra is
not ready to face this vision of “the way things are.” In fact, it almost breaks
the blind king completely.
Vy ā sa’s principal argument encourages Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra to understand the
war and devastation through the framework of fate. What is worth noting
about Vy ā sa’s account is that it “explains” the destruction of his kinsmen
in terms of a higher good: relieving Earth of her burden. Vyā sa’s account
also frees Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a from the burden of responsibility, since Vy ā sa’s
main point is that there was simply nothing that Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra could have
done to stop the war. It was the product of a divine design; this is why he
should not grieve. Vyā sa’s principal account—as Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra interprets
it—does not, therefore, require him to take a hard look at his own life.
Neither does it require him to refl ect deeply upon the human situation
(though Vy ā sa’s framing point concerning the transitory nature of life
certainly does).1 32
132. Does Vyā sa really think that the story of the burden of Earth provides a sound expla-
nation for the war? I have been careful to note that in this passage he frames the story
with a very diff erent account of the war’s cause—one that emphasizes the transitory
nature of life, a point that echoes Vidura’s previous speech. For other places in the epic
where Vy ā sa emphasizes the transitory nature of life in the context of urging the grief-
stricken not to succumb to despair, see 6.2.5, 6.4.2–3, and 12.26.5–8. I emphasize the
presence of Vyā sa’s framing point, which stands in an ambiguous relationship to his
“burden of Earth explanation” because a number of scholars have read the epic’s burden
of Earth account as its defi nitive answer to why the war took place. According to these
scholars, the war is not actually a war between human beings, but is in reality a war
between the gods and the demons, and hence good against evil, transposed in this
human context. For this reading, see, for example, Georges Dumézil, M ythe et Épopée
(Paris: Gallimard, 1968), 168–169 ; Fitzgerald, “The M ah ā bhā rata ,” 57–59, 74 ; A lf Hilte-
beitel, “India’s Epics: Writing, Orality, Divinity” in The Study of Hinduism , Studies in
Comparative Religion, ed. Arvind Sharma (Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina
Press, 2003), 134 ; W. J. Johnson, T he Sauptikaparvan of the Mahā bhā rata: The Massacre at
Night (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), xxxvi ; Ruth Cecily Katz, Arjuna in the
Mah ā bhā rata: Where Krishna is, There is Victory (Columbia, SC: University of South Car-
olina Press, 1989), 239–240 ; Jacques Scheuer, Ś iva dans le Mahā bhā rata (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1982), 156 ; J ohn D. Smith, T he Mahā bhā rata (London: Penguin
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 139
Vy ā sa’s principal account, therefore, stands out because it is the only
argument among the three that could be construed as providing
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra with some level of comfort. As the blind king interprets his
father’s speech, it places a positive spin on the tragic war by contextual-
izing it in terms of the greater good of relieving Earth of her burden and
by absolving Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra of blame. Vidura and Saṃ jaya’s arguments, by
contrast, are bitter pills for the blind king to swallow. Given the fact that
Books, 2009), xxvi . This reading of the text is often based on the following passages:
1.58–61, 6.62.8–11, 11.8.20, 12.337.29–31, 13.143.12, 16.9.29. However, as Simon Brodbeck
notes (and I agree with him), this cosmic explanation for the war is used sparingly in the
text and remains “fi rmly in the background.” See “ Husbands of Earth: K ṣ atriyas ,
Females, and Female K ṣ atriyas in the S trīparvan ,” in Epic Undertakings , ed. Robert P.
Goldman and Muneo Tokunaga (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2009), 50 and 52 . My posi-
tion on this question is that this cosmic explanation is only one answer among many
with respect to the question of the war’s cause, and the epic in the end defers privileging
any one of these answers. (Tamar Reich’s recent article “Ends and Closures in the
Mah ā bhā rata ” supports this position [see p. 25]). I also believe that the cosmic “answer”
is not one to which the epic gives a great deal of “aesthetic weight.” (See chapter 1 for
how this idea of aesthetic weight is central to Ānandavardhana’s reading of the epic as
well as my own.) Many scholars have cautioned students of the epic on this point as
well, arguing against the trend in M ahā bhā rata studies to overemphasize the mytholog-
ical/divine dimensions of the story. For example B. K. Matilal warns us against viewing
the Mahā bhā rata war as a simple struggle between good and evil, between gods and
demons (a lens that the story of the burden of Earth supplies). Matilal writes, “But I
believe when we interpret the Mahā bhā rata battle in this way, we take a simplistic and
easy way out. Every episode of the epic has a rich variety of signifi cance, it is full of am-
biguities, r eplete with suggestivity ” (italics mine). See Matilal, “The Throne,” 109 . Greg
Bailey too notes that the epic genre emphasizes the human level, particularly in light of
the physical and mental suff ering that characters in the epic undergo. See “Suff ering in
the Mah ā bhā rata ,” 48 and 51. See also A. K. Ramanujan, “Repetition in the M ahā bhā rata ,”
434 n4 where he critiques Biardeau and Hiltebeitel for their tendency to emphasize the
mythological over the human. Additionally, K. A. Paniker notes that the diff erence
between the p ur ā ṇ a genre and the i tih ā sa genre (by which he means “epic”) is that the
purā ṇ as glorify divinity (i.e., the mythological stories), while the i tih ā sa focuses on the
human element. See Indian Narratology , 41–42. Many scholars who emphasize the
mythological lens when interpreting the epic have been infl uenced by either Georges
Dumezil, who reads the epic through a Vedic/Indo-European prism, or Madeleine
Biardeau, who reads it through a Purā ṇ ic one. Both scholars have been criticized for
their symbolic interpretations of the epic. See Brockington, T he Sanskrit Epics , 69;
González-Reimann, T he Mahā bhā rata and the Yugas , 157 ; Hill, F ate, Predestination, and
Human Action , xxii ; James Laine, V isions of God: Narratives of Theophany in the
Mah ā bhā rata (Vienna: Gerold & Co., 1989), 32 ; v an Buitenen, The Mah ā bhā rata. Vol. 3 ,
163 ; and John D. Smith, “The Hero as Gifted Man: Nala in the M ah ā bhā rata ,” in T he
Indian Narrative: Perspectives and Patterns , ed. Christopher Shackle and Rupert Snell
(Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1992), 13–22 .
140 disorienting dharma
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, at least in part, is presumably moved by Vyā sa’s account
because it makes him feel better, how are we encouraged to respond to it?
Or to put this question another way, are Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s responses meant to
serve as a model for ours? The answer is clearly “no.” The text’s strategies
have encouraged us to view him increasingly as morally wanting, particu-
larly in three contexts: as he makes decisions,1 33 listens to advice, and ref-
uses to come to terms with the real sources of his sorrow. Therefore, rather
than being moved by arguments that persuade Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, we are en-
couraged by the text to be moved by those arguments that fail to persuade
him.
Further, the fact that Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a fails to be moved by Sa ṃ jaya and
Vidura’s arguments provides a window into the innerworkings, particu-
larly the potential blind spots, of the human mind. The fact that Saṃ jaya’s
speech fails to persuade Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra to abandon his despair exposes the
fact that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra is simply unable to see and accept his role in the war.
Similarly, the fact that Vidura’s speech fails shows us that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra is
unable to face fundamental truths about the nature of existence. In
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s failure to be persuaded by Saṃ jaya’s and Vidura’s arguments
lies a hidden truth now exposed for us to see: how loath the human mind
is to accept agency in suff ering (both one’s own suff ering and the suf-
fering of others) and to accept the fact that life is characterized by impla-
cable temporality and hence inevitable loss and despair.1 34 By exposing this
resistance, the text provides us with the opportunity to refl ect upon
whether we harbor the same kind of resistances that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra does.
What would be the purpose of encouraging this refl exive move? Ostensi-
bly, such self-refl ection would initiate the process of the dissolution of the
resistances that prevent us from seeing and coming to terms with the
world as it is.
133. Once the Pā ṇ ḍ avas come of age and the question of kingship becomes pressing,
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra makes three fateful decisions: (1) he exiles the Pā ṇ ḍ avas to V ā raṇ ā vata, (2) he
challenges them to a game of dice, and (3) he fails to return the kingdom to them after their
thirteen-year exile.
134. As mentioned in chapter 1 , Simone Weil and Iris Murdoch both write passionately
about the fact that humans are unable to face the prevalence of suff ering and death in the
world. Weil and Murdoch consider the ability and courage to do so is the highest ethical
achievement. See S imone Weil, “The Love of God and Affl iction,” in The Simone Weil
Reader , ed. George Panchinas (London: Moyer Bell, 1977), 439–468 and I ris Murdoch,
“Comic and Tragic,” in Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals (New York: Penguin Press, 1993),
90–146 .
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 141
Conclusion
As mentioned earlier, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra never truly rises above his grief.
Although he spends his last days in the forest performing austerities, he
still speaks of being tormented by the memory of the destruction of the
Bh ā ratas and still blames Duryodhana for the catastrophe.1 35 Thus he
remains “blind” to the very end save for one brief and joyous night when
Vy ā sa, his father, grants him the power to see his sons (along with the
other warriors) rise up from the river and embrace one another.
To return to a question raised earlier, why then does the text make an
argument against despair chiefl y through the depiction of a perennially
grieving character who himself ultimately fails to overcome his sorrow?
An argument running throughout this chapter is that the text’s narrative
strategies encourage our increasing estrangement from Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a. Our
suspicions are fi rst raised at the very opening of the story in his “When I
heard . . . ” speech, since his attempts to prove that he possesses the eye-
sight of insight raise troubling questions about him. Namely, if he was
able to “foresee” the defeat of the Kauravas and the deaths of his sons, why
didn’t he do something to stop the building animosity between the Kaura-
vas and the Pā ṇ ḍ avas? In The Book of the Eff ort , we watch him waver; doubt;
“see” and, at the same time, refuse to see; squander precious time; and
lose the opportunity to make peace. During and after the war, we watch
him refuse to own up to his role in the confl ict and rush to pin the blame
on other forces.
Thus we “learn” from Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra not because he is a moral paragon,
but because he is a fl awed human being.1 36 Accordingly, we are not encour-
aged to identify and emulate him, but to stand back and critically refl ect on
his moral—and very human—failings (for fi lial weakness and losing one’s
mind to grief are very human pitfalls). From this distance, we are directed
to see parts of ourselves mirrored and greatly magnifi ed. This amplifi ca-
tion “does work” because the extremity of what Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra has to face—
moral responsibility for whole-scale slaughter—renders bearable what we
ourselves have to face and are loath to face, which will almost certainly not
be as extreme as what the blind king must face. Thus, the characterization
135. 15.36.26–33.
136. See Matilal’s assessment of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s moral failings, “Dharma and Rationality,”
60–61.
142 disorienting dharma
of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra creates “a moral space” for us to face and bear our own
places of contact with sorrow, either as agents or victims of despair or as
both. The fact that this characterization does signifi cant moral and aes-
thetic work in the epic is underscored by the fact that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s role as
lamenter par excellence is highlighted in the epic’s outer frame and in the
frame of the four battle books.
Further, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s failure to rise above his grief creates a context for
wise characters in the epic to make arguments about the pitfalls of despair.
While it is clear that these arguments fall on Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s deaf ears, they
are not meant to fall on o ur deaf ears. Thus Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s character creates
an opportunity in the epic for advice, particularly arguments against grief.
In asking us to watch Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a (whom we increasingly see as morally
wanting) fail to listen to good advice and reap bad consequences due to
this failure, the text’s aesthetics of suff ering makes a powerful case for
why we should adopt the ways of seeing and of understanding the world
recommended by Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s wise advisers that would enable us to
move beyond despair.
For all these reasons, the epic’s depiction of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra provides a
powerful case for why readers or spectators of narrative literature do not
learn from watching positive role models in action. Rather, they learn
from negative exemplars by watching them fail and assessing the reasons
for the failure as well as witnessing and experiencing the inevitable disas-
trous consequences of their bad decisions. Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra is not the only
character in the epic who “instructs” through his fl aws. Indeed, the princi-
pal characters in the epic, for the most part, serve as negative examples,
especially in terms of their responses to suff ering.1 37 Almost all the princi-
pal actors are moral failures in this respect (Gā ndh ā rī, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s wife,
is one possible exception; see postscript). They either refuse to see their
role in contributing to sorrow (Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a), are crazed by the experience
of it (Draupadī and Aśvatthā man, who both descend into a psychology
of revenge),1 38 or are paralyzed by being implicated in it (Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira,
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, and Arjuna in the B hagavadgīt ā ). The point of supplying nu-
merous examples of inappropriate responses is to persuade us to under-
stand why it is imperative not to respond in these ways. Fortitude, courage,
137. Bharata, author of the N ā ṭ yaś ā stra , provides a typology of heroes and heroines that is
based on characters’ responses to events. See T he Nā ṭ yaś ā stra , Vol.2 , 201—213.
138. Sutherland, “Sīt ā and Draupadī,” 67 .
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 143
realistic vision, stoic acceptance, and tranquility—these are the mental
attitudes that will enable us to steer clear of the fog of despair and the fur-
thering of suff ering.1 39
Postscript
As a postscript to chapter 3 I want to briefl y note that Gā ndhā rī’s postwar
laments provide an interesting counterpoint to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s. I also want to
entertain the idea that they provide a model in the epic for an appropriate
way to respond to despair. Gā ndh ā rī is Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra’s wife who blindfolded
herself on the day of her marriage so that she would not be superior to her
husband in any way. After the war, both she and her husband fi nd them-
selves in analogous situations; both respond to these situations similarly.
Since each is a parent of Duryodhana, both must face the fact that the war
and its devastation were due, in part, to their inability to restrain their son.
Both characters have a diffi cult time coming to terms with their culpability,
and this, in part, accounts for the reason why they blame a variety of causal
forces for the catastrophe: Gā ndhā rī, like Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra, blames variously
time, 140 karma, 141 Duryodhana,1 42 herself1 43 (as Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra blames him-
self), 144 and K ṛ ṣ ṇ a (whom Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra never blames). 145 Further, both
Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra and Gā ndhā rī respond to their overwhelming grief with anger
(Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra attempts to crush Bhīma in a violent embrace; 146 G ā ndhā rī con-
templates cursing Yudhiṣ ṭ hira 147 and actually does curse Kṛ ṣ ṇ a 148 ). Finally,
139. Dhand, “The Subversive Nature of Virtue,” 34 .
140. 11.15.17.
141. 11.16.58–59.
142. 11.17.16.
143. 11.15.20.
144. Yudhiṣ ṭ hira also blames himself in his postwar laments. In this regard, he presents an
interesting contrast to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra. While Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a has a tendency to blame others and
avoid coming to terms with his own role in the war, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira goes too far in the opposite
direction: he blames himself entirely for the war and the deaths of his kinsmen and conse-
quently loses his will to live and desire to rule. (12.7.1–8.1; 12.27.1–25)
145. 11.25.36–42.
146. 11.11.13–21.
147. 11.13.2. While she does not curse him, she does scorch the nails of his fi ngertips as he
bows before her in a gesture of fi lial piety at 11.15.7–8.
148. 11.25.36–42.
144 disorienting dharma
both receive the gift of vision in the context of fi lial loss. In T he Book of the
Women , Vy ā sa grants G ā ndhā rī a divine eye so that she may witness the
carnage of the battlefi eld (thus she never sees her sons while they are alive,
but only as corpses).1 49 In T he Book of the Stay in the Forest Hermitage , as
already mentioned, Vyā sa bestows the gift of vision on Dhṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra so that
he may see his dead sons rise up from the river Gang ā for one brief night. 150
Yet it is in G ā ndh ā rī’s ability to respond to and express her grief from the
perspective of a mother that sets her apart from her husband. In the teeth
of her own despair, G ā ndh ā rī never ceases to be moved by the grief of those
around her, even her “enemies.” When she fi rst encounters the P ā ṇ ḍ avas
after the war, we are told that she comforts them “like a mother”.1 51 It is like
a mother too that she “who suff ers acutely” ( ā rta ) 152 comforts the grieving
Draupadī, “who suff ers even more” ( ā rtatara ), 153 telling her in words that
echo Saṃ jaya’s speech to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra in T he Book of the Beginning ,
Daughter, do not be tormented with grief! See how I am also suf-
fering. I think that this devastation of the world was brought on by
the turning of Time . . . Do not grieve for something that cannot be
avoided and especially not for what has passed away.1 54
Directly after she comforts Draupadī (and perhaps because of it?), she sees
the fi eld of battle with the divine eye bestowed upon her by Vy ā sa. Movingly,
she describes to Kṛ ṣ ṇ a the details of the carnage as well as her own mixture
of emotions—sorrow and resignation—upon seeing Duryodhana’s body:
Look at my son, Mā dhava, as he lies on a hero’s bed—impetuous,
the best of warriors, an expert shot, intoxicated by war. The scorcher
of enemies who went at the head of the consecrated kings now lies
in the dust. See how Time turns! 155
149. 11.16.1–3.
150. 15.43.1.
151. 11.15.8.
152. 11.15.15.
153. 11.15.15.
154. 11.15.16–19.
155. 11.17.9–10.
The Eyesight of Insight: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Moral Blindness 145
She also mourns the loss of other sons, Duḥś ā sana, Vikarṇ a, and Dur-
mukha in particular. These laments concerning her personal loss, how-
ever, are interspersed with her detailed descriptions of the shock, horror,
and suff ering of the other women on the battlefi eld. Even more painful
than the sight of the mangled bodies of her own sons, G ā ndh ā rī says, is
the vision of the grieving women on the battlefi eld; these women who
gasp, shriek, wail, and drop to the earth as they happen upon the severed
limbs and heads of their husbands, fathers, and sons. She says,
And look, what is even more distressing to me than the slaying of
my son is these women who surround these heroes killed in battle.1 56
Thus, encapsulated in her lament to Kṛ ṣ ṇ a in The Book of the Women are
the laments of countless others, the voices of wives, mothers, sisters, and
lovers.1 57 In this scene, G ā ndh ā rī is more than just a mother who laments
the loss of her sons; she is a mother to all grievers lamenting the loss of
their loved ones. In her concern for the sorrow of others while grappling
with her own loss, she becomes a model for how one should respond to
despair—that is, one should never lose sight of the fact that human sorrow
is a universal experience, not an isolated personal one, a truth that the
“short-sighted” Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a never seems to glean in spite of Sa ṃ jaya’s
(and others’) exhortations that he do so.1 58
156. 11.17.22.
157. Black argues that it is precisely this quality of her narration that makes it so poignant
and unique. “Eavesdropping,” 65.
158. See Vidura’s argument against grief, which he delivers to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a at 11.2.1–8.1. Note
that at 15.40.11 Gā ndh ā rī is described as a “k ā lapary ā yavedinī ”; in the same verse she is also
described as a “s arvadharmajñ ā .” The suggestion here is that to know d harma is to under-
stand the “revolution of time,” i.e., the transitory nature of life.
4
Time That Ripens and Rots
All Creatures
We might, in fact, regard the [M ah ā bh ā rata ] as an extended
essay, carried along on a complex narrative frame, on time
and its terrors.
—david shulman1
at the opening of the Mah ā bh ā r ā ta , Ugraśravas, the bard of the brah-
mins in the Naimiṣ a forest, makes an astute observation about the
Mah ā bh ā rata and how it is meant to aff ect its audiences. He says, “The
great-spirited author has composed this story of the Bhā ratas to produce
tears and terror in the minds of good people.”2 There is perhaps no more
terrifying “character” in the epic than the specter of time (k ā la ). Through-
out the text, time appears in the guise of several horrifying forms and in-
carnations: a rat gnawing on a rope;3 a snake coiled at the bottom of a pit; 4
an old woman smeared with crimson ointments, chanting dismal tunes;5
1. “Toward a Historical Poetics,” 26–27.
2. 1.2.195. Ugraśravas here is speaking specifi cally about how T he Book of the Women is
meant to aff ect its audiences, but the statement certainly pertains to the epic as a whole.
3. This image appears twice in the context of a story about Jaratkaru, an ascetic and the father
of Āstika. The story line runs as follows: One day Jaratkaru wanders into a cave. There he dis-
covers his ancestors hanging upside down and suspended by a blade of grass, which is being
devoured by a rat. When Jaratkaru asks them why they are in this horrible predicament, they
reply that because he, the last of their descendants, has chosen the life of asceticism and
refused to procreate, their line will be destroyed. The rat, they inform him, is time. Soon it will
gnaw through the rope, they will die, and the line will become extinct (1.13 and 1.41).
4. See Vidura’s argument against grief in T he Book of the Women (11.2.1–11.8.1).
5. 10.8.64–5.
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 147
a bald man with a black and tawny complexion who peers into the houses
of his imminent victims.6
Time is also terrifying because of the adverse ways in which it
impacts the lives of individuals. Characters often attribute their mis-
fortunes to the forces of time. 7 Further, when characters walk open-
eyed into certain doom, the narrative voice declares that they were
impelled by time. For example, when Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira makes the fateful
decision to journey to Hā stinapura and play dice with the Kauravas,
Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana notes that he “was summoned by Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and the
covenant of time.”8 At the end of the epic, when the still-dejected
Dharma King decides to renounce his kingdom and perform yogic aus-
terities, he tells Arjuna that he thinks everything that happened, the
war and the deaths of their kinsmen, was due to time. 9 Arjuna replies
simply, “Time, time.” 10
Paul Ricoeur in his seminal work T ime and Narrative writes,
All fi ctional narratives are t ales of time inasmuch as the structural
transformations that aff ect situations and characters take time.
How ever only a few are “t ales about time ” inasmuch as in them it is
the very experience of time that is at stake in these structural trans-
formations.1 1
The Mah ā bh ā rata , in addition to being a “tale of time” since it is a work
of literary art, is also “a tale about time” since, as this chapter argues,
the experience of time that it produces is central to the moral and aes-
thetic messages of the text. Indeed, transforming our understanding of
time is at the heart of its ethical project of refi guring our understanding
of suff ering.
Without doubt, time is one of the most complex, multifaceted themes
in the epic. Not only does the text contain a variety of conceptions of time
6. 16.3.2.
7. Hill, Fate, Predestination, and Human Action , 225 . For example, Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a blames time
frequently as discussed in chapter 4 .
8. 2.52.21.
9. 17.1.3.
10. 17.1.4.
11. Paul Ricoeur, Time and Narrative . trans. Kathleen McLaughlin and David Pellauer (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 2:101 (italics mine) .
148 disorienting dharma
(e.g., time is closely associated or equated with astrology,1 2 cosmology,1 3
causality, 14 historical chronology1 5 ), it also expresses its views on time in
a variety of ways (e.g., as a theme,1 6 as a narrative construct, and as a
poetic motif 17 ). Because of the diversity and range of the conceptions of
time in the text, our focus in this chapter will be narrowed to three con-
cerns. First, this chapter will explore two dominant theories of time, the
system of world ages or “y ugas ” and the epic’s “doctrine of time,”
( k ā lav ā da ). 18 Second, it will examine what the epic’s narrative strategies
“do” with time, that is, how the text through its narrative strategies ma-
nipulates our experience of time. Third, it will consider what insights
these two avenues of inquiry yield in terms of understanding the rela-
tionship between time and human sorrow in the text and how these
insights relate to the epic’s threefold ethical task.
ā ā
Two Theories of Time: Y ugas and K lav da
As previously mentioned, one unique dimension of the M ah ā bh ā rata
as a work of religious and literary art is its “riddle design,” which
van Buitenen captures so aptly in the following statement that it bears
repeating:
12. Bhī ṣ ma, for example, is said to be able to calculate time because he can read the heavens;
See his calculations in T he Book of Vir ā ṭ a , 4.47. For more on the astrological aspects of time
in the Mah ā bhā rata , see Paula Lerner, Astrological Key in Mahā bhā rata : The New Era , trans.
David White (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1988) .
13. Time is said to be the creator and destroyer of the universe. I discuss this dimension of
time and its depiction further in this chapter.
14. See chapter 3 .
15. The Mahā bh ā rata is after all a chronicle of the lineage of kings of the great Bhā ratas.
16. One way the text explores time thematically is through characters and their relation-
ship to time. Bhīṣ ma, as noted above, is able to calculate time. Kṛ ṣ ṇ a is time (6.33.32),
and Vyā sa is able to see past, present, and future simultaneously—as is Saṃ jaya when
he possesses his divine eye bestowed upon him by Vyā sa. (6.2.2 and 6.14.1) Further,
Vy ā sa is called the “ k ā lavā din ,” or the speaker of time (at 6.4.2), and he provides some
of the most moving sermons on time in the text. See Bruce Sullivan, S eer of the Fifth
Veda : K ṛ ṣ ṇ a Dvaip ā yana Vy ā sa in the Mah ā bhā rata (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1999),
31–36 .
17. Beyond the “terrifying” images mentioned above, time is also depicted as a wheel (sug-
gesting time’s cyclical nature), a rope; an ocean (in which the whole world sinks), and a
mighty wind or river (which carries all things away). See Vassilkov, “Kā lavā da,” 17–24 .
18. Ibid. , 17–33 .
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 149
The epic is a series of precisely stated problems imprecisely and
therefore inconclusively resolved, with every resolution raising a
new problem until the very end, when the question remains: whose
is heaven and whose is hell?1 9
One of the most pressing riddle-questions raised throughout the central
narrative is precisely why in spite of many characters’ good intentions did
events turn out in the disastrous way that they did? Or, more to the point,
who or what is responsible for the M ah ā bh ā rata war, the tragic devastation
of the great Bhā ratas, and the near destruction of the world?
One among several answers that the text provides is time (k ā la ).2 0 So,
precisely how and why is time responsible? By examining two major “the-
ories” of time in the M ahā bh ā rata , the system of four world ages or “y ugas ”
and the epic’s “doctrine of time” ( k ā lav ā da ), this chapter seeks to suggest
an answer. It focuses on these two ideas because both emphasize the de-
structive and oppressive powers of time, thus targeting time as a principal
cause of suff ering in the world. In this chapter we will be interested in the
extent to which these two ideas about time overlap, the context in which
each is discussed, and the extent to which characters in the epic explicitly
link each to the Bhā rata war. This chapter argues that the latter theory (the
epic’s doctrine of time) is more central to the text’s aesthetics of suff ering.
- -
The Yugas in the Mah abha rata
The term “ yuga ” refers to a mythical-historical system of four world
ages, beginning with the Kṛ ta yuga and ending with the Kali y uga . Each
yuga is preceded and followed by a “dawn” and a “twilight” that connect
the ages together. According to one formulation, the Kṛ ta y uga lasts four
thousand years plus four hundred years of dawn and as many of twi-
light; then comes the Tret ā of three thousand years, the Dv ā para of two
thousand, and fi nally the Kali of one thousand years (plus their corre-
sponding dawns and twilights). Thus, the ages are of unequal duration,
the longest appearing at the beginning of the cycle and the shortest at
the end. At the conclusion of this four- yuga cycle, that is at the end of the
19. Van Buitenen, T he Mahā bh ā rata, Vol. 2 , 29 .
20. The text, of course, raises other possible sources for the war and for suff ering in gen-
eral. See chapter 5 .
150 disorienting dharma
Kali yuga , the world is destroyed and then recreated and the whole cycle
begins anew.2 1
The four y ugas are named after the throws of the Vedic dice game and
their names indicate the gradual moral and physical degeneration of
humankind. While d harma is said to stand on four legs in the K ṛ ta yuga , it
stands on three in the Tretā , two in the Dvā para, and fi nally on only one
leg in the Kali yuga .2 2
Much has been made of the relationship between the M ah ā bh ā rata and
the theory of the yugas . According to the tradition, the M ahā bh ā rata war
occurred just before the commencement of the Kali y uga , which began on
the day of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s death on February 18, 3102 BC.2 3 Perhaps because of this
dating, which is not supported by the text, both Euro-American scholars
and traditional scholars have tended to “blame” the infl uence of the
approaching Kali y uga for the M ahā bh ā rata war and the degeneration of
dharma that takes place both before and during the battle.2 4
21. For scholarship on the y uga s in the Mahā bhā rata , see Madeleine Biardeau, “Etudes de
Mythologie Hindoue (IV): B hakti et Avatā ra ,” Bulletin de l’Ecole Française d’Extreme-Orient 63
(1976): 111–263 ; Mircea Eliade, T he Myth of the Eternal Return: Or, Cosmos and History (Princ-
eton: Princeton University Press, 1971), 113–115 ; González-Reimann, T he Mah ā bhā rata and the
Yugas; Sutton, Religious Doctrines , 255–261 ; Lynn Thomas, “Paraśurā ma and Time,” in M yth
and Mythmaking: Continuous Evolution in Indian Tradition , ed. Julia Leslie (Richmond: Cur-
zon, 1996), 63–86 and “Does the Age Make the King or the King Make the Age? Exploring
the Relationship Between the King and the Yugas in the Mahā bhā rata ,” Religions of South
Asia 1/2 (2007): 183–201 ; Heinrich Zimmer, Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civilization
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1972) . For a good synthesis of the theory of the y ugas
as it is presented in the Pur ā ṇ as, see Cornelia Dimmit and J. A. B van Buitenen, trs. and
eds., Classical Hindu Mythology: A Reader in the Sanskrit Purā ṇ as (Philadelphia: Temple Uni-
versity Press, 1978), 38–44 . The subject of the yuga s and its centrality to the epic story is a
loaded subject in M ahā bhā rata scholarship because it is at the center of Madeleine Biardeau’s
reading of the epic. Biardeau places the epic action at a crucial change of y uga (from the Kali
to the K ṛ ta y uga , that is the end of a cosmic cycle and the beginning of a new one) and she
explains many of the epic’s narrative events, particularly the tragic confl ict and the war, in
terms of this transition. She does this despite the fact that the M ahā bh ā rata itself does not
explicitly makes this link. For a critique of her p ralaya theory of the epic, see González-
Reimann, The Mah ā bhā rata and the Yugas , 157 ; Hill, Fate, Predestination, and Human Action ,
xvii–xviii ; Hiltebeitel, “The Mah ā bhā rata and Hindu Eschatology,” History of Religions 12/2
(1972) 95–135 ; and John Smith, “The Hero as Gifted Man,”14 .
22. For a brief study of this idea, see André Couture, “Dharma as a Four-Legged Bull: A Note
on an Epic and Pur ā ṇ ic Theme” in Voice of the Orient: A Tribute to Prof. Upendranath Dhal,
ed. Raghunath Panda (Delhi: Eastern Book Linkers, 2006), 69–76 .
23. M. Krishnamachariar, H istory of Classical Sanskrit Literature (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1970), lxvii . There is some discrepancy on this point. According to some traditional scholars,
the Kali y uga began during the M ah ā bhā rata war.
24. González-Reimann, T he Mahā bh ā rata and the Yugas , 2 .
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 151
Given the tendency of both modern scholarship and received tradition
to explain various narrative events, particularly the tragic confl ict and the
war, in terms of the infl uence of the Kali yuga , it is surprising that there
are only two extensive discussions of the y ugas in the M ahā bhā rata .2 5 Nei-
ther is located “in the thick of things,” that is, in the midst of the heat of
the action of the central narrative; rather, both are located in the third
book, The Book of the Forest , where the exiled Pā ṇ ḍ avas wander for twelve
years in the forest, traveling to hermitages and pilgrimage sites, listening
to the stories and teachings of the various sages whom they visit. Further,
as this chapter will demonstrate, neither of the two passages mentioned
above explicitly link the war or any other key narrative event explicitly to
the approaching Kali y uga .
The Hanumān Episode
The fi rst major discussion of the y ugas in the epic occurs in T he Book of the
Forest when Bhīma encounters Hanumā n in a banana grove. Hanumā n,
the chief of monkeys who aided Rā ma in the conquest of Laṅ k ā , is a major
fi gure in the R ā m ā ya ṇ a . His most famous feat was jumping over the
ocean to La ṅ k ā in order to locate Sītā , R ā ma’s kidnapped wife. When
Bhīma recognizes Hanum ā n, he asks about the specifi cs of the four world
ages, and Hanumā n’s discourse on the y ugas follows.
In this discourse, Hanumā n focuses primarily on the quality of life,
virtue, and religious devotion in each y uga , which, he points out, decrease
as the y ugas progress. In the Kṛ ta y uga , according to Hanumā n, dharma
does not decay and creatures do not die. There is no illness, no aging, no
discontent, no sorrow, no pride, no hatred, no hostility, and no fear. The
four classes are well defi ned and there is one single Veda. In the Tret ā
yuga , however, dharma decreases by one quarter and sacrifi ces appear,
along with diff erent religious systems, and people perform their duties
according to s vadharma . In the Dvā para yuga , d harma survives by half. The
Vedas are now fourfold; some people know all four, some three, some two
or one, while some know none at all. Passion arises and dishonesty and
diseases follow. In the Kali y uga , only one quarter of d harma survives. The
Vedic life-rules, law, sacrifi ce, and ritual come to an end. Crops fail and
diseases and vices take over.2 6
25. My discussion here is limited to Critical Edition and the Vulgate.
26. 3.148.10–37.
152 disorienting dharma
Hanum ā n concludes his teaching by warning Bhīma that the Kali yuga
will arrive soon. Then he assumes his divine form and he delivers a sec-
ond teaching, this time on d harma . In this speech he emphasizes the vir-
tues of nonviolence.2 7
Mā rka ṇ ḍ eya on the Yugas
The second extensive discussion of the y ugas in the epic also occurs in T he
Book of the Forest when Yudhiṣ ṭ hira is visited by the sage Mā rka ṇ ḍ eya.
M ā rka ṇ ḍ eya, gifted with a long life, has had the unique experience of
living through and witnessing the dissolution of the universe at the end of
the Kali y uga . Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira questions him, therefore, about his apocalyptic
experience as well as about ultimate causation.2 8 This question prompts
M ā rka ṇ ḍ eya’s discourse on Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s role as creator and destroyer of the
universe as well as his refl ections on the yugas , particularly on what hap-
pens at the end of the Kali y uga .2 9
M ā rkaṇ ḍ eya begins his discourse by briefl y outlining the time-span of
each yuga as well as that of the whole yuga cycle. Next, he describes in
great detail what happens at the end of the y uga cycle, that is, at the end of
the Kali yuga . According to M ā rkaṇ ḍ eya, people degenerate both morally
and physically. They become liars and thieves. Members of one caste per-
form the duties of another. Barbarian kings rule the earth. Young girls
become pregnant at the age of seven or eight. People have shortened life
spans, become weak-bodied and diseased. The population increases, cows
yield little milk, and trees produce few fruits.3 0 Many natural disasters
occur at the end of the eon as well. First, there is a drought, and then a fi re
devastates the earth. Finally, “wondrous-looking” clouds gather and fl ood
the earth with rain for twelve years until there is nothing but one desolate
ocean. 31
M ā rkaṇ ḍ eya describes his own experience of wandering about the des-
olate ocean. He journeys with great fear and dread until he comes upon a
27. Directly before his meeting with Hanūmā n, Bhīma behaved in a particularly aggressive
manner, trampling and killing whatever was in his path as he searched for fl owers for
Draupadī.
28. Literally, “the causes of everything” (s arvahetu ). 3.186.11.
29. This episode of the M ahā bh ā rata has been translated by James Laine. See V isions of God ,
177ff .
30. 3 .186.25–55.
31. 3.186.56–77.
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 153
child sitting on the branch of a banyan tree, who off ers him refuge inside
his mouth. There in the child’s mouth Mā rka ṇ ḍ eya discovers the world,
just as it was before the deluge; he explores the world for more than a
hundred years. After being emitted from the child’s mouth, he learns that
the child is N ā r ā ya ṇ a/K ṛ ṣ ṇ a, creator and destroyer of the universe, who
creates himself whenever d harma languishes in the world.
After M ā rka ṇ ḍ eya praises the merits and powers of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a extensively,
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira presses him for more details about life at the end of the Kali
yuga . M ā rka ṇ ḍ eya expands upon the moral and physical depravity of
human beings as the universe comes to an end. After the termination of
the Kali y uga , the world is regenerated. Kalki, a brahmin who brings tran-
quility back to the world, is born. M ā rka ṇ ḍ eya concludes his speech by
warning Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira that he should heed d harma :
You have joined yourself eternally to dharma , O best among those
who uphold d harma . A dharma-spirited king enjoys happiness here
and in the next world.3 2
Signifi cantly, both the Hanumā n and the Mā rkaṇ ḍ eya episodes are im-
mediately followed by a discourse (however brief) on d harma . This sug-
gests that both teachings were not delivered to inspire a kind of
hopelessness about the possibilities of the life of virtue in the Kali y uga .
Rather, it suggests that these y uga talks were delivered, at least in part, to
inspire a sense of urgency with respect to the task of cultivating virtue.
Further, as noted above, neither speech explicitly links the epic events,
particularly the approaching war, to the Kali y uga .
Other Discussions and References to the Y ugas
In addition to these two passages, briefer discussions and references to
the yugas are scattered throughout the text. They are most frequent in T he
Book of the Forest and T he Book of Peace . These passages can be categorized
in terms of the following themes:
1. References to the end of the yuga . These references are the most numerous
and they are most prevalent in “the massacre narratives,” that is, those
passages in the text that describe death and destruction on a large scale.
32. 3.189.17.
154 disorienting dharma
Most, if not all, compare a specifi c warrior, weapon, or scene of battle to
some aspect of the destruction of the world at the end of the y uga . How-
ever, these references do not indicate that it i s the end of the y uga . Rather,
they are metaphors expressing the idea that the particular phenomenon
being described is “like” (i va ) some aspect of the end of the y uga . For
example, in T he Book of Bhīṣ ma , the fi rst of the four battle books, the
encounter between the two armies is described as being “like” (i va ) the
encounter between two oceans at the end of the y uga . 33
2. References to Kṛ ṣ ṇ a/N ā r ā ya ṇ a . Like the Mā rka ṇ ḍ eya passage discussed
above, these passages focus particularly on Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s role as creator and
destroyer of the universe at the beginning of the Kṛ ta yuga and the end
of the Kali yuga . K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s role as a vatā ra is also mentioned, but less fre-
quently. These passages discuss how Kṛ ṣ ṇ a assumes diff erent forms in
diff erent yugas in order to uphold d harma .3 4
3. References to the time of the Mah ā bhā rata war . There are approximately
two passages in the text that state explicitly that the war took place at
the juncture of the Dvā para and Kali yugas . These passages suggest that
the Dvā para yuga has come to an end and that the age of Kali is close at
hand. The fi rst is in The Book of the Beginning when Ugraśravas tells the
brahmins in the Naimiṣ a forest that the war between the Kauravas and
the Pā ṇ ḍ avas was fought at the juncture of the Dvā para y uga and the
Kali y uga .3 5 However, no specifi c causal relationship between the two is
indicated. The second occurs in The Book of the Eff ort when K ṛ ṣ ṇ a tells
Ka ṛ ṇ a that when the battle begins, there will be no more K ṛ ta yuga , no
more Tretā yuga , and no more Dv ā para yuga , implying that what will be
left is the Kali y uga .3 6 However, the causal relationship between the war
and the Kali y uga in K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s statement is not exactly clear.
4. References to the decline in dharma in the Kali yuga . While these passages
are fairly numerous, relatively few suggest that the Kali y uga is explic-
itly linked to the moral decline that takes place in the epic. However,
there is at least one passage that does so. It occurs in T he Book of Śalya
when Bhīma defeats Duryodhana in a mace battle by resorting to unfair
33. 6.1.24.
34. See, for example, Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s conversation with Uttaṅ ka in T he Book of the Horse Sacrifi ce at
14.53. and Bhagavadgīt ā 4.7–8.
35. 1.2.9.
36. 5.140.6–15.
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 155
means: he strikes him in the thigh, an action that violates the rules of
proper warfare. Balarā ma, K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s brother, furious with Bhīma for
fi ghting dirty, berates both Bhīma and Kṛ ṣ ṇ a. In an eff ort to explain
Bhīma’s actions, Kṛ ṣ ṇ a tells his brother that what Bhīma did was justi-
fi ed since the Kali y uga has arrived.3 7 This brief statement, however, is
only one among fi ve reasons that K ṛ ṣ ṇ a provides to plead Bhīma’s
case.3 8 Also, Saṃ jaya, our narrator here, refers to Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s statements as
“deceptive” (literally “a deception of d harma ,” dharmacchala ).3 9
5. References to Śiva . These passages concern Śiva’s role as destroyer and
creator of the universe.4 0
6. R eferences to the relationship between kingship and the yugas . These pas-
sages make the point that the quality of the age depends upon the
quality of the king.4 1
The y uga theory is without a doubt prevalent throughout the M ahā -
bh ā rata . Further, it does provide an account for the existence of suff ering.
Most simply put, as time progresses (and remember, we are talking about
very long periods of time here), human beings degenerate morally and
physically and hence their condition deteriorates. However, only a few
passages explicitly link major narrative events to the y ugas , particularly the
Kali yuga . Further, characters rarely appeal to the concept of the y ugas in
order to attempt to understand and explain the unfolding disaster of the
Bh ā rata war. Therefore, while the y uga theory does implicate time in the
problem of human moral and physical depravity, in most cases, it is not one
37. Literally, K ṛ ṣ ṇ a tells Balarā ma, “Know that the Kali yuga has arrived.” p r ā ptaṃ kaliyuga ṃ
viddhi . 9.59.21.
38. 9.59–60. See Robert P. Goldman, “E ṣ a Dharmah. Sanā tanah : Shifting Moral Values and
the Indian Epics,” in R elativism, Suff ering, and Beyond: Essays in Memory of Bimal K. Matilal ,
ed. P. Bilimoria and J. N. Mohanty (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), 91–108 and
Bimal Krishna Matilal, “Kṛ ṣ ṇ a: In Defence of a Devious Deity,” in E thics and Epics : T he Col-
lected Essays of Bimal Krishna Matilal , ed, Jonardon Ganeri (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2002), 91–108 . K ṛ ṣ ṇ a is notorious for fl ooding his case with a plethora of reasons even
though these reasons are often contradictory. This suggests that Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s goal is to get the
result that he wants and he cares little for which reason in particular is actually convincing.
Lawrence McCrea, personal communication.
39. 9.59.22.
40. These are most prevalent in 13.14, particularly in the Vulgate.
41. See Kuntī’s comments to K ṛ ṣ ṇ a at 5.130.14–18. For scholarship on this topic, see Thomas,
“Does the Age Make the King or the King Make the Age? Exploring the Relationship between
the King and the Yugas in the Mahā bhā rata,”183–201 .
156 disorienting dharma
of the primary suspects in the epic’s who-dunnit quest, posed in the form of
riddle-questions, of why things went so horribly wrong.4 2 This is reserved
for another theory of time found in the M ahā bhā rata .
K ā lav ā da : The Doctrine of Time in the M ah a- bh a- rata
In addition to the y uga system, the epic provides another theory for why time
is terrifying: the epic’s “doctrine of time” (k ā lav ā da ).4 3 The Mah ā bh ā rata ’s
k ā lav ā da expresses the idea that time revolves or turns (k ā lapary ā ya ) inevi-
tably bringing about decay, destruction, and death. As Luis González- Reimann
writes, “The M ah ā bh ā rata views time as an oppressive, overpowering force
that relentlessly pushes all beings towards their eventual death. So intense is
the concern with its destructive nature that time virtually becomes a synonym
of death and destruction.”4 4
Alf Hiltebeitel captures the range of the images and ideas associated
with the concept of k ā lav ā da in the Mahā bh ā rata :
The epic’s k ā lavā da includes frequent references to the “wheel of
time,” to time’s “revolving” (p ary ā ya ). The idea that those about to
die are “already slain” and the theme that time “swallows” beings
with its “gaping mouth” are not only combined in the Bhagavad
Gīt ā , but found elsewhere in the text (22–28). Not only does the
Mahā bh ā rata make the phrase “time cooks” one of its signatures:
there is an “ocean of time” ( k ā lasā gara ; 12.28.43). The whole world
is k ā l ā tmaka or “has time as its self” (13.1.45). Time is “the Supreme
Lord” ( parameśvara ). Caught in “time’s noose,” always “bewildered”
and “impelled by the law of time” (c oditah. k ā ladharmaṇ ā ), heroes
and heroines should act knowing that although one cannot counter
time, fortune does have its favorable moments . . .4 5
Building on the work of Vassilkov, González-Reimann, and Hiltebeitel,
this section focuses on the context and import of the M ahā bh ā rata’s
42. This “who-dunnit quest” will be approached head-on in chapter 5 .
43. V ā da has a range of meanings: “discourse,” “statement,” “argument,” “doctrine.” In
translating it as “doctrine,” I am following Vassilkov’s translation in his article “ K ā lav ā da .”
44. González-Reimann, T he Mah ā bhā rata and the Yugas , 20 .
45. Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahā bhā rata , 39 .
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 157
k ā lav ā da . It hopes to show that expressions of this idea surface at pivotal
moments, particularly moments of crisis when characters are reeling
from sudden reversals in their fortune.4 6 In the context of these moments,
two sub-genres of discourse express the k ā lav ā da idea: the lament and the
argument against grief. In the lament, characters who are victims of mis-
fortune often blame the disasters that they encounter on time (i.e.,
k ā lav ā da ) and express shock in response to what they understand to be the
power of all-destroying, impartial time. In the argument against grief,
characters, most often “advisors,” focus on the omnipotence and destruc-
tive capability of time as well.4 7 However, they argue that it is simply a fact
of life to which all living creatures are subject, a dimension of existence
that needs to be faced and accepted. Implicit in the argument against grief
articulation of the k ā lav ā da is the idea that if one truly understands and
accepts the fact that “time revolves” and therefore everything in the world
is transitory, then one will no longer be a victim of the pain that this
dimension of life brings; one will no longer be “terrorized by time.”
K ā lav ā da and the Lament
Because the M ah ā bh ā rata presents a series of catastrophic events that
impact characters in a variety of adverse ways, the text also contains many
accompanying passages where characters give expression to their grief.
I refer to such an expression as “the lament” ( vil ā pa ). While laments most
often occur when characters mourn the death of a loved one, they arise in
other contexts as well, such as when a character is aware of some impend-
ing doom. In many if not most cases, the lamenter off ers a refl ection on
the transitory nature of life due to the reverses brought about by time.
Several recurring ideas are expressed in these laments. First and
foremost, the lamenting character expresses an understanding of a fun-
damental truth about existence in terms of time and how it functions,
that time turns or revolves (k ā lapary ā ya) , bringing about change.4 8 No
matter how dear, powerful, virtuous, or precious, nothing is permanent.
The attitude toward this realization is a mixture of incredulousness,
shock, disbelief, awe, and immense sorrow. Further, in the throes of this
46. Hill, Fate, Predestination, and Human Action , 199 .
47. These characters generally fall into the wide-ranging rubric of friend, wise counselor,
and/or family member.
48. Vassilkov, “K ā lavā da ,” 24 .
158 disorienting dharma
realization, the lamenter often juxtaposes past circumstances with pre-
sent ones. For example, when a character laments the death of a loved
one, he or she juxtaposes the way that the loved one appeared in the full
bloom of life with how the deceased appears now. These juxtapositions
lead to further remarks about time’s immense power, which the grieving
character fi nds almost incomprehensible, and the fact that he or she
now fi nally sees the vulnerability of all things—even the most powerful
and mighty—to time.
For example, in The Book of the Eff ort when Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra has a premoni-
tion of the war and the deaths of his sons, events that he knows he cannot
stop, he blames the revolution of time for what will inevitably take place:
Turning I think is the d harma of time, which is eternal. There is no
escape for those who are fi xed to its wheel like a rim.4 9
In one of the epic’s most heartbreaking scenes, Subhadrā , Arjuna’s wife
and K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s sister, laments the death of her son, Abhimanyu. Expressing
shock and disbelief at the news that her son has been tricked and defeated
by some of the Kauravas’ most honorable warriors, she refl ects upon past
moments when her son enjoyed youth, beauty, and the fi nest comforts.
Now he lies on the battleground, fodder for beasts of prey, and she can
barely comprehend the immense divide between these two moments in
time:
O son, how does your face, which is dark like a blue lotus and with
beautiful white teeth and lovely eyes, appear to me now that it is
covered with the dust of battle? . . . Alas, your bed used to be covered
with expensive quilts. How do you, who was accustomed to a life of
ease, sleep on the bare earth now, [your body] pierced [with arrows]?
This mighty-armed hero used to be surrounded by the most beautiful
women. How can he who has fallen in battle now be surrounded by
jackals?5 0
After denouncing the might of Bhīma, Arjuna, and the rest of the Pā ṇ ḍ ava
warriors who failed to protect her young son, she articulates the shock of
49. 5.50.58.
50. 7.55.3, 7.55.6–7.
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 159
the realization of the transitory nature of life and how this truth is very
hard for human beings to conceptually grasp:
O, hero, to me you are like a treasure in a dream that was seen but
now lost. Alas, the human condition is transitory, as unstable as a
bubble in water . . . Without a doubt the course [of time] . . . is very
diffi cult to understand, even for the wise!5 1
When Ghā ndh ā rī, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s queen, sees her son Duryodhana’s body
on the battlefi eld, she, “withered with grief,” (ś okakarśita )5 2 drops to the
ground and faints. After regaining consciousness, she gives voice to her
sorrow by marveling at the power and impartiality of time because it can
strike down all human beings, even the most powerful:
Look at my son, Mā dhava, . . . the scorcher of the enemy who would
be at the head of the specially consecrated warriors now lies in the
dust. See how time turns!5 3
The power of these laments lies in the fact that they capture moments
when characters are forced to come to terms with precisely that which is
almost impossible for the human mind to accept: the fi nality of death and
the transitory nature of life. 54 The fact that many of the Mah ā bh ā rata ’s la-
ments share common motifs and ideas, particularly ideas about tempo-
rality, reveals that grief has an idiom in the M ahā bh ā rata and this idiom,
to a large extent, centers on the language that captures the awe, shock, and
sorrow that one feels when confronted by the irrevocable ravages of all-
destroying time.5 5
51. 7.55.16 and 7.55.19.
52. 11.17.1.
53. 11.17.10.
54. Examples of other laments in the epic are Draupadī’s lament in the dicing scene
(2.62.4–14); Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s lament upon the news of Abhimanyu’s slaying (7.49.1–21);
Aśvatthā man’s lament after Duryodhana has been defeated (9.64.12–38); and Gā ndh ā rī’s
lament in The Book of the Women (11.16–26).
55. Studies on the psychological eff ects of grief are too numerous to mention, but recent
work on the subject is worth noting: Jill Bialosky, History of a Suicide: My Sister’s Unfi nished
Life (New York: Atria Books, 2011) ; Jean-Yves Le Naour, T he Living Unknown Soldier : A Story
of Grief and the Great War , trans. Penny Allen (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2002) ; Joan
160 disorienting dharma
Kā lav ā da and Arguments against Grief
A closely related sub-genre of discourse that employs this same idiom of grief
is the argument against grief.5 6 The argument against grief is a sermon deliv-
ered by a wise advisor at moments of great crisis in order to “comfort” a
grieving character. I use the term “comfort” loosely, because what the advisor
provides is not solace but a bitter pill for the griever to swallow. The advisor
transforms the idea of the transitory nature of life, the essence of the epic’s
k ā lav ā da , from being a realization that is inextricably linked with the emotion
of grief, as it is in the lament, to being a fact of life that must be recognized and
accepted so that despair and grief may be overcome. There are approximately
nine major “arguments” in the epic that incorporate the kā lav ā da worldview. 57
These speeches express the following cluster of ideas. First, time is the
root of everything that exists; it brings living things into being and destroys
them in turn. No one, regardless of how virtuous, powerful, or wealthy, is
protected from time’s oppressive decree. Second, time is also cyclical;
whatever or whoever dies will return to life again, only to be subject to the
same miseries as before. Third, time is closely associated with fate (d aiva ,
di ṣ ṭ a ); it is so in at least two diff erent ways. Some passages indicate that
fate just i s the inevitability that time will bring about adverse reversals.
Others indicate that time brings about (“cooks” or “ripens”5 8 ) that which
Didion, The Year of Magical Thinking (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2005) ; Elizabeth Kübler-
Ross and David Kessler, On Grief and Grieving: Finding the Meaning of Grief through the Five
Stages of Loss (New York: Scribner, 2005) ; Sandra M. Gilbert, Death’s Door: Modern Dying and
the Way We Grieve: A Cultural Study (New York: Norton, 2006) ; Joyce Carol Oates, A Widow’s
Story: A Memoir (New York: Ecco, 2011) ; Julian Barnes, “For Sorrow There is No Remedy,”
The New York Review of Books , April 7, 2011 , http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2011/
apr/07/sorrow-there-no-remedy/ (accessed May 15, 2011).
56. Arguments against grief are numerous in the M ah ā bhā rata . Other examples that
espouse a view of time that is consistent with Saṃ jaya’s view here are delivered by Vyā sa
(6.2–4; 12.26; 16.9) and Vidura (11.2) Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s statements to Arjuna in the B hagavadgītā could
be considered an argument against grief as well since K ṛ ṣ ṇ a argues that Arjuna should not
grieve for those “he” is going to kill because K ṛ ṣ ṇ a, as time, has already killed them. More
broadly construed, the entire Ś ā ntiparvan (Book 11, The Book of Peace ) could be understood as
a kind of argument against grief since Bhīṣ ṃ a delivers his teaching at Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s prompting in
order to help Yudhiṣ ṭ hira overcome his despair over the slaughter of his kinsmen.
57. 1.1.188–190, 3.245.12–17, 5.36.42–46, 11.1.21–11.2.1, 11.2.1–11.8.1, 11.8.10–11.9.1, 12.26 ff ,
12.34.1–17, 16.9.25–38.
58. For scholarship on “the cooking time” image in the epic, see Hiltebeitel, R ethinking
the Mahā bh ā rata , 39 and González-Reimann, T he Mahā bhā rata and the Yugas , 34–35 . For
scholarship on the cooking motif in the Vedic context, see Jan Heesterman, T he Broken
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 161
has been fated.5 9 Fourth, grief and despair caused by the ravages of time
should be overcome because they destroy one’s ability to see a situation
clearly and make good decisions accordingly; in short, they obscure one’s
intelligence. Fifth, one should conquer grief with wisdom (b uddhi ), which
entails acceptance of “the coming and going of creatures” ( bhūtā n ā m
ā gati ṃ gatim ) or the transitory nature of life.6 0
In The Book of the Beginning , for example, when Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a mourns
the death of his eldest son Duryodhana in the lament/summary that we
examined closely in chapter 3 , Saṃ jaya responds to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s lament
with a speech that attempts to dispel Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s sorrow. In this speech,
Sa ṃ jaya points out that time is the root of everything. It both brings crea-
tures into being and then destroys them. If Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra fully grasped this
truth, he would, according to Saṃ jaya, not allow his mind to succumb to
grief. This particular speech of Sa ṃ jaya’s is one of the epic’s signature
statements on time:
Time ripens the creatures and time rots them. Time again extin-
guishes the time that burns the creatures. Time alters all beings in
the world, virtuous or not. Time destroys them and creates them
again. Time moves in all creatures, unchecked and impartial. Those
beings who were in the past and those beings yet to come and those
that exist now, they are all fashioned by time. Know this and do not
abandon your intelligence .6 1
A second example comes from T he Book of Bhī ṣ ma , when the two
armies stand on the battlefi eld readied for war and Vyā sa approaches
World of Sacrifi ce: An Essay in Ancient Indian Ritual (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1993), 175 and C harles Malamoud, C ooking the World : Ritual and Thought in Ancient India ,
trans. David White (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1996) .
59. Fate is a multivalent category in the M ahā bhā rata that is sometimes closely linked with
the concept of time and sometimes is not (see chapter 5 for a more extensive discussion of
the range of Sanskrit terms for fate and their meanings). González-Reimann (T he
Mahā bh ā rata and the Yugas ) views fate and time as synonymous, but even when they are
linked, I think that there are subtle important diff erences between them. See also Hill, F ate,
Predestination, and Human Action , 196–210 .
60. 12.16.24.
61. 1.1.188–190.
162 disorienting dharma
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and informs him that all the warriors will kill one another.
Vy ā sa argues, however, that this news should not cause Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a grief.
Why? Because the impending massacre is not simply a personal tragedy
for Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra, but is just the way the world dictated by time works.
Vy ā sa says,
Knowing the changes brought about by time, do not allow your
mind to grieve . . . Without a doubt, O best of kings, time destroys
the world; time creates the world again. In this world nothing exists
forever. 62
In The Book of Peace , Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira, overwhelmed by grief at the
slaughter of his kinsmen, becomes “radically disaff ected from every-
thing,” 63 and expresses the desire to renounce the kingdom and go to
the forest. Vy ā sa, his grandfather, approaches him and delivers a ser-
mon on time in order to dispel his grief. First, Vyā sa points out that
time is the cause of all things, both the actions of men and natural
processes:
A person acquires all that is ordained for him or her through time
by means of the Ordainer from the operation of its turning.
Through time swift winds blow, through time rain reaches the
clouds, through time bodies of water possess blue lotus blossoms,
through time trees fl ourish in the forests.6 4
Next, Vyā sa recites a song sung by King Senajit when he was overcome
with sorrow. This song expresses the idea that all living creatures are sub-
ject to time’s turnings.6 5 Therefore a person should see his or her own
misery and fear as the miseries and fears of all living creatures. Such a
transformation in vision would reveal the self-centered foolishness of
grief. 66 When Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s sorrow persists, Vyā sa reinforces the idea of
the transitory nature of existence:
62. 6.2.5 and 6.4.2–3.
63. Fitzgerald, The Mah ā bh ā rata, Vol. 7 , 168.
64. 12.26.5 and 12.26.8.
65. 12. 26.14.
66. 12.26.18.
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 163
The unions and separations of living creatures are certainly like
bubbles in water: they are there and then they are not. All accumu-
lation ends in dissolution, every ascent ends in a fall, all unions end
in separation, all life ends in death.6 7
The goal of the argument against grief is essentially therapeutic, that
is, to dispel the lamenters’ sorrow. As we discovered in chapter 3 in the
context of our discussion of Saṃ jaya’s speeches to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, one key
point of the argument against grief is that time is impartial because it
brings death and decay to every living creature regardless of virtue or
stature. Thus the argument against grief seeks to point out that sorrow
caused by the ravages of time is a universal experience, not an isolated
personal one. By making this point, the argument against grief is forcing
the lamenter to confront the fact that his or her grief is just a tiny drop
in the ocean of sorrow caused by the ravages of all-destroying time. Such
a perspective, if adopted, would, as we discussed in chapter 3 , presum-
ably snap the lamenter out of his or her despair by recontextualizing her
situation and opening her eyes to the condition of all living creatures.6 8
It would also encourage an emotional transformation in the grief-
stricken toward the normative emotion of tranquility (perhaps the most
lauded virtue in the epic and the goal of the M ahā bh ā rata according to
Ānanda).6 9
both the theory of the y ugas and the Mahā bhā rata’s k ā lav ā da view
time as an oppressive, destructive force. Both provide accounts for
why time is implicated in the problem of human suff ering. However,
these two theories of time diverge in two important ways. First, they
address fundamentally diff erent levels of human experience. While
the Mah ā bh ā rata ’s k ā lav ā da is concerned with time as it appears in
an individual’s immediate awareness (one moment something exists
and the next it is gone), the yuga theory addresses large periods of time
or “times.” Another way to put this is that while the epic’s k ā lav ā da is
concerned with time at the microcosmic level, the theory of the yugas
67. 12.27.28–29.
68. Chaitanya, T he Mah ā bhā rata , 58–59 .
69. See chapter 1 .
164 disorienting dharma
has to do with time at the macrocosmic level since it is concerned with
large cycles of social transformation.7 0
The second way these two “theories” diff er concerns how they are
explored in the epic. As the discussion so far has attempted to show, the
passages that discuss the idea of the y ugas do not frequently explicitly link
them to the Bhā rata war, nor do characters often turn to the idea of the
yugas in order to understand the catastrophes they endure. The passages
that discuss the epic’s doctrine of time, however, are located at pivotal mo-
ments in the epic and are integral to how the narrative voice and how the
characters themselves understand the catastrophes that lead to the war
and to whole-scale destruction.7 1
Narrative Strategies of Temporal Manipulation:
Consuming, Dismissing, Collapsing, and Stretching Time
Now that we have established some of the predominant statements that
characters make about time, let us consider what the text’s strategies “do”
with time. How does the text through the skillful deployment of its narra-
tive devices impact our experience of time? In what follows this chapter
hopes to show that while the text emphasizes the theme of the destructive,
oppressive nature of time as discussed above, it also makes a quite dif-
ferent point, that time may be manipulated and therefore in some sense
overcome. Through its strategies of temporal manipulation, the text col-
lapses, overturns, engulfs, reverses, eradicates, and stretches time, thus
seemingly undermining or “rupturing” our confi dence in the k ā lav ā da
understanding of time. To what end?
This section discusses three ways in which the text manipulates time
through strategies that are closely associated with its framing device: con-
suming, dismissing, and collapsing it. Next, it discusses a fourth way in
which the Mah ā bh ā rata through the art of narration manipulates time:
stretching it.7 2 Finally it considers the “arguments” that these narrative
strategies are making about time, particularly in light of the issues dis-
cussed above, the epic’s doctrine of time and its connection to human
70. González-Reimann, T he Mah ā bhā rata and the Yugas , 3 .
71. Ibid. , 45 , and Hill, F ate, Predestination, and Human Action , 199 .
72. The distinction that I am making here is between the art of telling and the art of struc-
turing the story, two narrative impulses that are closely related.
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 165
sorrow. The discussion will refer to four interrelated kinds of time: (1) the
epic’s doctrine of time, (2) sequential time—or past, present, and future
time relative to the sequence of the events in the narrative, (3) the charac-
ters’ experience of time, and (4) the audience’s experience of time.
Consuming Time
In order to discuss what the M ahā bh ā rata “does” with time, it is necessary
to return, once again, to the issue of the framing device. As Hiltebeitel and
Kloetzli write, “The frame story is probably the leading device through
which the text supports its vast and complex meditations on time.” 7 3
Through the use of the framing device, the text moves back and forth in
time as well as into “simultaneous meanwhiles.”7 4
As mentioned several times, the M ah ā bhā rata contains two outer
frames, both of which contextualize the epic’s telling: the Ugraśravas-
Śaunaka frame (the outermost frame where Ugraśravas narrates the
story of the M ah ā bh ā rata to a group of brahmins in the Naimiṣ a forest)
and the Vaiśaṃ p ā yana-Janamejaya frame (the epic’s inner frame,
where Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana narrates the story of the M ahā bh ā rata at Janame-
jaya’s snake sacrifi ce). The fact that these two outer frames contextu-
alize the epic’s narration tells us something about the Mah ā bh ā rata ’s
relation to time. Since these stories that tell the circumstances (the
where, when, why, and by whom) of the epic’s fi rst two tellings are
contained in the M ah ā bh ā rata , they are also, as I have mentioned
before, part of the M ah ā bhā rata . If we take this insight and extend it
logically, the design of the epic suggests that whenever, wherever, or
whoever tells or receives the story of the great Bh ā ratas becomes part
of the Mah ā bh ā rata . In other words, through the art of its design, the
text explodes the boundary between interiority and exteriority. As David
Shulman writes,
So the M ah ā bhā rata is coterminous with the world—not a modest
claim perhaps but one that does help to clarify the aims of the text.
There is no escape built into it from its relentless, bleak vision. It
73. Hiltebeitel and Kloetzli, “K ā la ,” 578 .
74. Ibid. According to Hiltebeitel and Kloetzli, the M ahā bh ā rata is one of the fi rst texts to
explore framing and its narrative possibilities in relation to the theme of temporality.
166 disorienting dharma
represents itself not as a work of art but as reality itself. No boundary
marks off this text from the world.7 5
The eradication of these boundaries gives the text the ability to consume
time, for if the M ah ā bh ā rata is reality itself, then it has the potential to con-
tain all of time.7 6 Thus, through the art of its design, the text has the capacity
to draw into itself and take control of a central theme in its own story: time.
This suggests that the all-powerful destructive nature of time, the central
point of the k ā lav ā da doctrine, is not the epic’s last “word” on this issue.
Dismissing Time
The framing device allows the narrative to move backward and forward in
time; stories merge into other stories with deliberate disregard for tempo-
ral boundaries. For example, in the P ulomanparvan of T he Book of the
Beginning , Śaunaka asks Ugraśravas to recite the origins of his lineage, the
Bh ṛ gu lineage.7 7 Ugraśravas agrees and narrates the story of Ruru, Bhṛ gu’s
grandson.
Ruru falls madly in love with a young woman named Pramadvarā .
A wedding is arranged, and several days before the wedding Pramadvarā ,
who is playing with her friends, fails to notice a sleeping snake and steps
on it. Signifi cantly, the narrative voice notes, “she was prompted by time.” 78
The snake “pressed by the decree of time” sinks its fangs into the body of
the “careless” girl, and Pramadvarā dies immediately.7 9
Ruru, grief-stricken, laments the death of his bride. Calling upon the
gods and summoning his ascetic power, he begs them to revive his wife.
The gods suggest a deal: he will give up half of his life in order to restore
the life of his wife. Ruru agrees and the deal is struck. Ruru, however,
angry at the high price that he had to pay to be reunited with his wife, vows
to seek revenge on all snakes. Indeed, whenever he sees a snake, fury over-
takes him and he beats it to death with a club.
75. Shulman, “Toward a Historical Poetics,” 26 .
76. Certainly the size and the scope of the M ahā bhā rata underscore this point as well.
77. For scholarship on the Bhṛ gus, see Robert Goldman, Gods, Priests, and Warriors: The
Bh ṛ gus of the Mah ā bhā rata (New York: Columbia University Press, 1977) .
78. 1.8.15.
79. 1.8.16.
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 167
One day, he happens upon a lizard. Mistaking the lizard for a snake,
Ruru smashes it on the head with a stick. The lizard, understandably star-
tled, questions Ruru about his motives since he, the lizard, has never done
Ruru any harm. Ruru informs the lizard about his vendetta against all
snakes, and the lizard, in response, delivers a sermon lauding the virtues
of nonviolence and telling Ruru that he has been conducting himself like
a k ṣ atriya , not a brahmin. To make his point he refers to King Janamejaya
and his great sacrifi ce, an example of a king (i.e., a k ṣ atriya ), who has a
similar vendetta against snakes and for similar reasons.8 0 Quite unexpect-
edly, the lizard (now a brahmin released from a curse) disappears, and
Ruru runs to his father and begs him to tell him the story of Janamejaya’s
sacrifi ce; his father agrees.8 1
Thus Ruru’s story ends, but this ending is no simple ending in truth,
since here the text completely dismisses the rules of temporal boundaries.
Ugraśravas, the bard who is situated in the outer frame of the M ah ā bh ā rata ,
tells the brahmins of the Naimiṣ a forest that he recently attended Janame-
jaya’s snake sacrifi ce. Ruru’s father, Pramati, is Śaunaka’s great-great
grandfather. He tells Ruru that he is going to tell him about this s ame sac-
rifi ce. Since obviously Śaunaka and Ugraśravas are contemporaries (and
by “contemporary” I mean that they are situated at the same point in time
in the text) and Ugraśravas witnesses the sacrifi ce, which has just hap-
pened, this means that Pramati is going to tell Ruru a story about a sacri-
fi ce that will occur approximately t hree generations in the future .
Collapsing Time
Another strategy that the text employs to manipulate time is the direct
address formula. The direct address formula is the device that the text
employs to signal a change in narrators, “X uv ā ca ” or “X said,” “X” being
the speaker. It is also a strategy that the text uses at specifi c junctures to
collapse time.8 2 One such instance occurs in the Mahā bh ā rata’s pivotal
scene: the dicing scene. It is in this scene that Yudhiṣ ṭ hira gambles away
himself, his four brothers, and his wife, Draupadī, in a crooked dice game.
80. The snake Tak ṣ aka killed Janamejaya’s father, Parikṣ it (Arjuna’s grandson).
81. 1.12.4–5.
82. This happens approximately twice in the epic: once in the dicing scene, as discussed
here, and once in The Book of the Stay in the Forest Hermitage at 15.42.1.
168 disorienting dharma
Duryodhana and his followers subsequently violate Draupadī and the
seeds are sown for the bitter enmity between the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and the Kaura-
vas, seeds that ultimately culminate in the war.8 3
A quarter of the way into Vaiśaṃ p ā yana’s narration of the dicing
scene, Janamejaya interrupts Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana and asks him a question,
which Vaiśaṃ pā yana answers. Interestingly, for the second time in the
text, Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana’s comments are introduced by an outer narrator
called “the Bard” (s ūta ).8 4 Therefore, here the direct address formula in-
troduces back-to-back four diff erent speakers who are situated in varying
points in the story.8 5 The sequence of these direct speakers runs as fol-
lows: (1) Janamejaya, (2) the Bard, (3) Vaiśaṃ p ā yana, and (4) Duryod-
hana. Directly before this passage, Vaiśaṃ p ā yana has outlined the events
that have led up to Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra’s decision to sanction the fateful dice
game. 86 Now Janamejaya requests to be told in more detail how the dice
game came about; his request is followed by a statement by “the Bard”
who says,
Thus addressed by the king, Vyā sa’s glorious student, who knew
everything, narrated it all as it happened.8 7
The Bard’s statement is followed by Vaiśaṃ p ā yana’s voice; Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana,
in response to Janamejaya’s request, begins to tell the story of the events
that led up to the dice game all over again, only this time in more detail.
Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana’s voice is followed by Duryodhana’s, who is now speaking
to Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a in an attempt to convince him to sanction the game.
The insertion of the Bard’s very brief comments is signifi cant because
it is not clear at all who “the Bard” is.8 8 The text does not give us the name
83. See chapter 3 for an extensive discussion of this scene.
84. For scholarship on the status of s ūtas in Indian society as discussed in the classical texts,
see Shubha Pathak, “Why Do Displaced Kings Become Poets in the Sanskrit Epics?” I nter-
national Journal of Hindu Studies 10/2 (2006): 133–36 .
85. 2.46.1–7.
86. See chapter 2
87. 2.46.4.
88. van Buitenen also fi nds this insertion strange; he writes, “this bard can only be
Ugraśravas, who is recounting to the hermits of the Naimiṣ a Forest Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana’s account
to Janamejaya. His unexpected appearance here is interesting.” van Buitenen, T he
Mah ā bh ā rata, Vol. 2 , 815 .
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 169
of a specifi c person; the word “s ūta ” simply appears. “S ūta” here means
storyteller. So, the question is who is “the Bard”? The narrative provides
one clue about who the Bard is: the Bard informs his audience that
Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana is the narrator. Because Vaiśaṃ p ā yana is the narrator in
the inner frame, only someone in the outer frame is in a position to refer
to Vaiśaṃ p ā yana as a narrator. This clue leads us to our answer: the Bard
is Ugraśravas, who is narrating the story of the M ahā bh ā rata to the group
of brahmins in the epic’s outer frame.8 9 (My logic here runs as follows: For
the Bard to be able to refer to Vaiśaṃ p ā yana as the narrator, the Bard has
to know who Vaiśaṃ p ā yana is and the circumstances under which he
acted as the narrator of the M ah ā bh ā rata ; that is, he must also know about
the snake sacrifi ce. For the Bard to know about the snake sacrifi ce, the Bard
must be speaking at a point in time that either overlaps with the snake
sacrifi ce, or the Bard must exist in “future time” with respect to the snake
sacrifi ce. Because no other person other than Janamejaya and Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana
acts as a direct speaker at the snake sacrifi ce, the Bard must be speaking
from the perspective of a future time. The only context in the M ahā bh ā rata
where this is possible is the epic’s outer frame. Hence the Bard must be
Ugraśravas.)
Remember that Ugraśravas, at this point in the story, has not appeared
since Vaiśaṃ p ā yana took over as narrator approximately 217 chapters ago.9 0
At this point in the story, he is, to say the least, distant from our thoughts.
Thus the realization that the Bard is Ugraśravas brings with it a potential
moment of disorientation, which is intentional. It is as though the text is
prompting us to ask ourselves: Where are we in the narrative really? Are
we inside the story witnessing Duryodhana as he speaks passionately and
despairingly to his father in an eff ort to convince him to sanction the game
( t1 )? Are we at the level of the inner frame where Vaiśaṃ p ā yana narrates
the story of the M ah ā bh ā rata to King Janamejaya at the snake sacrifi ce ( t2 )?
Or are we at the level of the outer frame where Ugraśravas narrates the
story of the great Bhā ratas to the group of brahmins (t 3 )? Each one of these
narrative levels exists at diff erent points in time: the time that the story
takes place (t 1 ), the time that the story is publicly told (t 2 ), and the time that
89. Beyond the opening passages of the M ahā bhā rata , Ugraśravas rarely appears as a direct
speaker. At this point in the story, the audience’s memory of Ugraśravas, the outer-frame
narrator, is rather faint; I believe this is intentional.
90. 1.55.1.
170 disorienting dharma
the story is retold (t 3 ).9 1 However, through the close proximity of these dif-
ferent levels of time, the M ah ā bh ā rata creates the eff ect of their occurring
simultaneously, that is, it creates the eff ect of the collapsing of time.9 2
More specifi cally, what the sequence of speakers in lines 2.46.1–2.47.1
presents us with is the insertion of the future ( t3 ) into the present (which
is e ither t2 or t 1 ; the text makes the present here ambiguous). In so doing,
the present moment (which, as mentioned above, is either t 2 or t1 ) is made
into the past due to the future’s (t 3 ’s) insertion, which then frames it. This
is further complicated by the presence of the dyadic present, which itself
contains a future (t 2 ) and a present (t 1 ), and here again the future (t 2 )
inserts itself into the present (t 1 ), making the present moment the past by
displacing it.9 3
What point is the text making by creating this disorienting experience of
time? Let us take a look briefl y at how time (k ā la ) is working in the dicing
scene. The word “k ā la ” comes up on a number of occasions. Most relevant
to our concerns, it appears in places where the text seems to explicitly sug-
gest that the characters make the disastrous decisions that they do, decisions
that lead to the game and ultimately to war, because they are being impelled
to do so by time. For example, when Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira begins his journey to
H ā stinapura, the text says, “[Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira] was summoned by Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a
and the decree of time.”9 4 In doing this, the text encourages us to ask spe-
cifi c questions about the nature of time. Does it determine human action?
Worse, is it a force that impels human beings to their doom? By eff ecting
the experience of the collapsing of time through the insertion of the future
into the present moment, the M ah ā bh ā rata’s narrative strategies provide a
dramatic response to these fundamental concerns. After all, how can we
have complete confi dence in the notion of the all-consuming power of time
91. T3 is “future time” from the perspective of t2 because Ugraśravas is narrating the story
of the M ahā bh ā rata after having heard Vaiśaṃ pā yana narrate the story at the snake sacrifi ce;
t3 and t 2 are “future time” from the perspective of t 1 because they both contain narrators who
are telling the events that happened in t 1 .
92. The temporal representation of the sequence of narrators in this particular passage is
t2 , t3 , t2 , and t1 .
93. Consider Ricoeur’s statement about the remarkable property of the narrative voice:
“Indeed we can consider anticipations about the future as anticipated retrospections, thanks
to the remarkable property of narrative voice that it can place itself at any point of time which
for it becomes the quasi-present, and from this observation point, it can comprehend as a
quasi-past the future of our present.” Paul Ricoeur, T ime and Narrative , 3:260 .
94. 2.52.21.
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 171
after the M ahā bh ā rata ’s narrative strategies have produced the experience
of the collapsing of time?
Stretching Time
Aside from the framing device, the Mah ā bh ā rata has other means at its
disposal for manipulating time. One such means is narrative delivery, par-
ticularly when the delivery slows down, takes its time, delays time, and es-
sentially stops time. This strategy appears most often in the “massacre
narratives,” that is, those passages in the epic that depict death and destruc-
tion on a massive scale.9 5 In these episodes the narrative voice employs two
strategies that stretch time: intricate description and repetition.
Considering the size, shape, and scope of the M ahā bh ā rata , whose
story begins with creation and “ends” with the reign of Janamejaya, the
fact that the eighteen days of battle consume fi ve books (including T he
Book of the Night Massacre ) or more than one quarter of the epic gives us a
sense of what happens to time in these books. Indeed, the battle scenes
contain some of the most intricately detailed and carefully crafted pas-
sages in the entire epic; these same passages describe horrifying scenes of
savage slaughter and wholesale devastation.9 6 Consider, for example, the
following passage:
A river was seen on the battlefi eld that fl owed to the other world. Its
waters were blood, its whirlpools were chariots, its trees were ban-
ners, its pebbles were bones. Its crocodiles were arms, its streams
were bows, its rocks were elephants and its stones were horses. Its
marshes were fat and marrow, its swans were umbrellas, and its
rafts were clubs. Covered with armor and turbans, its beautiful trees
were fl ags. Filled with a multitude of wheels and three-bannered
poles, the horrifying river rose up full of Kauravas and S ṛ ñjayas,
inspiring delight in the heroes and increasing the dread of the
fearful.9 7
95. Examples of massacre narratives include the burning of the Khā ṇ ḍ ava Forest (1.214–
220); the cattle expedition (3.225–244); the cattle raid (4.25–63); and the fi ve battle books,
including The Book of the Night Massacre ( Sauptikaparvan ) where Aśvatthā man viciously
butchers the sleeping Drupadas.
96. Chaitanya, T he Mah ā bhā rata , 38–39, 58–59 .
97. 9.8.29–32.
172 disorienting dharma
Because the description is so thick in these books, the progression of the
plot slows down, and we are encouraged to pause and take in, with eyes
wide open, the various horrifying ways in which the soldiers’ lives are cut
short and how the body, which is vulnerable to so many abuses, can be
torn apart. Saṃ jaya tells Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra (as quoted before in the introduction
to this book):
Some were pierced by spears and some by battle-axes, and some
were crushed by elephants and others were trampled by horses.
Some were cut by car-wheels and some by sharp arrows, and they
cried out everywhere for their relatives, king. Others cried out for
their sons, and others for their fathers and for their brothers . . . .
And their many entrails were scattered and their thighs were bro-
ken, Bh ā rata. And others, with arms torn off and their sides split
open were seen wailing. Thirsty, they desired to live, and others
overwhelmed with thirst, with little strength, fell on the battlefi eld
on the bare ground and begged for water.9 8
Through slowing down the tempo of the narrative at these points in the
story, the narrative voice encourages us to pause and take in the ravaging
eff ects of violence, decay, and destruction—the eff ects, in essence, of
time:
Hundreds and thousands of severed heads and adorned arms fell
upon the ground and twitched. And some accomplished warriors,
those best of men, who were headless continued to stand ready with
weapons grasped and bows raised.9 9
Another strategy that the text employs to delay time is the repetition of
various motifs throughout the war books. The most prevalent ones are:
1. The loss of recognition motif . In the battle books, Saṃ jaya frequently
describes how, as the war progresses, the warriors lose the ability to
recognize one another. Again and again we are told that fathers no
longer recognize their sons, brothers no longer recognize brothers,
98. 6.44.34–38.
99. 6.55.9–10.
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 173
nephews no longer recognize uncles. Consequently, they kill one an-
other.1 00
2. The river of blood motif . Another recurring motif is the description of the
river of blood that forms as a result of the extensive carnage. Filled with
the fl esh and blood and entrails of the corpses of the soldiers, horses
and elephants, the river carries the bodies to the realm of Yama, the
God of death.
3. The “battlefi eld looked beautiful” trope . Saṃ jaya repeatedly comments on
the aesthetic dimensions of the battlefi eld strewn with corpses. For ex-
ample, he compares the battlefi eld littered with bodies to a fi eld of
fl owers,1 01 an autumnal sky,1 02 a beautiful young woman adorned with
various ornaments,1 03 a fi eld of gold-colored lotuses, and a painted fi g-
ure on a canvas.1 04 The irony here lies in the fact that Saṃ jaya is nar-
rating the events of the war to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and is, therefore, essentially
asking him (as well as us) to see the destruction of his own army as
beautiful. Indeed, Saṃ jaya describes a wounded Duryodhana to
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ tra in the following somewhat shocking manner: “Deeply
pierced your son looked beautiful like a k i ṃ śuka fl ower in the spring
season.”1 05
4. The omens motif . Scattered throughout these books are passages that
describe in great detail the dreadful omens that appear for all the war-
riors to behold.1 06 Examples of such omens are meteor showers, dust
storms, fl ashes of lightning in a cloudless sky, howling jackals, moving
headless trunks, showers of blood or pieces of bone and fl esh, the tears
100. See for example 6.44.2–3.
101. 6 .50.55.
102. 6.55.15.
103. 6.92.65.
104. 6.42.25.
105. 8.40.29. For Danielle Feller Jatavallabhula’s interpretation of these descriptions, see
“Ra ṇ ayajña: The M ah ā bh ā rata War as a Sacrifice,” in V iolence Denied: Violence, Non-
Violence, and the Rationalization of Violence in South Asian Cultural History , ed. E. M. Houben
and K. R. van Kooij (Leiden; Boston: Brill, 1999), 86. She surmises that the fact that the
Earth is enjoying these “off erings” explains these poetic descriptions. However, I could fi nd
no evidence for this interpretation. For a more convincing discussion of the epic’s battle
similes from the perspective of Sanskrit literary theory, see Sinha, T he Mah ā bhā rata : A Lit-
erary Study 33–34, 36 .
106. See, for example, Vyā sa’s extended description of the omens at the beginning of the
war at 6.2–6.3.
174 disorienting dharma
of the Kauravas’ animals, lakes and wells that vomit blood. These
omens create a kind of recurring dread, not only in the characters but
also in us, since they indicate that events are only going to get worse as
the war progresses.1 07
5. The scattered weapons motif . The narrative voice repeatedly pauses to
catalogue the battle weapons that are strewn upon the fi eld. The
expense, size, shape, and design of the weapons are described, high-
lighting the futility of such mighty and costly weapons to their now-
deceased owners.1 08
6. T he hungry jackals motif . Most of the battle episodes conclude with a
brief description of all the hungry beasts of prey (jackals, dogs, r ā k ṣ asas ,
and ghouls) howling in anticipation of their nightly feast and gorging
upon the fat and blood of the victims of the battle, dancing about in
glee.
The point that the repetition of such motifs makes is that in war there
is no progress toward a brighter future, there is only a steady decline in
the humanity of the characters. This decline is marked by the slow, un-
bearable march toward inevitable whole-scale destruction. According
to Ānandavardhana, the repetition of these motifs throughout the
battle books has an important aggregative eff ect: the more battles that
are described, the more distasteful the war becomes and the “more
fi rmly grounded becomes our feeling of detachment, of world weari-
ness (v airā gya ).” 109
let us now stand back and consider in more detail why the text would
want to manipulate our experience of time in these varying ways. On the
surface at least, the strategies that manipulate time appear to undermine
the central thesis of the k ā lavā da doctrine, which is that time is an over-
powering, oppressive force that leads all creatures to their doom. For, if
time really possesses these qualities, then how could the text give us the
experience of consumed/dismissed/collapsed time? But is this really the
107. F or a discussion of the relationship between omens and time, see Hiltebeitel and Klo-
etzli, “ K ā la ,” 578 .
108. See for example 6.92.47–9.
109. Dhv . 4.5 A. This is Masson’s interpretation of Ānandavardhana; see Ingalls, Masson,
and Patwardhan, T he Dhvanyā loka , 694 .
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 175
case? Do the strategies of temporal manipulation truly unravel the epic’s
doctrine of time? To answer this question, we should turn to and refl ect
upon the central point of the advisors’ perspective on the k ā lav ā da doc-
trine, which they articulate in their arguments against grief. According
to Saṃ jaya, Vyā sa, and Vidura, the person who faces and accepts the fact
that time “revolves” and that therefore everything in the world is subject
to radical transitoriness will no longer be subject to the sorrow that time
brings. Thus the person who is no longer swayed by the strong emotional
responses that time’s ravages cause would in essence move beyond time
in the sense that he or she would no longer be psychologically terrorized
by time. Viewed from this perspective, the text’s temporal manipulations
do not undermine the epic’s doctrine of time—what they actually under-
mine, or “rupture,” is only the lamenters’ version of the doctrine. They
support, however, the implicit recommendation for overcoming sorrow
articulated by the advisors in their arguments against grief: psychologi-
cally moving beyond time. They support this implicit recommendation
by producing in us the very experience that the advisors attempt (and
fail) to produce in their own audience members, that is, the experience
of overcoming temporal boundaries and hence psychologically moving
beyond time.
If the strategies of consuming, dismissing, and collapsing time do
not unravel but indeed support the epic’s doctrine of time (specifi cally
the understanding of the doctrine expressed by the advisors), what
about the strategies that stretch time? Earlier I mentioned that these
strategies appear most often in the massacre narratives. By delaying
our experience of time at these points in the story, the strategies force
us to become intimately familiar with death and its many dimensions:
the susceptibility of the body to violence, the look of terror in the eyes
of a mortally wounded victim, the gory details of the decaying corpse,
the grief that loss causes others and how this emotion can so easily
lead a person to slip into madness. By presenting us with these violent
scenes and by doing so again and again, the text encourages us to face
and accept the vulnerability of the human condition to time and decay.
It does more than make us face these truths. It guides us through these
scenes so that the aggregative eff ect of the delaying devices is that they
provide instruction in how to respond to a world that is characterized
by all-powerful, all-consuming time. Guided by the text, shock, horror,
and despair give way to contemplative distance, stoic acceptance, even
peaceful contentment, emotions that would enable us to face such a
176 disorienting dharma
world with courage and forbearance rather than losing control of our
senses, as do so many characters in the text.1 10
Conclusion
What our analysis in this chapter reveals is a slight variation on Ānanda-
vardhana’s d hvani theory in chapter 1 . While we saw that many of the text’s
literal statements about time focused on the idea of time as an all- powerful
destructive force impelling all creatures to their doom, we also saw that
many of the text’s “suggested” messages about time included the idea that
time can be manipulated and temporal boundaries can be surmounted.
While on the face of it these two ideas about time seem distinct and even
contradictory, we discovered that, at least in the case of the strategies of
temporal manipulation, it was the areas of overlap between these two
ideas (particularly taking into account the grief counselors’ articula-
tion of the epic’s k ā lav ā da urging acceptance of the transitory nature of
life) that gave force to the text’s messages concerning the task of psycho-
logically moving beyond time. What this variation points to, therefore, is
a slight modifi cation of our articulation in chapter 1 of the way the literal
meaning and the suggested meaning work together to produce signifi ca-
tion (i.e., that the suggested meaning is always distinct and predominant
over the literal). There are also cases, our analysis has revealed, where the
text works to create meaning through the reverberations (i.e., areas of con-
sonance as well as dissonance) between the two types of signifi cation (and
not simply through the predominance of one over the other).
More specifi cally my argument in this chapter has suggested that the
epic’s aesthetics of suff ering presents time as both a cause and a “solu-
tion” to the problem of suff ering. First, ontologically time is the problem
since it is a destructive and overpowering force that leads all living beings
toward their doom. However, psychologically and epistemologically time
is a “solution” to the problem of suff ering in the sense that if one un-
dergoes a radical reorientation to the world based on an enlightened accep-
tance and acknowledgement of time’s power, then one can psychologically
move beyond time (i.e., the k ā lavā da doctrine of time) and hence beyond
suff ering.
110. W eil makes a similar point about the benefi ts of tragic literature in her essay “Morality
and Literature” in T he Simone Weil Reader , 290–295. As Ugraśravas says, the M ah ā bhā rata
will cause one to never despair, even in dire situations (n a k ṛ cchre ṣ v avasīdati ). 1.1.199.
Time That Ripens and Rots All Creatures 177
How might one characterize the psychological state of moving beyond
time? As Yaroslav Vassilkov tells us in his study of the k ā lav ā da doctrine,
it would involve equanimity, that is, both seeing the world and acting in
the world with complete disinterest so that one would not grieve over loss
nor rejoice over success (a common refrain in the epic’s arguments against
grief).1 11 To appreciate this “solution,” one must remember that the epic’s
aesthetics, unlike its characters, is less concerned with preventing cata-
strophic situations because, according to the epic’s k ā lav ā da , these situa-
tions are sure to come.1 12 Instead, the epic’s aesthetics is chiefl y concerned
with how human beings respond to these situations once they occur. The
recommendation is to respond with a calm, disinterested mind, so that
one can see one’s way out of the fray and act accordingly. Why does the
epic’s aesthetics of suff ering locate the solution to suff ering here, in mo-
ments that characters perceive to be instances of extreme urgency? What
the Mahā bh ā rata ’s aesthetics shows us time and again is that strong emo-
tional responses (such as grief and anger) to the injustices wrought by
time only lead to actions that increase the number and intensity of such
situations. Indeed, as we saw in chapters 2 and 3 , the degree to which
events can spiral out of control is so extreme in the epic’s worldview that
the simple matter of a son’s “grief” over the fortunes of his prosperous
“enemy”/cousin coupled with the leniency of a doting father can lead to
actions that initiate a chain of despair that is so wide and so deep that it is
capable of bringing about the destruction of the entire world.
111. Vassilkov “ K ā lavā da ,” 25 .
112. As Gitomer (“King Duryodhana,” 222) puts it, “the text depicts a world in permanent
crisis.” I do not mean to suggest, however, that the epic recommends that one n ot attempt to
prevent disaster. Rather, I am suggesting that, according to the epic, this attempt will not
necessarily be successful.
5
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick
t heodicy and n arrative s trategies
The full signifi cance of suff ering in the epic derives its
meaning only within the total ensemble of speculations
about fate, d harma , karma , human eff ort ( puru ṣ ak ā ra )
and adharma ; these constitute part of the thematic web of
the epic. Where notions of suff ering are expressed most
clearly in the M bh ., questions about d harma and fate are
usually in the background.
—greg bailey1
our analysis so far has suggested that the epic’s aesthetics of suff ering
encourages its audiences to be centrally engaged with the question “Who
or what is responsible for the great Bhā rata war and, by extension, who or
what is responsible for large-scale or universal suff ering?” In the last three
chapters we have seen that the epic’s narrative strategies have directed us
to consider several possible “answers” to this question: Did the Bhā rata
war begin with the game of dice ( chapter 2 ) or was it Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s fault
( chapter 3 )? If so, what does this say about the role of human psychology—
and by extension human agency—in creating the disaster? Is time a
culprit and/or a solution to universal suff ering? ( chapter 4 ).
In addition to the concept of time, the epic’s aesthetics of suff ering
points a fi nger at a number of other conceptual categories, suggesting that
they are responsible for the production of the war and by extension the
problem of universal suff ering. Indeed, time’s role with respect to this
problem is placed in tension with approximately four other conceptual
categories: fate (d aiva ), human exertion ( puru ṣ ak ā ra) , karma, and God
1. “Suff ering in the M ah ā bhā rata ,” 39.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 179
(K ṛ ṣ ṇ a). In this chapter we will examine the presentation of these other
possible “suspects” in order to assess whether the epic’s aesthetics of suf-
fering ever provides a defi nitive answer to one of its central preoccupa-
tions (Who or what was responsible for the Bhā rata war, and by extension,
universal suff ering?). In short, we will be exploring the question of
whether or not the epic’s aesthetics delivers a theodicy.
According to Ronald Green, the problem of theodicy arises when the
reality of human suff ering is juxtaposed with two sets of beliefs tradition-
ally associated with ethical monotheism: (1) God is absolutely good and
compassionate and (2) God is omnipotent and omniscient.2 However, as
Green asserts, some writers have expanded the term beyond its classical
Western philosophical usage. Max Weber redefi ned it in order to make it
applicable to religious traditions that do not believe in just one omnipo-
tent deity. According to Weber, “the theodicy problem” refers to any situa-
tion of inexplicable suff ering and “theodicy” itself refers to any rationale
for explaining suff ering.3
For the purposes of this chapter, we will adopt Weber’s use of the
term. First we will consider fate (d aiva ) and human endeavor (p uru ṣ ak ā ra )
as potential theodicies by returning to the dicing scene and examining
their role in the infamous game of dice. Next we will explore whether or
not karma and K ṛ ṣ ṇ a provide rationales for the existence of suff ering. Fi-
nally, we will examine the epic’s enigmatic conclusion when the Pā ṇ ḍ avas
journey to heaven.4 This chapter argues that, due to the narrative strat-
egies of ambiguity and deferral, fate, human endeavor, karma, and Kṛ ṣ ṇ a
do not provide conclusive answers to the theodicy question.5 Rather, the
epic’s aesthetics of suff ering rejects a “straightforward” literal approach to
the problem and addresses it in a more dramatic, “suggestive” fashion.
2. Ronald Green, “Theodicy,” in The Encyclopedia of Religion , 2d ed, vol. 12, ed. Lindsay Jones
(Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2005), 9112 .
3. This is Green’s formulation of Weber’s ideas. See Max Weber, The Sociology of Religion ,
trans. E. Fischoff (Boston: Beacon Press, 1993), 138–150 .
4. This takes place in T he Book of the Great Departure and The Book of the Journey to Heaven ,
Books 17 and 18, respectively.
5. One additional theodicy that the M ah ā bh ā rata considers is time. See chapter 4 for a discus-
sion of time in the Mahā bh ā rata , particularly vis-à-vis the issue of suff ering. There I mentioned
but did not emphasize the fact that the power of time is placed in tension with (or exists in an
ambiguous relationship with) other potentially more powerful forces like fate and human ex-
ertion. Thus, in the context of the concerns of this chapter, I would argue that it is handled with
the same strategies of ambiguity with which fate, human exertion, and Kṛ ṣ ṇ a are.
180 disorienting dharma
Through the deployment of the strategies of estrangement and rupture in
the journey-to-heaven episode, the text presents its stark revelation of the
structure of the world, a revelation that this chapter argues is the epic’s
“answer” to its central question concerning the causes of despair.
Fate and Human Exertion in the Game of Dice
As mentioned in chapter 2 , the dicing scene is one of the pivotal scenes in
the M ah ā bh ā rata . In this scene, Duryodhana invites Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira to a
“rigged” dice game,6 takes his kingdom from him, physically abuses his
wife, and exiles him for thirteen years. These horrible actions make the
war between the Kauravas and Pā ṇ ḍ avas inevitable.7 Throughout the epic,
characters locate the root of the war and the immense suff ering that it
generates in the dice game (see, for example, Janameya’s comments at
2.46.1–3 where he calls the game of dice “the root of the destruction of the
entire world” [m ūlaṃ . . . vin ā śya p ṛ thivyā ] and 18.1.16–17 where Nā rada
urges Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira not to dwell on the hardships he has endured that were
“caused by the dice game” [d yūtakā rita ].)8 So precisely why did this “very
unfortunate”9 game take place? Both characters and the narrative voice
(here Vaiśaṃ p ā yana) point fi ngers at destiny ( daiva ). However, close scru-
tiny of the scene reveals that the principal characters’ desires and volitions
are also operative (p uruṣ ak ā ra ). To what extent, then, are fate, human en-
deavor, and/or some combination of the two depicted as the primary cause
of the dice game and the resultant suff ering that it causes? To answer this
question, we will examine, once again, the depiction of the three charac-
ters whose decisions led to the “fateful” game and who themselves claim
that these decisions were determined by fate: Duryodhana, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra,
and Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira. While in chapter 2 we investigated the psychological
states of these three characters vis-à-vis the strategies of proximity and
estrangement, we are now concerned with a slightly diff erent set of issues:
the tension between their desires and the role of fate in their decisions and
6. “Rigged” in the sense that Śakuni, an expert at dicing, plays for Duryodhana. Whether
Śakuni cheats or not is an open question in the text. However, he is a decidedly shady character.
7. For a brief summary of the dicing scene, see chapter 2 .
8. See Luis González-Reimann, “Ending the M ahā bh ā rata : Making a Lasting Impression,”
International Journal of Hindu Studies 15/1 (2011): 101–110 .
9. Janemjaya calls the game “m ah ā tyayam ” at 2.46.1.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 181
actions. Because the question of the power of fate versus human endeavor
is explicitly under investigation in the dicing scene (more so than in any
other dramatic scene in the epic), the epic’s treatment of the dynamic
between these two forces is considered to be representative.
Fate Terminology
Before we turn to our analysis of the role of fate and human eff ort in the
dicing scene, let us fi rst briefl y get clarity on the terms under investiga-
tion.1 0 In the M ah ā bh ā rata there are several Sanskrit terms that are employed
to designate the notion of fate. The most common terms are daiva (“divine
power or will,” “destiny,” “fate,” “chance”)1 1 and diṣ ṭ a (“allotment,” “fate,”
“destiny”).1 2 Other terms that frequently appear are k ā la (“time,” “death,”
“fate”), 13 v idhi (“rule,” “fate,” “time”),1 4 d hā t ṛ /vidh ā t ṛ (“maker,” “arranger,”
“fate”),1 5 b h ā gya (“fate,” “fortune,” “luck,” “happiness”),1 6 and b h ā gadeya
(“share,” “portion,” “lot,” “fate”).1 7 While these terms have slightly diff erent
semantic nuances, most of them are used interchangeably; all consistently
indicate external forces over which the individual exercises no control.1 8
Precisely who or what is the agent of fate? This is yet another question
raised by the M ah ā bhā rata and, characteristically, answered ambiguously.
In some passages, the epic suggests that there is a divine intelligence at
10. For scholarship on the role of fate in the Mahā bhā rata , see E. Washburn Hopkins, Epic
Mythology (New York: Biblio and Tannen, 1969), 73–77 ; Bruce Long, “The Concepts of
Human Action and Rebirth in the M ahā bh ā rata ,” in Karma and Rebirth in Classical Indian
Traditions , ed. Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980),
38–60 ; Saroj Bharadwaj, T he Concept of “Daiva” in the Mahā bhā rata (Delhi: Nag Publishers,
1992) ; Shulman, “Devana and Daiva,” 350–365 ; Sutton, R eligious Doctrines , 367–384 ; Hill,
Fate, Predestination, and Human Action , 85–230 ; and Julian F. Woods, D estiny and Human
Initiative in the Mahā bh ā rata (New York: State University of New York Press, 2001) .
11. See, for example, 2.43.32, 3.33.15, 5.26.15, 6.19.2, 7.23.4, 8.5.29, 10.2.6, 11.10.19, 12.7.18,
13.6.3, 14.5.16, 16.2.5.
12. See, for example, 1.84.6, 2.45.54 ff , 3.33.11 ff , 5.29.18, 6.49.02, 16.9.26.
13. See chapter 4 .
14. See, for example, 2.19.43 ff , 5.41.9, 6.1.6, 9.1.8, 11.8.35, 14.3.9, 15.10.8, 17.1.11, 18.50.32.
15. See, for example, 3.31.36, 5.23.17, 5.28.5, 6.72.26, 9.44.4, 11.1.18, 14.42.61.
16. See, for example, 2.16.26, 2.17.3, 2.70.15, 3.49.35, 5.174.13, 7.52.29, 9.20.41, 11.8.9.
17. See, for example, 2.16.26, 3.49.35, 5.14.13, 7.52.29, 9.20.41, 11.8.9.
18. Long, “The Concepts of Human Action and Rebirth in the M ahā bhā rata ,” 45 , and Hill,
Fate, Predestination, and Human Action , 198 . See, for example, 3.257.4.
182 disorienting dharma
work (here the primary candidates are Brahmā ,1 9 Vi ṣ ṇ u/Kṛ ṣ ṇ a, 20 and the
dh ā t ṛ / vidh ā t ṛ ).2 1 In others, the epic suggests that fate is caused by an imper-
sonal mechanistic power that drives all people to their doom.2 2 In still
others, the line between these two options is not always clear.2 3 Thus, the
concept of fate is presented multidimensionally; sometimes fate is pre-
sented as an impersonal, mechanistic force, sometimes as the will of the
gods or God, and oftentimes the exact nature of the agency behind what is
deemed “fated” is left open to question.2 4
Puruṣ ak ā ra means literally “that which is done by human beings.”2 5
In the epic’s endless quest for causation (i.e., why things happened the way
they did), fate and human exertion are forces that are often pitted against
one another. Most scholars agree that the question of their relationship is
one of the central concerns of the epic. 26 However, they disagree about
which side, if any, the epic ultimately comes down on. For example, accord-
ing to R. C. Zaehner, “the M ah ā bh ā rata stresses time and time again the
primacy of fate over human endeavor.”2 7 Conversely, while Peter Hill
acknowledges the wide variety of views that exist in the M ah ā bh ā rata
19. For other references to the divine burden of Earth story, see 6.62.8–11, 11.8.20 ff ,
12.337.29–31, 13.143.12, and 16.9.29.
20. In some versions of the burden of Earth story, Brahmā commands Viṣ ṇ u, in others
Vi ṣ ṇ u himself decides to descend. See 11.8.20–25.
21. As Hill (F ate, Predestination, and Human Action , 166) points out, dhā t ṛ and v idh ā t ṛ are
sometimes employed as epithets of one of the great Gods (Brahmā , Vi ṣ ṇ u, Śiva). For ex-
ample, see: 3.13.19, 3.18.22, 6.62.32, 13.15.31, 13.16.22, 16.17.47, 17.145.39. For instances where
characters employ these terms to refer to an inscrutable, capricious, arbitrary force, see
2.51.25, 2.52.14, and 3.31.1–42.
22. See, for example, 2.43.32, 6.58.01, 8.24.3. This understanding of fate is often articulated
by characters who are struggling to come to terms with circumstances of death, destruction,
and/or extreme reversals of fortune. Hill, F ate, Predestination, and Human Action , 199 .
23. Peter Hill makes the point that this ambiguity is embedded in the terminology itself. I bid., 197.
24. H ere I am disagreeing with scholars who argue that the fate terminology in the epic
refers in all cases to the story of the burden of Earth and/or the will of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a. See, for ex-
ample, Woods, D estiny and Human Initiative , 146 .
25. Woods, D estiny and Human Initiative , 4 .
26. For scholarly discussion of the constant tension between these opposed “poles” in the
epic, see Bharadwaj, T he Concept of “Daiva,” 78–96 ; Hill, Fate, Predestination, and Human
Action , 232–234 ; and Sutton, R eligious Doctrines , 367–384 . For statements in the epic that
refl ect this tension, see Bharadwaj, T he Concept of “Daiva ,” 28–96 .
27. R. C. Zaehner, H induism (London: Oxford University Press, 1966), 106 .
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 183
concerning the tension between fate and human exertion, he argues that it
is the importance “and meaningfulness of human eff ort and freedom that
most stands out.”2 8 Perhaps more wisely, Nicholas Sutton argues that there
is no clear solution to the question of which force is supreme; rather the
epic presents diff erent possible “accounts” of their dynamic in order to
engender in the reader a clear sense of the stakes involved in the issues
raised by the power (or lack thereof) of each.2 9
Duryodhana and Fate
As mentioned in chapter 2 , Prince Duryodhana is the driving force of the
dice game. But precisely what motivates him to rush toward certain disaster?
The text suggests that fate is implicated. At the opening of the dicing scene,
Duryodhana is smarting. Having just witnessed Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s royal conse-
cration and his glorious rise to the position of universal sovereign, he is
publicly humiliated by the illusions of Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s assembly hall. He burns
because of his humiliation. Duryodhana cannot understand why, in spite of
his repeated eff orts to defeat them, the Pā ṇ ḍ avas continue to rise in glory
while his situation remains stagnant. His only explanation is that it is due to
fate. He says:
I think that fate (d aiva ) alone is supreme and human action is point-
less when I see such radiant fortune given like that to Yudhiṣ ṭ hira.3 0
Along with Śakuni, his crafty uncle, Duryodhana plots to defeat the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas and win their kingdom; he shall do it through a game of dice.
Śakuni claims that Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira, who loves to gamble, does not really know
how to play.3 1 He, on the other hand, is so skilled at gambling that there is
28. Hill, Fate, Predestination, and Human Action , 371 .
29. Sutton, Religious Doctrines , 384 .
30. 2 .43.32.
31. 2.44.19. Many scholars have attributed Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s astonishing behavior in the dicing
scene to a weakness for gambling, based on Śakuni’s statement here. However, there is very
little evidence in the text that Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira is a compulsive gambler. (Arjuna does accuse
Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira of having a weakness for gambling in T he Book of Karṇ a , but he does so out of
anger, and it is not clear whether we are meant to take his words at face value). Further,
Śakuni is a very shifty character who the text suggests should not be trusted. Indeed, there
is textual evidence to refute Śakuni’s claim. Draupadī says that Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira rarely played:
“ n ā tikṛ taprayatnaḥ .” 2.60.43.
184 disorienting dharma
no one like him on earth (indeed, in all the three worlds). Therefore, Śakuni
assures Duryodhana, if Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira can be persuaded to enter into the
game, Duryodhana will be able to take Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s kingdom from him.
The fact that Duryodhana tries to act against that which he believes is
ordained by fate puts him in an antagonistic relation to it. In trying to
defeat the Pā ṇ ḍ avas, whose triumph he believes is fated, he is attempting
to defy fate. Paradoxically, the way in which he intends to defy fate,
through the game of dice, is exactly what other characters (namely
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira) think is ordained by fate, as we shall see.3 2
So, precisely what is Duryodhana’s relation to fate here? Is he acting
against it (and thus exercising his freedom) or in accordance with it (indi-
cating that his freedom is limited)? Since the answer to this question
depends on character-perspective (i.e., Yudhiṣ ṭ hira and Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra sug-
gest that he is acting in a ccordance with fate; however, according to
Duryodhana, he is not), the issue is handled ambiguously by the text.
Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra and Fate
When Duryodhana and Śakuni approach Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a and urge him to
sanction their plan, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a fi rst wavers and then acquiesces.
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra himself provides three reasons why he feels that he cannot
allow the dice game to take place: (1) Vidura is against it,3 3 (2) it will lead to
a division (b heda ) in the family,3 4 and (3) he does not want to fi ght with
people who are stronger than them.3 5
However, Duryodhana is wasting away with envy and Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
cannot bear to see him suff er. Because there are two versions of the con-
versation between Duryodhana and Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, the text provides two dif-
ferent contexts in which Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra gives in to Duryodhana. In the fi rst
version, he acquiesces when Duryodhana threatens suicide.3 6 This version
suggests that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra yields to his son because he is both weak and
overly fond of his spoiled son. (Duryodhana is certainly hamming it up a
32. See 2.45.57 and 2.52.14.
33. 2.46.7.
34. 2.46.12.
35. 2.51.10.
36. Specifi cally, Duryodhana tells Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra that Vidura will urge him to turn away from
this idea, and if Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra follows this advice, Duryodhana will kill himself. 2.45.43.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 185
bit and manipulating his father when he says, “When I am dead, be happy
with your Vidura, king.”)3 7
According to the second version (which includes an extended version
of Duryodhana’s detailed account of the extravagant gifts that Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira
received at the royal consecration), Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a relents when Duryodhana
points out that if they win the game the Kauravas will stand on equal
footing with the Pā ṇ ḍ avas.3 8 This version suggests that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra gives
in for reasons beyond his concern for Duryodhana’s happiness or
well-being. It suggests that he does not like watching the Pā ṇ ḍ avas out-
shine his own sons, and, further, that listening to his son’s account of the
magnitude of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas’ wealth has perhaps incited his greed.
Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ r a, however, claims that he submits to his son’s request for a
reason that is altogether diff erent from the ones suggested above. He says
that he agrees to the game because it is fated. He tells Vidura, “I think it is
supreme fate alone by which this occurs.” 3 9 But what exactly does he
mean? Is he saying that he agrees to Duryodhana’s request because the
game is fated? If so, how does he know this? Does it suddenly occur to
him or is he being tricked by fate so that he suddenly “sees” the game in
this light? Or, is he justifying his own weakness (his failure to stand up to
his son) by stating that the game is fated and therefore something that
cannot be avoided anyway? More to the point, does he agree to the game
because he wants to or because he is compelled or even forced to by fate?
The text’s strategies suggest that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a is motivated by a compli-
cated, even contradictory, dialectic between these two factors (i.e., his
agency and fate). The narrative voice (here Vaiśaṃ p ā yana) states explicitly
that Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra submits because of his attachment to Duryodhana:
Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ r a, knowing the evils of dicing, was drawn to it out of love
for his son.4 0
However, it also suggests that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s mind is “bewildered by fate”
( daivasa ṃ mūḍ hacetas ).4 1 Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra himself claims that he has been blinded
37. 2.45.44.
38. 2.51.13.
39. 2.45.57.
40. 2.45.49.
41. 2.51.16.
186 disorienting dharma
and confused by an inexorable force beyond his ken that causes him to “see”
things incorrectly4 2 and impels him to act against his will.4 3 Because the
text’s strategies support both readings (i.e., he did as he desired and was
impelled by fate), they deliberately render ambiguous the relative extent to
which Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s will on the one hand and fate on the other play a role in
his decision to agree to the game.
Yudhiṣ ṭ hira and Fate
Yudhiṣ ṭ hira is the most baffl ing character of all. Why does he accept
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s invitation when he knows that the game will divide the
family and most likely cause a war? And why does he, King Dharma, the
paragon of virtue who has faced every one of the P ā ṇ ḍ avas’ trials with
complete equanimity suddenly lose his wits once he enters the game
and gamble away his entire kingdom, his brothers, himself, and his
wife? These questions bring us to the heart of what is at stake in deter-
mining the precise nature of the role of fate in driving events toward the
game.
When Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra sends Vidura to Indraprastha to invite Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira
to the dice game, Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira immediately senses danger. As previously
mentioned in chapter 2 , he tells Vidura,
Dicing will bring destruction upon us, steward. Who, knowing this,
would consent to the game?4 4
Instead of refusing the challenge, however, as one might expect, he ac-
cepts it. Why? Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira himself provides three reasons: (1) because as
42. 2.72.8–11. In this speech, Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra uses the term “time” ( k ā la ) and seems to use
it interchangeably with fate. In his commentary to verse 2.52.21, Devabodha glosses “k ā lasya ”
as “d aiva sya” (D evabodha’s Commentary on the Sabhā parvan from the Mahā bhā rata , ed. R. D.
Karmarkar [Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Institute, 1949], 35 ). For scholarship on time and
fate as closely linked (if not synonymous) terms in the epic, see Long, “The Concepts of
Human Action and Rebirth,” 295 ; Bharadwaj, The Concept of “Daiva ,” 19 ; Sutton, Religious
Doctrines , 369 ; Hill, Fate, Predestination, and Human Action , 196–200 ; and González-Rei-
mann, The Mah ā bhā rata and the Yugas , 26–39 . Time, like fate, has a range of meanings in
the Mah ā bhā rata (see chapter 4 for a discussion of this range).
43. 2.51.25.
44. 2 .52.10.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 187
the “son” of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a he must obey his father’s command,4 5 (2) because
he has vowed to accept all challenges,4 6 and (3) because he believes that the
game is fated and that he must obey that which has been decreed. (In T he
Book of the Forest Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira gives one additional reason why he agrees to
play. He tells Bhīma that he wanted to take Duryodhana’s kingdom from
him.)4 7
Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s fi rst two reasons involve moral obligations by which he
feels bound. His third reason involves an outside force beyond his control:
fate ( dh ā t ṛ ). Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira tells Vidura,
It is well known that this [world] is under the control of destiny
through the Ordainer. I will not refuse to gamble with those rogues
today.4 8
And as he leaves for Hastinā pura to take part in the game, Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira
says, to no one in particular:
Fate ( daiva ) robs wisdom like light blinds the eye. A person is under
the control of the Ordainer as though bound with fetters.4 9
Once he enters the dice game with Śakuni, Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira does act like a man
who has been robbed of his reason, overtaken by some exterior force such
as fate. He begins with a sober stake: a set of pearls. But when Śakuni cries
“Won!” Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira loses his composure. Nineteen throws later he has
staked and lost his entire kingdom, his four brothers, himself, and
Draupadī, thus paving the way for his wife’s humiliation and abuse.5 0
So precisely why does Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira accept the challenge? One way of
interpreting Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s statements is that he considers fate to be that
which he believes he is obligated to do but does not want to do. If this is
45. 2.52.10. This is highly ironic because it is precisely because Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra chooses to treat
Yudhiṣ ṭ hira as an enemy rather than as his son that Yudhiṣ ṭ hira has been placed in this
situation in the fi rst place.
46. 2.52.14.
47. 3.35.2. For additional scholarship on Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s motivations to play dice, see Brod-
beck, “Gendered Soteriology: Marriage and the K armayoga ,” 154 .
48. 2.52.14.
49. 2.52.18.
50. See chapter 2 for a discussion of the ramifi cations of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s stake of Draupadī.
188 disorienting dharma
the case, then while he might feel forced to act, he is still to some extent in
control of his situation and thus a free agent. However, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira
believes that he is being confused and impelled toward the game by fate.
The narrative voice (again Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana) supports Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s view by
suggesting that he is being impelled towards the game against his will.5 1
So, did Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira accept the challenge to play the game of dice because
of his sense of moral obligation—in which case, while constrained, he still
has agency—or because he was impelled by fate—in which case his agency
is called into question? Again the text’s strategies support two readings
whose conjunction places fate in an unresolved tension with human
agency.
a close examination of the characters’ decisions and actions in this
scene reveals that characters express the conviction that fate is a force
that clouds their mind and drives them.5 2 The narrative voice supports
this view by suggesting that fate both strikes out at individuals and
makes decrees to which characters are subject.5 3 However, characters also
express intentions and give reasons why they willfully agree to the game
(e.g., Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra indicates that he submits to Duryodhana’s wishes
because of his devotion to his son5 4 and Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira indicates that he
agrees to participate in the game, in part, out of moral obligation), and
the narrative voice indicates that these intentions are motivating factors
as well.5 5 To return to the original question concerning the extent to which
either fate or human endeavor provide answers to the theodicy issue, the
answer is an ambiguous “both do, in part.” The above analysis reveals
that the dice game took place because of a complicated dialectic between
both forces. What is the nature of this dialectic? Which force is more pow-
erful and which is responsible for the suff ering that takes place in this
scene and in the epic at large? Since these questions are not answered
conclusively, they join the ranks of the epic’s multiple riddle-questions
(that is, questions that are raised but never conclusively answered). And,
because the power of fate is placed in an ambiguous relation with human
51. 2.52.21.
52. 2.51.25, 2.52.14, 2.52.18, and 2.72.8–11.
53. 2.51.16 and 2.52.21.
54. He says this explicitly at 2.72.36.
55. 2.45.49.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 189
endeavor, the text through its strategies of ambiguity defers answering
whether either force on its own (or a defi nitive combination of the two) is
a suffi cient explanation for the problem of suff ering. 56
Karma and Suffering
Unlike the powers of fate and human endeavor, the impact of karma on
the lives of individual characters is not explicitly examined in one dra-
matic scene. Instead, karma is explored predominantly in two epic con-
texts: (1) in didactic passages where the details of the machinations of
karma are discussed; and (2) through characterization, particularly in
terms of how characters are depicted as acting and reaping the conse-
quences of their actions.5 7
Before I turn to an examination of karma’s role in the prevalence of
suff ering in the epic, let me fi rst clarify what karma is and how it pertains
to the theodicy issue. According to Peter Hill there is no single theory of
karma in the tradition. 58 However, a distinctive feature in most, if not all,
defi nitions is the strict connection between act and consequence. Further,
according to Hill, most theories of karma contain the idea that every indi-
vidual in the course of successive existences (i.e., sa ṃ sā ra , or cycle of
rebirth) reaps the fruit of his or her own actions performed in previous
existences. As Hill writes, “as a person desires, so does he [or she] act and
as he acts so does he incur or store up consequences that must come to
fruition in future existences.”5 9
Some Euro-American scholars, the great sociologist Max Weber in par-
ticular, have argued that the concept of karma provides a logical solution
56. Sutton writes, “There can be no simple solution to the problem of destiny and free will
and the stature of the epic is surely raised by the fact that when viewed as a work in its en-
tirety, it makes no such attempt. Rather, it off ers diff erent perspectives . . . each of which
contributes to the development of the reader’s comprehension.” Sutton, R eligious Doctrines ,
384 . For a catalogue of references to d aiva in the Mahā bh ā rata , many of which point to the
pervasive tension between the power of fate and human endeavor in the epic, see Bharadwaj,
The Concept of “Daiva ,” 28–96 .
57. Hill associates karma’s presentation in the epic also with the themes of boons/curses
and sin/merit. See Hill, F ate, Predestination and Human Action , 39–40 and 42–72 . There are
also several characters in the epic whose past lives determine their present ones in specifi c
ways. For example, see the story of Ambā who is reborn as Śikhaṇ ḍ in to exact revenge on
Bhī ṣ ma. (5.170–190).
58. Hill, Fate, Predestination and Human Action , 2 .
59. Ibid. , 3 .
190 disorienting dharma
to the conundrums of the theodicy question.6 0 Weber considered karma to
be “the most complete formal solution to the problem of theodicy.” 61 For
him, the doctrine “solves” the problem of the prevalence of suff ering by
blaming evil on itself: one’s present experience is the direct result of the
action (karma), good and bad, accumulated in past lives and affi xed to
the transmigrating soul.6 2 In Weber’s own words: “What may appear from
the viewpoint of a theory of compensation as unjust suff ering in the ter-
restrial life of a person should be regarded as atonement for sins in a
previous existence.”6 3
In the Mah ā bh ā rata karma is linked to suff ering in two distinct but
related ways. First, karma along with the closely associated notion of
sa ṃ s ā ra , is invoked by characters (predominantly sages or advisors, often
advisors against grief) as a concept that provides descriptive content to the
idea that the world, and more specifi cally the human condition, is charac-
terized by suff ering.6 4 In this context, the concept is invoked predomi-
nantly to provide an account for, indeed to describe, “the way things are,”
as opposed to providing a rationale or reason for the prevalence of human
sorrow. The purpose of providing such an account is to make a compelling
case for why either the path of d harma and/or the techniques for escaping
rebirth should be adopted, n ot to provide a theodicy.
The second manner in which karma is linked to suff ering occurs when,
in accordance with Weber’s ideas, characters invoke the concept in order
to explain why they (or others) suff er sudden and unexpected misfortune
(i.e., it is invoked as a theodicy). The reason is that the character must have
performed some sinful act either in a previous life or in the past of his or
her current lifetime and is now reaping the consequences of those bad
60. However, the law of karma has never been unanimously accepted as a satisfying answer
to the theodicy problem. See Magaret Chatterjee, “Some Strands of Thought Relating to the
Problem of Evil” in R elativism, Suff ering, and Beyond: Essays in Memory of Bimal K. Matilal ,
ed. P. Bilimoria and J. N. Mohanty (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), 329 .
61. Weber, The Sociology of Religion , 145 .
62. Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty, T he Origins of Evil in Hindu Mythology (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1976), 14 .
63. Weber, The Sociology of Religion , 143 .
64. The distinction that I am making here is between invoking the concept of karma to
provide a reason for why characters suff er and invoking the concept in order to describe an
ontological fact. The diff erence is between the urge to solve the problem as opposed to the
urge to describe the problem. Another way of saying this is that the issue shifts from being
about causality to being about ontology.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 191
actions. However, this use of the concept occurs surprisingly infrequently
in the text. Saṃ jaya’s comments to the lamenting Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra in the battle
books are a notable exception.6 5
Signifi cantly, when karma is linked to suff ering specifi cally for the pur-
poses of providing a theodicy, its power is often placed in an ambiguous
relation with other potential theodicies (such as fate, time, etc.). In what
follows, we will examine the depiction of karma in the two types of epic
contexts mentioned above (didactic passages and characterization) in
order to assess karma’s precise role in the problem of suff ering.
Three Teachings on Karma
There are only a handful of major teachings on karma in the Mah ā bh ā rata .6 6
The three that we will briefl y examine are Marka ṇ ḍ eya’s discussion of
karma in T he Book of the Forest , the hunter’s discussion of karma in “The
Colloquy of the Brahmin and the Hunter” (also in T he Book of the Forest ),
and Vidura’s teaching on karma in T he Book of the Women . Our main con-
cern is determining precisely if, how, and why karma is linked to suff ering.
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira prompts Markaṇ ḍ eya’s teaching on karma in The Book of
the Forest by posing the following question to the great sage:
Seeing myself unhappy and noticing that the evil sons of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
are prospering in every way, the thought occurs to me that a person
is the agent of action, both good and evil, and that one enjoys one’s
own fruit; but if this is so, how is God the agent? Best of those who
know Brahman, do the acts of human beings, in happiness and
suff ering, follow them in this life, or again in another body?6 7
65. Two other notable exceptions are Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a and G ā ndh ā rī’s laments in The Book of the
Women . Both attribute their miserable circumstances to their previous actions. See 11.1.17,
11.16.59, and 11.18.11–12.
66. According to Peter Hill, there are fi ve major discussions of karma in the M ah ā bhā rata :
the U ttarayā y ā ta section of The Book of the Beginning (1.81.1–89.1); Marka ṇ ḍ eya’s teaching to
Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira in The Book of the Forest (3.181.1–185.1); “The Colloquy of the Brahmin and the
Hunter,” also in The Book of the Forest (3.198.1–207.1); Bṛ haspati’s teaching to Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira in
The Book of the Instruction (13.112.1–113.1); and Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s teaching to Arjuna in the Anugītā
(14.13.1–17.1). See H ill, Fate, Predestination, and Human Action , 5–29 . I would add a sixth dis-
cussion to Hill’s list: Vidura’s argument against grief to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra in The Book of the Women
(11.2.1–8.1).
67. 3.181.4–6.
192 disorienting dharma
The heart of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s question is whether previous acts determine
future fortunes, whether bad or good. In short, his question is whether
karma provides a theodicy, and if it does, how it does so.
In response, Marka ṇ ḍ eya turns to a discussion of the beginning of
creation, providing a kind of history of the origins of human suff ering.
In the beginning, according to Markaṇ ḍ eya, Prajā pati, Lord of the Crea-
tures, created pure beings who were devoted to d harma and thus free
from suff ering. Living with the gods in heaven, they went back and forth
to earth as they pleased. However, as time progressed, human beings
became vulnerable to lust and greed and committed sinful acts. Conse-
quently, they became victims of suff ering, reaping the fruits of their evil
deeds.
Next Markaṇ ḍ eya responds more directly to Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s question,
asserting that human beings, and not God, are responsible for their hap-
piness and/or misery because they reap the consequences of what they
sow in previous existences:
A person in his or her original, God-created body accumulates a lot
of good and bad deeds. At the end of life one abandons one’s mostly
exhausted body and is instantly reborn in a womb; there is no gap.
There, one’s own acts, which always follow one like a shadow, fruc-
tify, and now one is born deserving happiness or suff ering.6 8
Finally, Markaṇ ḍ eya discusses the course of action followed by the
wise. Markaṇ ḍ eya defi nes “the wise” (j ñ ā navat) as those who understand
that what will happen to them in the future is determined by their current
behavior. Thus wise people live according to virtuous actions in order to
be born into better wombs in the next life. According to Markaṇ ḍ eya, the
superior course of the wise involves practicing austerities, devotion to
learning, speaking the truth, subduing one’s passion, forgiveness, and
self-control. 69
After Marka ṇ ḍ eya establishes the fact that karma is the sole operative
force in determining the lot of human beings—specifi cally with respect to
their happiness and/or sorrow—he seemingly pulls the rug right out from
under his teaching by asserting quite out of the blue:
68. 3.181.23–25.
69. 3.181.28–32.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 193
O king, some things come to people from fate, some from chance,
and some from previous actions. Do not think about this anymore.7 0
Thus he calls into question (or as Hill writes “demolishes”)7 1 his teaching
on karma by placing its so-called predominant power in an ambiguous re-
lation with other forces that he claims also control the lives of individuals.
The second teaching on karma involves a story that Markaṇ ḍ eya tells
Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira about a brahmin who visits an unusually wise hunter in order
to receive the hunter’s teachings on d harma . Upon meeting the hunter,
the brahmin asks the hunter why he pursues his vile occupation. The
hunter explains that he does so because of his past deeds:
There is no doubt that my actions are terrible, brahmin, but what is
ordained is powerful for our previous deeds are diffi cult to overcome.
This is the bad consequence of the evil that I did before. I have tried,
brahmin, to destroy this bad consequence. What was previously
ordained by fate is the cause that is really the killer. But we are the
cause of this karma, brahmin.7 2
The hunter then proceeds to instruct the brahmin in, among other things,
the nature of karma.
In his teaching on karma the hunter makes four basic points. First, the
hunter emphasizes karma’s power to determine human fortune. Karma,
according to the hunter, governs and is responsible for everything (in-
cluding suff ering); human beings are but the instrument of previous
karma. According to him,
no one is the master of one’s own lot, supreme brahmin; [what] is
seen here is the consequence of one’s previous actions.7 3
Second, the hunter discusses the details of birth, death, and transmigra-
tion in order to explain the mechanics of how acts follow the soul from
one life to another. He tells the brahmin that when the body perishes, the
70. 3.181.32.
71. Hill, Fate, Predestination, and Human Action , 13 .
72. 3.199.1–3.
73. 3.200.22.
194 disorienting dharma
soul migrates to another body, bound by the fetters of his deeds.7 4 Further,
he explains how karma determines the quality of one’s birth: As a result of
virtuous acts, one becomes a god; due to mixed acts, one becomes a
human; due to deluded acts, one becomes an animal; and due to criminal
acts, one goes below, to hell.7 5
Next, the hunter describes the misery that the cycle of transmigration,
generated by karma, entails. He labors on this point extensively:
A person continually attacked by the miseries of birth, old age, and
death is cooked in sa ṃ s ā ra by the bad consequences which one
brings upon oneself. After going to hell and being reborn in a thou-
sand animal wombs, souls, bound by the fetters of their actions,
wander. But a creature, having died and suff ered due to this or that
karma which they brought upon themselves is reborn in an inaus-
picious womb in order to get rid of that suff ering. Then one gets a
great deal of new karma and again is cooked by it like a sick person
who has eaten something that does not agree with them. Being in a
state of constant suff ering yet unsuff ering, one is called happy.
Therefore, in great agony one goes around in sa ṃ s ā ra like a wheel
because the fetters have not been cut and karma has come again.7 6
Finally, the hunter discusses the means to escape the world of suff ering
generated by the forces of karma and s a ṃ s ā ra through controlling the
senses and cultivating tranquility, which is in accordance of the behavior
of the followers of d harma . According to the hunter, the path of d harma
leads one to realize that the world is by nature transient and therefore it is
expedient to renounce everything and strive for release.7 7
In this discourse the hunter clearly implies that karma is responsible
for human fortune and misfortune (since according to him karma gov-
erns everything), but this is not his principal point. His main point is to
describe the misery of human existence due to the forces of karma and
sa ṃ s ā ra in order to convince the brahmin to follow the path of dharma and
to escape the cycle of rebirth and thereby suff ering. Such a path, according
74. 3.200.24.
75. 3.200.32.
76. 3.200.33–37.
77. 3.200.40–52.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 195
to him, entails disciplined mental control and practicing austerities.
Because this path ultimately leads to union with Brahman, the paths of
dharma and m ok ṣ a are thus united, or at least brought closely together, in
the hunter’s discourse.
The third teaching on karma is one that we have already examined in
chapter 3 , Vidura’s argument against grief to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a in The Book of the
Women . In a speech that Julian Woods calls “perhaps the purest enuncia-
tion of karma in the M ah ā bh ā rata ,” Vidura focuses on the universal nature
of suff ering, which he attributes to several forces, karma and s a ṃ s ā ra
among them.7 8
Vidura begins his argument by emphasizing the vulnerability of all
living beings to the ravages of all-destroying time, which he discusses as
the root of suff ering.7 9 Seamlessly, Vidura shifts his focus from time as the
cause of suff ering to karma and sa ṃ s ā ra , providing one of the clearest ar-
ticulations of karma in the epic:
Deeds that were done in the past lie next to a person who is lying
down, they stand next to a person who is standing, and run after a
person who is running. A person who performs good or bad acts in
a certain stage of life will experience their results in that same stage
of life.8 0
And, like Markaṇ ḍ eya and the hunter before him, Vidura points out that
misery as well as happiness are products of one’s past deeds:
Son of Vicitravīrya, beings obtain their lot in life whether it is
suff ering or happiness through their own deeds in fact. Heaven
is reached through one’s own deeds, as are happiness and suf-
fering, Bhā rata. So one bears one’s burden, whether one is free or
not. 81
78. Woods, D estiny and Human Initiative , 120 .
79. See chapter 4 for a full discussion of time conceived in this way.
80. 11.2.22–23. Note that, according to Vidura, one reaps the consequences of one’s actions
performed in the past of a current life, not in a previous life. It is not clear how much the
concepts of time and karma overlap in Vidura’s argument. Sometimes Vidura seems to be
talking about them synonymously and sometimes they seem to refer to diff erent things.
However, they do appear to be very closely linked here.
81. 11.3.7–8.
196 disorienting dharma
Further elaborating on this point, Vidura discusses the impact of karma
and sa ṃ s ā ra on the lives of the individual, describing human existence,
which he argues is determined by them, in very unpleasant terms. He
begins with the topic of conception in the womb, then moves to life in
human form which, according to him, is characterized by disease, sin,
vices (due to karma) all of which make one susceptible to the clutches of
Yama (i.e., death). Thus one lives, acts, suff ers the consequences of one’s
actions, and dies, and then is reborn again only to live, act, suff er, and die
again. In making this strong connection between karma, sa ṃ sā ra , and
human suff ering, Vidura’s purpose is not to further depress Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a
but to encourage him to see the truth and thus travel “the farthest course.”
Out of these three teachings, only one, Marka ṇ deya’s speech, focuses
on karma primarily for the purposes of discussing it as a theodicy. How-
ever, as already mentioned, while Markaṇ deya points a fi nger at karma, he
also points other fi ngers at fate and chance, thus rendering his comments
concerning karma’s role in universal suff ering inconclusive. By contrast,
although both the hunter’s teaching and Vidura’s teachings imply that
karma is responsible for suff ering, this point only serves as a stepping
stone to a larger ontological point about the fact that rebirth and karma
simply constitute (rather than cause) universal suff ering. Indeed, the idea
of providing a rationale for suff ering is in some sense antithetical to the
hunter’s and Vidura’s messages, since both stress that suff ering is some-
thing that must be accepted, not rationalized and “explained away.”
Characterization and Karma
Detailed teachings are not the only way in which karma is explored in the
epic. The nature of the relationship between act and consequence, particu-
larly with respect to the issue of human suff ering, is explored through the
depiction of characters as well. Perhaps the most persistent and dramatic way
karma is explored through characterization is through the depiction of a
character now all too familiar to us: Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a.8 2 Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra is a compelling
character study in this regard because he is one of the few characters, if not
the only one, who is consistently told that he is reaping or will reap the con-
sequences of his actions. As discussed at some length in chapter 3 , Saṃ jaya
82. See chapter 3 for a more extensive discussion of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra vis-à-vis the topic of act and
consequence, particularly as it intersects with issues of narrative structure.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 197
tells Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a throughout the battle books that the war and the deaths of
his sons are his fault, a direct result of his past actions, namely his weakness
for his son and/or his refusal to listen to good advice.8 3 And, as we also dis-
covered in chapter 3 , Sa ṃ jaya’s message to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra in most of these pas-
sages is anything but straightforward. In many cases, Saṃ jaya’s statements
are ambiguous, since he complicates his point by telling Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, in the
same breath, that the war and the death of Dhṛ trar ā ṣ ṭ r a’s sons was fated and
that there was nothing that Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra could have done about it!
The most stunning example of Sa ṃ jaya’s ambiguity occurs in T he Book
of the Eff ort in a passage that we examined in chapter 3 . When Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a
asks Sa ṃ jaya to be his war correspondent, Saṃ jaya accepts the job, but
tells Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a that the blind king fi nds himself in the present situation
because of his own misdeeds. Immediately after Samjaya says this, how-
ever, he tells Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a to listen to his narration of the war and as he does
so, not to grieve. Why? Because, according to Sa ṃ jaya, man is not the
agent of his good and evil acts; he is helplessly manipulated like a wooden
puppet. Further, some acts are caused by chance (y ad ṛ cch ā ), some by God
( īśvara ), and some by previous action (karma).8 4
What are we to make of Sa ṃ jaya’s baffl ing statements to Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a?
Like Markaṇ ḍ eya, Saṃ jaya seems to deliberately employ the strategies of
ambiguity when speaking about the power of karma. We might wonder
whether or not Saṃ jaya understands fate and karma to be somehow
linked or in collusion with one another. However, this seems to decidedly
not be the case since Saṃ jaya tells Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra explicitly not to blame fate,
only himself and his past actions, for what has come to pass. 8 5
while this brief survey of the epic’s examination of karma is not ex-
haustive, my intention has been to bring to light two points about karma’s
treatment in the epic. First, the text does not frequently invoke karma as a
means to provide a rationale for the existence of suff ering and misfortune.
There are approximately fi ve major teachings on karma in the epic; only
a few of these focus on the concept specifi cally as a theodicy. And while
the relationship between act and consequence is examined implicitly in
83. See passages discussed in chapter 3 , for example, 5.156.9, 6.16.2, and 6.73.1–3. Other
characters—most notably Kṛ ṣ ṇ a at 9.62.37–55—also tell Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a that the war was his
fault.
84. 5.156.12–15.
85. 5.156.9.
198 disorienting dharma
the case of many characters (as it is in any good work of literature),8 6 it
is examined explicitly (and by “explicit” is meant the presence of termi-
nology like “k arman ,” “fruit” [ phala ] and “fault” [d o ṣ a ]) in relatively few
cases. Second, when the concept of karma is invoked for the purpose of
providing a rationale for suff ering, it is often placed in an inconclusive
relationship with other forces that either vie for power or possibly work in
tandem with it in ways that are deliberately rendered ambiguous by the
text’s strategies.
To return to the larger question of whether karma provides a theodicy in
the Mah ā bh ā rata , the answer is, once again, “not conclusively.” Why not?
First, it is not a major “theodicy-suspect” in the M ah ā bhā rata , and second, in
the relatively few cases where karma is treated as such, it is often handled
ambiguously; thus any defi nitive answer of karma’s precise role in the preva-
lence of suff ering is deferred. We must, therefore, look elsewhere for more
conclusive answers in our theodicy quest. This search leads us now to perhaps
our most perplexing suspect of all: God in the form of the trickster Kṛ ṣ ṇ a.
K. r .s n. a the Enigmatic Deity
ṛ ṣ ṇ
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a V ā sudeva, cousin to the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and Lord of the Universe, is an
enigmatic deity. Why, for example, does he stand back and allow the injus-
tices of the dice game and the resultant slaughter that follows to take place?
If he is God, couldn’t he have stopped these events? And why does he urge
the P ā ṇ ḍ avas to commit deceitful acts during the war? More disconcerting
is the fact that the narrative leaves open the question of whether or not
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a is actually on the side of human beings or if he is plotting against
them, driving everyone toward an apocalyptic doom. While the subject of
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s enigmatic depiction in the M ah ā bh ā rata is worthy of a monograph
itself, my focus in this section will be quite limited and specifi c.8 7 I want to
consider what role Kṛ ṣ ṇ a plays in the existence of suff ering, focusing in
86. See E. M. Forster, A spects of the Novel (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1956), 59.
87. For scholarship on the depiction of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a in the M ah ā bhā rata , see Brockington, T he
Sanskrit Epics , 256–267 ; Hill, Fate, Predestination, and Human Action , 143–153 ; Alf Hiltebeitel,
The Ritual of Battle: Krishna in the Mahā bh ā rata (Albany: State University of New York Press,
1976) ; idem, “K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and the Mahā bhā rata (A Bibliographical Essay),” Annals of the Bhan-
darkar Oriental Institute 60 (1979): 65–107 ; Karve, Yug ā nta , 159–182 ; Matilal, “Kṛ ṣ ṇ a: In
Defence of a Devious Divinity,” 91–108 ; Smith, T he Mahā bhā rata , xxxiv–xli ; Sutton, Religious
Doctrines , 143–180 ; and S. N. Tadpatrikar, “The Kṛ ṣ ṇ a Problem,” Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 10 (1929): 269–343 .
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 199
particular on the questions that the text raises about the nature and scope
of his divinity and about his role in bringing about the war.
Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s Power
Several passages in the epic portray Kṛ ṣ ṇ a as an omnipotent deity who cre-
ates and controls the cosmos. Depicted as such, he is, by implication, re-
sponsible for the presence of suff ering, since he is considered to be the cause
of everything. For example, in the B hagavadgītā , Kṛ ṣ ṇ a tells Arjuna that he is
the “great lord of the world” and that “happiness and unhappiness” (s ukham
duḥkham ) along with everything else spring from him alone.8 8 In The Book of
the Assembly Hall , when Yudhiṣ ṭ hira consults Kṛ ṣ ṇ a about whether or not he
should perform the royal consecration, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira turns to him precisely
because he is God and thus “superior to all the world”.8 9 In the same book
Bhīṣ ma, defending his decision to give Kṛ ṣ ṇ a the guest gift, tells the as-
sembly of kings that Kṛ ṣ ṇ a alone is the origin of the worlds.9 0 Further, in
The Book of the Eff ort , Sa ṃ jaya (who has special knowledge of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a)9 1 tells
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra that Kṛ ṣ ṇ a makes the wheel of the world go around and governs
all things, including time, death, and all creatures.9 2 Finally, in the battle
books, as the war progresses and the Kauravas suff er heavy losses, Bhī ṣ ma,
Dro ṇ a, and others in the Kuru camp tell Duryodhana that victory for the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas is certain because they have Kṛ ṣ ṇ a, who is the all-powerful divinity,
on their side. Indeed, Kṛ ṣ ṇ a even uses his divine powers to intervene on the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas’ side (although this occurs rarely). For example, after the war when
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a alights from Arjuna’s chariot, it is immediately consumed by fi re. To
the awed P ā ṇ ḍ avas Kṛ ṣ ṇ a explains that the chariot had already been burned
several times over by the various weapons by which it had been struck.
Because K ṛ ṣ ṇ a had stood upon it in battle, it had not broken apart.
While Kṛ ṣ ṇ a is portrayed as the omnipotent creator of the universe in
some passages, in others he is depicted as possessing limited power.9 3
88. 6.32.4.
89. 2.12.25.
90. 2.35.22.
91. See 5.67.2.
92. 5.66.14.
93. Note that there is certainly a distinction between how Kṛ ṣ ṇ a talks about himself when
he is revealing his divine form and when he is not.
200 disorienting dharma
When K ṛ ṣ ṇ a is portrayed as limited, he is sometimes depicted as the
avat ā ra (i.e., incarnation) of Lord Vi ṣ ṇ u. 94 Perhaps the clearest articulation
of K ṛ ṣ ṇ a portrayed in this light occurs in The Book of the Horse Sacrifi ce
when K ṛ ṣ ṇ a is journeying home to Dvā rak ā after the war. In the deserts of
Rajasthan, he encounters the great hermit Uttaṅ ka. Regarding Kṛ ṣ ṇ a as
the all-powerful deity, Utta ṅ ka asks him if he was able to resolve the diff er-
ences between the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and Kauravas and establish peace. Kṛ ṣ ṇ a
replies that although he tried, he was not able to because “it is impossible
to overcome destiny through either intelligence or might.”9 5 When he
hears this, Uttaṅ ka becomes furious and accuses Kṛ ṣ ṇ a of being respon-
sible for the suff ering and carnage caused by the war. Because K ṛ ṣ ṇ a could
have stopped the war (since he is God), Utta ṅ ka argues, he is to be held
accountable for allowing it to happen. Utta ṅ ka, therefore, threatens to
curse K ṛ ṣ ṇ a:
O K ṛ ṣ ṇ a, since your dear relatives the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and the Kauravas
were not protected by you even though you were capable of it, there-
fore I will curse you, without a doubt. And it is not the case that
94. The term “ avat ā ra ” itself never appears in the Critical Edition and Sutton calls it, with
respect to the epic, “a peripheral concept”(see Sutton, R eligious Doctrines , 156, 167 ). Sutton
also notes that there are two distinct “doctrines” of a vat ā ra in the text. The fi rst centers on
the notion that the descent of an a vat ā ra is related to a particular y uga and the second
stresses the manifestation of the a vat ā ra when it is required to assist the purposes of the
gods (i.e., to relieve the burden of Earth) and/or to preserve d harma ; (it is important to
note that these two ideas are not necessarily linked). For “the restoration of dharma idea,”
see Bhagavadgītā 4.7–8. Despite the fact that the concept of a vat ā ra is underdeveloped in
the text and the fact that the term never appears in the Critical Edition, many scholars have
read the epic largely through the lens of the doctrine of the a vat ā ra . See, for example,
Biardeau, “ Études de Mythologie Hindoue (IV),” 111–262 and “ Études de Mythologie Hindoue
(V),” Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient 65/1 (1978): 87–237; Fitzgerald,
“ Mah ā bh ā rata ,” 55 , and T he Mahā bh ā rata , Vol. 7, 4; Johnson, The Sauptikaparvan , xxxiv .
Through this lens many scholars have argued that the M ah ā bhā rata concludes with the
restoration of d harma (stemming from Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s statement in the B hagavadgīt ā at 4.7–8 and
a confl ation of the two “doctrines” noted above) despite the fact that this reading of the text
is hard to reconcile with what actually happens at the epic’s conclusion. In actuality, the
Mah ā bh ā rata concludes, as Pollock aptly puts it, “in anomie, ascetic suicide, and apoca-
lypse.” Pollock, The Rā mā yaṇ a of Vā lmīki : An Epic of Ancient India , Vol. 2: Ayodh ā kā ṇ ḍ a
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987), 71 . In a similar vein, Fitzgerald writes, “a
pall hangs over the epic narrative from the conclusion of Bhīṣ ṃ a’s instructions all the way
to the end of the tale” ( The Mahā bhā rata , Vol. 7, 139). James Laine takes Biardeau to task
on precisely this issue (i.e., imposing comforting ideas onto the epic story). See L aine,
Visions of God , 32 .
95. 14.52.16.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 201
because you were unable to, you did not stop them because the best
of the Kauravas were assisted by you who behaved deceitfully. You
neglected them, Mā dhva, though you were capable. Therefore,
fi lled with anger, I will curse you, slayer of Madhu.9 6
Calmly, K ṛ ṣ ṇ a explains to Uttaṅ ka that although he is “the soul” of “all that
exists”9 7 and that everything emanates from him, he takes birth in diverse
wombs in order to uphold d harma .9 8 When he is born among the Gand-
harvas, then he acts like a Gandharva, and when he is born among the
gods, then he acts like the gods.9 9 Likewise, when he is born as a human,
he acts and is limited to the actions of human beings.1 00 Thus even though
he took measures to avert the war, he acted as a human being, not as a god.
As a human, all that he could do was counsel the Kauravas and encourage
them to avoid war, but because they were “unrighteous” (a dharma )1 01 and
“assailed by the law of time” (p arīt ā ḥ k ā ladharmena )1 02 they all perished in
battle.
The Utta ṅ ka episode explicitly raises the question of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s omnipo-
tence and responds negatively. According to this passage, Kṛ ṣ ṇ a did not
stop the war because he lacked the power to do so. Limited by his human
form, all that he could do was attempt to counsel the Kauravas, but
because they were “assailed by the law of time” they did not listen to
him.1 03 Thus we see that the passages that depict K ṛ ṣ ṇ a as the all-powerful
godhead, such as those found in the Bhagavadgītā , are placed in an am-
biguous relation with those that suggest that his power is limited, such as
the Uttaṅ ka episode. 104 While in some cases the text resorts to the nascent
idea of the a vat ā ra to resolve these kinds of paradoxical statements, in
most cases the ambiguity is left unresolved (i.e., sometimes Kṛ ṣ ṇ a is
96. 14.52.20–22.
97. 14.53.5.
98. 14.53.12.
99. 14.53.16–17.
100. 14.53.19.
101. 1 4.53.21.
102. 14.53.21.
103. Matilal, “Kṛ ṣ ṇ a: In Defence of a Devious Divinity,” 101 .
104. See also Sutton, R eligious Doctrines , 175 ; Hill, Fate, Predestination, and Human Action ,
144–145 ; and González-Reimann, T he Mah ā bhā rata and the Yugas , 29 .
202 disorienting dharma
depicted as all-powerful and sometimes he is not) and the question of the
extent of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s power is rendered by the text’s strategies as one more issue
or “knot” that joins the ranks of the epic’s many riddle-questions.1 05
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s Role in the Slaughter
Equally perplexing is the issue of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s role in bringing about the war.
Certainly there are passages in the epic that suggest that Kṛ ṣ ṇ a actively
endeavors to cause the war and its concomitant suff ering. For example, in
his summary of the epic in T he Book of the Beginning , Ugraśravas, the nar-
rator in the outer frame of the epic, explicitly states that Kṛ ṣ ṇ a encouraged
the quarrel between the cousins. He says,
Then Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a, who was fond of his son, permitted the dice
game. Hearing this, the son of Vasudeva [i.e., Kṛ ṣ ṇ a] became very
angry. And the wise one who was not terribly pleased encouraged
the dice game and he also disregarded the other developments.1 06
In The Book of the Assembly Hall , N ā rada tells to the assembled kings that
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a will eradicate the k ṣ atriya s:
Alas! This Great Being who has created himself will once again in
this way seize the k ṣ atriya s who are strong.1 07
In T he Book of the Stay in the Forest Hermitage , Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a tells Yudhiṣ ṭ hira
that K ṛ ṣ ṇ a saw the destruction of the k ṣ atriya s as a favorable outcome:
For K ṛ ṣ ṇ a saw all the kings destroyed. Kṛ ṣ ṇ a, the Supreme One,
took this to be the greatest good.1 08
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s role in the events leading up to the war also suggests that he
played an active part in bringing about the confl ict, since he is the one
105. For scholarship on the paradoxes surrounding Kṛ ṣ ṇ a, see Sukthankar, O n the Meaning
of the Mahā bhā rata , 24, 26 and Sutton, R eligious Doctrines , 176–177 .
106. 1.1.92–93.
107. 2.33.19.
108. 15.5.7
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 203
who encourages Yudhiṣ ṭ hira to build his grand assembly hall and to per-
form the royal consecration, both events that incite Duryodhana’s jealousy
and desire for revenge.
However, in at least two epic passages K ṛ ṣ ṇ a is cursed (or almost
cursed in one case) not because he actively caused the war but because he
stood back and allowed it to happen (i.e., he as god was a passive witness
to suff ering). For example, G ā ndh ā rī blames K ṛ ṣ ṇ a for being indiff erent to
the slaughter. She therefore curses him:
Because you, Govinda, ignored the Kauravas and Pā ṇ ḍ avas, who are
relatives, as they killed each other, you shall kill your own relatives.1 09
Above we saw that Uttaṅ ka also threatens to curse Kṛ ṣ ṇ a for standing back
and allowing the war to happen. We also saw that K ṛ ṣ ṇ a denied that
charge, explaining that as a human being his power was limited and sug-
gesting that he himself is subject to fate. However, when he is cursed by
G ā ndh ā rī, K ṛ ṣ ṇ a does not attempt to defend himself; he simply confi rms
that her curse is fated to happen.1 10
In addition to passages suggesting that Kṛ ṣ ṇ a either actively endeavors
to bring about the war or stands back and allows it to happen, there are
episodes where we see Kṛ ṣ ṇ a actively trying to bring about peace. In Book
5, the U dyogaparvan , Kṛ ṣ ṇ a acts as an envoy on behalf of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and
journeys to the kingdom of the Kauravas in order to deter them from war.
When Duryodhana indicates that he is not going to heed K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s advice,
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a urges the Kauravas to restrain him.1 11 If the Kauravas had listened
to K ṛ ṣ ṇ a at this moment, there would have been no war. However, it is
worth noting that before Kṛ ṣ ṇ a sets out on his mission for peace, he tells
Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira that he does not think it will be successful.1 12
The real irony here is that Kṛ ṣ ṇ a himself claims that his main objective
in walking among human beings is to uphold dharma (see the above dis-
cussion of the Uttaṅ ka episode). For example, in the B hagavadgītā , K ṛ ṣ ṇ a
tells Arjuna:
109. 11.25.40.
110. 11.25.44. Vasudeva also asserts that Kṛ ṣ ṇ a stood back and passively allowed his own
kinsmen to slay each other (16.8.).
111. 5.126.33.
112. 5.70.88.
204 disorienting dharma
Whenever there is a decline in dharma , O descendant of Bhā rata,
and an increase of adharma , then I manifest myself. In order to
protect the virtuous, destroy the sinful and sustain dharma , I am
born yuga after yuga .1 13
But if K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s main goal is to uphold dharma , then why would he allow
and/or bring about the war? And why would he encourage the Pā ṇ ḍ avas to
act dishonorably during the war? Kṛ ṣ ṇ a has a hand in the killing of the
following Kuru heroes: Bhīṣ ma, Droṇ a, Karṇ a, Bhūriśravas, and Duryod-
hana. In each case, Kṛ ṣ ṇ a violates—or, more precisely, encourages others to
violate—the moral code of warriors: Kṛ ṣ ṇ a tells Yudhiṣ ṭ hira to lie to Droṇ a;
he encourages Arjuna to kill Kar ṇ a while Karṇ a is fi xing the wheel of his
chariot; he urges Sā tyaki to butcher Bhūriśravas when the latter is incapac-
itated, and he prods Bhīma, through Arjuna, to break Duryodhana’s thigh
in the mace battle.
The epic provides several answers to each of these two questions. With
respect to the fi rst (why would K ṛ ṣ ṇ a allow and/or bring about the war?) the
text provides the following answers: in order to relieve the Earth of her bur-
den, 114 in order to issue in the next y uga ,1 15 in order to restore d harma , and/or
because he was helpless to stop the war (as Kṛ ṣ ṇ a argued in the Uttaṅ ka epi-
sode). With respect to the second question (why would Kṛ ṣ ṇ a encourage the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas to act immorally?), in T he Book of Śalya K ṛ ṣ ṇ a himself provides sev-
eral reasons why he was justifi ed to encourage Bhīma to break Duryodhana’s
thigh; (we can presume that Kṛ ṣ ṇ a would give similar reasons for encouraging
the other adharmic acts mentioned above.)1 16 To Balar ā ma, his brother and
Bhīma and Duryodhana’s teacher, he argues that Bhīma had made a vow to do
so when Draupadī was violated.1 17 To the P ā ṇ ḍ avas he argues that Duryodhana
would have defeated Bhīma and the Kauravas would have won the war.1 18 To
Duryodhana he argues that, having violated d harma , he (Duryodhana) lost his
moral right to be treated according to it.1 19
113. 6.26. 7–8.
114. 11.8.20–26. However, note my discussion of this passage in chapter 3 .
115. See, for example, 8.70.
116. Goldman, “E ṣ a Dharmaḥ San ā tanaḥ ,” 208–210 .
117. 9.59.14–15.
118. 9.60.57–62.
119. 9.60.39–46.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 205
Each one of these answers, particularly the last two, raises confound-
ing moral questions. If, as Kṛ ṣ ṇ a argues, in the fi ght for justice unjust acts
may be perpetrated, then how much a dharma is acceptable, and when
does it become just plain evil? Similarly, if in order to combat injustice
unjust acts may be employed, then how does one decipher the line between
right and wrong? More pressingly, how much human suff ering is morally
acceptable to ensure that d harma triumphs in the end?1 20 Not surprisingly,
the text’s strategies raise but defer answering such questions.1 21
What role then does Kṛ ṣ ṇ a actually play in the existence of suff ering?
Characteristically, the narrative provides several possible contradictory
answers that exist in tension with one another. In some passages Kṛ ṣ ṇ a is
depicted as all-powerful and in some of these passages the text suggests
that he actively endeavors to produce the M ah ā bh ā rata war and the great
suff ering it causes, and he does so for various reasons (to relieve Earth of
her burden, to ensure that d harma triumphs in the end, and/or to usher in
the new y uga ).1 22 In other passages, as in the Uttaṅ ka episode, Kṛ ṣ ṇ a is
depicted as having limited power. Many of these passages suggest that
while K ṛ ṣ ṇ a was powerless to stop the carnage, he did everything in his
power to try to resolve the confl ict, and when that proved impossible, he
ensured that the Pā ṇ ḍ avas won the war and justice (however compro-
mised) prevailed.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: The Two Conclusions
ā ā
of the M ah bh rata
So far we have considered four possible theodicy candidates (fate, human
exertion, karma , and Kṛ ṣ ṇ a) and have discovered that each candidate is, in
some sense, a “non-answer” since each fails to provide a defi nitive solution
120. This is the subject of Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira and Saṃ jaya’s heated debate in T he Book of the Eff ort .
5.23.1–32.1.
121. For more on the enigmatic portrayal of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a vis-à-vis d harma , see Matilal, “Kṛ ṣ ṇ ā : In
Defence of a Devious Deity,” 91–108; Hiltebeietel, T he Ritual of Battle , 248 ; and Reich, “Ends
and Closures in the Mah ā bhā rata ,” 35–36 . Matilal aptly notes, “If the M ahā bh ā rata imparts
a moral lesson, it emphasizes again and again the ever-elusive character, the unresolved
ambiguity of the concept of dharma . K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s role was not to resolve the ambiguity but to
heighten the mystery . . . ” M atilal, “K ṛ ṣ ṇ a: In Defence of a Devious Divinity,” 94 .
122. Scholars have tended to confl ate the fi rst two reasons and to see them as spelling out
one consistent story, but there is little, if any, textual support for this. See Sutton, R eligious
Doctrines , 169–171 .
206 disorienting dharma
to the question of the cause of suff ering. At this point, one might wonder if
the quest for any answer in the epic is doomed to fail. If the text’s strategies
raise questions only to resolve them with more questions, then do they ever
provide any answers? This chapter argues that they do provide answers, but
they are not the kind of answers that are resolved by the straightforward
appeal to philosophical concepts. Rather, they are resolved “narratively”;
they are “suggested” through the dynamic interaction between form, con-
tent, and sensitive reader/spectator, that is, through the epic’s narrative
strategies.
Now let us consider how certain narrative strategies in the conclusion
of the central story create patterns that both draw us in and disengage us
from the text’s narrative world.1 23 Through the deployment of these narra-
tive strategies, the epic sets up its audience so that it is prepared for the
revelatory disclosure that takes place in the epic’s last two books, T he Book
of the Great Departure and T he Book of the Ascent to Heaven . This disclosure
is the epic’s answer to the problem of suff ering. It is not the direct or literal
kind of answer that conceptual categories such as karma or fate would
provide. Instead, the text’s strategies of rupture create a cognitive space in
the sensitive reader/spectator where a revelation of the tragic structure of
existence may take place. Through this disclosure, the text’s strategies
reveal their “answer” to the theodicy question.1 24
To facilitate a discussion of the epic’s conclusion, this section will be
divided into fi ve parts. Each part will include a brief summary followed by
an analysis. These analyses will attempt to show how each part builds
toward the fi nal resolution (which takes place in part fi ve) where the epic’s
theodicy is revealed.
123. It is important to make a distinction between the conclusion of the central story of the
war between the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and Kauravas (with the deaths of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas in Book 18) and
the conclusion of the M ahā bhā rata , which is no conclusion in truth but a return to the
beginning, the Janamejaya/Vaiśaṃ pā yana frame.
124. Prince’s Dictionary of Narratology defi nes “end” as follows: “Students of narrative have
pointed out that the end occupies a determinative position because of the light it sheds (or
might shed) on the meaning of events leading up to it. The end functions as the (partial) con-
dition, the magnetizing force, the organizing principle of narrative: reading (processing) a
narrative is, amongst other things, waiting for the end, and the nature of the waiting is related
to the nature of the narrative” ( Gerald Prince, D ictionary of Narratology [Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press], 26 . For scholarship on the signifi cance of narrative endings to the interpre-
tation of a literary work, see Frank Kermode, T he Sense of an Ending: Studies in the Theory of
Fiction (London: Oxford University Press, 1967) ; Paul Ricoeur, T ime and Narrative , trans. Kath-
leen McLaughlin and David Pellauer (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 1: 60; and
Swanson, “Narrative Temporality and the Aspect of Time in Franz Kafka’s Short Fiction.”
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 207
Summary of Part One: After ruling for many years, the Pā ṇ ḍ avas decide
to retire from the world, and the fi ve brothers with Draupadī as the sixth
character and a dog1 25 as the seventh character set out to perform the
mah ā prasth ā nika or “great journey.”1 26 When they reach Mount Meru,
Draupadī loses her yogic concentration, falls to the earth, and dies.1 27
Bhīma asks why, and Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira tells him that Draupadī fell because she
was partial to Arjuna. 128 Leaving Draupadī where she lies, the P ā ṇ ḍ avas
continue on. Next, Sahadeva, Nakula, Arjuna, and Bhīma fall and die suc-
cessively. Each time, Bhīma asks the cause (even when he falls), and each
time Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira points to a moral fl aw involving pride (Sahadeva falls
because he was proud of his wisdom, Nakula of his beauty, Arjuna of his
heroism, and Bhīma of his strength).1 29 After his wife and his brothers
have fallen, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira, then, proceeds alone, not looking down or back
( anavalokayan ),1 30 accompanied by the dog.
Analysis: Draupadī’s death is jarring for several reasons. First, it is ex-
ceedingly strange that the Pā ṇ ḍ avas leave her where she falls and do not
mourn her. Neither does the narrative voice (here Vaiśaṃ p ā yana) mourn
her; it notes her death and then falls silent. This silence, both on the part
of the characters and the narrative voice, is a narrative strategy that directs
us to feel distanced, not only from the characters, but from the world of
the text, since we are encouraged to feel a sense of grief and loss that is
neither shared nor satisfi ed by it. (After all, we have traveled a long and
arduous journey with Draupadī, and while the epic gives us two entire
books to prepare for Bhī ṣ ma’s death, Draupadī falls without any warning
at all.)
125. This dog is very interesting because it appears out of nowhere. Nor have dogs played a
signifi cant role in the epic up to this point.
126. According to Fitzgerald, “the great journey” or m ah ā prasthā na is a “journey of suicide
on which one walks until he or she drops of exhaustion or lack of nourishment.” Fitzgerald,
The Mahā bh ā rata , Vol. 7, 661, n1.20 . However, note that Bhīma seems surprised when each
of his loved ones drops to the earth. For the ritual dimensions of this particular journey, see
Christopher R. Austin, “The S ā rasvata Yā tsattra in Mah ā bhā rata 17 and 18,” International
Journal of Hindu Studies 12/3 (2008): 283–308 .
127. F or an instance of epic mirroring with respect to this passage and its implications, see
Christopher Austin, “Draupadī’s Fall: Snowballs, Cathedrals, and Synchronous Readings of
the Mahā bh ā rata ,” International Journal of Hindu Studies 15/1 (2011): 111–137 .
128. 17.2.6.
129. 17.2.10, 2.16, 2.21, and 2.25.
130. 17.2.26.
208 disorienting dharma
The narrative voice not only does not share the emotions of loss and
grief, but also presents these emotions as a sign of human weakness,
noting that when both Nakula and Arjuna fall, each does so because he is
overwhelmed with sorrow:
When the warrior Nakula saw that Draupadī and Sahadeva the
P ā ṇ ḍ ava had fallen, he was distressed ( ā rta ), for he loved his family,
and he himself fell.1 31
And:
Having seen [Nakula, Sahadeva, and Draupadī] fall there, Arjuna,
the P ā ṇ ḍ ava who rode a white horse and killed his enemies, fell
tormented by grief (ś okasaṃ tapta ).1 32
At the same time, the text ensures that the audience’s grief will be intensi-
fi ed, since we are encouraged to feel grief with each abrupt (and
unmourned) loss of the fi ve characters. Further, the narrative voice high-
lights Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s detachment from the deaths of Draupadī, Nakula,
Sahadeva, Arjuna, and Bhīma by noting several times that he does not
look down or back, a detail that serves to separate the audience emotion-
ally from him (after all, during and after the war Yudhiṣ ṭ hira mourned the
loss of his kinsmen excessively; the fact that he does not respond to the
deaths of his wife and brothers is jarring, to say the least).1 33 In these ways,
the narrative strategies in part one of the conclusion create a kind of
distance or separation between the audience and the world of the text.
(One additional narrative strategy that encourages our estrangement from
the world of the text is the abrupt insertion of the narrator [here
Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana] at this moment in the text. Vaiśaṃ p ā yana says, “When he
said this, the great-armed Yudhiṣ ṭ hira went on, not looking down. Only
the dog followed him, t he dog that I have already told you about quite a lot .”
131. 17.2.12.
132. 17.2.18.
133. Since the dice game, we have, of course, been emotionally drawn in by other strategies.
Note that Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira cries when he sees his brothers lying dead on the ground in “The
Drilling Woods” in T he Book of the Forest (3.295.1–299.1). The drilling-woods scene mirrors
the ascent-to-heaven scene in many ways (Shulman calls them “narrative twins”). For a dis-
cussion of the resonances between these two scenes, see Shulman, “The Y ak ṣ a’s Questions,”
50–62.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 209
It is as though Vaiśaṃ pā yana is saying, “Remember I am the narrator, this
is only a story, you are the audience, and you are about to return to your
lives.”). 134
Summary of Part Two : As Yudhiṣ ṭ hira proceeds with the dog, Indra ap-
pears, inviting him to enter heaven in his human form. “Burning with
grief” ( śokasaṃ tapta )1 35 because of the deaths of his family members,
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira replies that he will not go to heaven without his brothers and
Draupadī. Informing Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira that they are already in heaven (Indra is
careful to note that the others have shed their bodies), 136 Indra urges
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira “not to be sad” and to proceed to heaven.1 37 Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira
requests that the dog be allowed to accompany him, but Indra refuses.
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira insists. Then, as if by magic, the dog is transformed into the
god Dharma, who tells Yudhiṣ ṭ hira that he disguised himself in order to
test Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira. Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira has passed this test and may proceed to
heaven in his human form. Dharma says:
You abandoned the celestial chariot saying, “This dog is devoted to
me.” Therefore, great king, there is no one equal to you in heaven.
Hence the imperishable worlds are yours. You have obtained the
supreme path of heaven with your own body, best of Bhā ratas.1 38
Analysis : In part two we are drawn back into the narrative world through
our proximity toward Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira. Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s behavior is less disturb-
ing now that he reacts to the loss of his brothers and his wife and wants to
be reunited with them in heaven. However, there are still things about
him that are troubling. Should he have insisted on staying with the dog or
not? Because the dog is really Dharma, the text seems to indicate that
Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s decision to remain with it is the right one. Dharma praises
his loyalty and tells him that he may now enter heaven in his human body.
The fact that Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira is to enter heaven in his body is presented
by Indra, Dharma, and Nā rada as a rare feat. 139 However, it is not clear
134. 17.2.26.
135. 17.3.2.
136. 17.3.6.
137. 17.3.5.
138. 17.3.20–21.
139. 17.3.6, 17.3.21, and 17.3.27.
210 disorienting dharma
whether we should take their word at face value. Indra told Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira
that he was to enter heaven in his human body even before he “passed”
Dharma’s test, indicating that this “feat” is not necessarily a product of
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s virtue. Further, we know from previous examples in the
epic (i.e.,Yay ā ti and Arjuna) that going to heaven in one’s human body, at
least in some cases, means imminent return to the world of human
beings. 140 Considered in this light, this episode is a strategy that sets us up
for the literary terrain that we are now entering. This is a world where
there are tests (i.e., the dog was a test) and tricks (i.e., the dog was really
Dharma).
Summary of Part Three : In heaven Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira does not see his brothers
or Draupadī, but he encounters Duryodhana! Enraged, Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira states
that he does not want to share heaven with Duryodhana because of the
death and suff ering that he caused:
In the company of greedy, short-sighted Duryodhana I do not want
these worlds. It was for his sake that the entire world and all my
friends and family members were killed while he [i.e., Duryodhana]
was being conquered on the battlefi eld by us who had suff ered pre-
viously in the great forest.1 41
Instead Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira wants to see his brothers and Draupadī. Indra demurs
but Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira insists, so Indra orders a celestial messenger to take
Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira to his immediate family.
Analysis : In part three the text’s strategies further encourage our prox-
imity toward Yudhiṣ ṭ hira, since his reaction to fi nding Duryodhana in
heaven understandably mirrors and guides our own. Yudhiṣ ṭ hira tells
Indra in no uncertain terms that if Duryodhana is in heaven he wants no
part of it because Duryodhana caused great suff ering to him and the
people he loved. Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira repeats the word “suff ering” (k li ṣ ṭ a ) several
times and brings up the dice game and the war as examples of the disas-
trous events caused by Duryodhana’s egregious behavior, statements that
encourage our own outrage that Duryodhana is in heaven. Further,
Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s concern for the whereabouts of Draupadī, Arjuna, Bhīma,
and the twins intensify our own concerns for their whereabouts. Here the
140. 1.70–1.89 and 2.161–162.173. I am grateful to Lawrence McCrea for this insight.
141. 18.1.7–9.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 211
strategies of proximity are setting us up for the realization that we, along
with Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira, have a lot at stake concerning where they are.
Summary of Part Four : Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira follows the celestial messenger on a
path that gradually becomes dark. Presently, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira notices that it is
covered with hair, fl esh, and blood for its mud and that it is permeated by
the smell of rotting corpses. Growing concerned, Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira begins to
turn around. As he does so, he hears voices:
Stay near, great-armed one, even for a moment, Bh ā rata. When you
are here, Kauravya, the tortures do not torment us!1 42
Not recognizing the voices of “those wasted suff ering people” ( gl ā n ā n ā m
duḥkhit ā n ā m ),1 43 Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira asks, “Who are you?” He hears: “I am
Bhīma!” “I am Draupadī!” “I am Arjuna!” First disbelieving (Yudhiṣ ṭ hira
asks, “Am I asleep or am I awake? Although I am thinking, I do not
think. Alas, this may be an agitation of my mind or a disorientation of
my mind” 144 ) and then angry, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira “reproaches” the gods and
even d harma . 145 He tells the messenger to return to heaven without him;
he will remain here, since his presence comforts his brothers and his
wife.
Analysis : The text does not state outright that Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira is being
taken to hell. Instead, it appeals to our senses of sight, smell, and sound
in order to gradually bring us to this realization. The sights of hell are
horrible and given in great detail. The path, we are told, is “[strewn] with
severed arms, thighs, and hands, which are covered in fat and blood and
with severed stomachs and feet scattered about here and there.”1 46 The
horrible smells that emanate from this inauspicious place are referred to
repeatedly. However, it is the sounds of hell that are the most horrifying of
all: they are the sounds of Arjuna, Bhīma, and Draupadī suff ering tor-
ments. When Yudhiṣ ṭ hira fi rst hears the voices that cry out in pain, he
142. 18.2.35.
143. 18.2.38.
144. 18.2.48.
145. 18.2.50. David Shulman makes much of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s curse here, particularly in terms
of what it says about d harma and suff ering. He sees it as a “rejection at the end of the day of
the whole world of d harma .” Shulman, “The Y ak ṣ as Questions,” 58 . Shulman also notes that
since Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira is the Dharmarā ja, this curse must include himself. Ibid. , 57 .
146. 18.2.21.
212 disorienting dharma
does not recognize them. He cannot accept that his loved ones, virtuous
as they were on earth, are now in this horrid place. He asks:
What fi lthy deed was done by these great-souled ones, by Karṇ a or
by the sons of Draupadī or by slim-waisted Draupadī? There are
those who are in this terrible evil-smelling place. I do not know
what evil was done by those whose deeds are virtuous.1 47
By the time Yudhi ṣ thira realizes to whom these voices belong, the nar-
rative has taken him—and us—to a very dark place. The presence of these
characters in hell creates a rupture, or gap in meaning, since it forces
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira—as well as us—to come face to face with the unimaginable
possibility that the “good” are doomed to suff er torments in hell and the
“bad” are rewarded with glorious lives in heaven. Just as we are encour-
aged to identify with Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira as he grapples with the fact that many of
the conceptual categories that he has held dear have been upended, so too
are we encouraged to sympathize with his condemnation of these cate-
gories that have now failed him. For, if the virtuous go to hell and the
sinners to heaven, then these categories, d harma in particular, are ren-
dered meaningless. Thus, the strategies are now doing their “work” by
encouraging the audience to experience Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s questions, doubts,
and fears as our own.
Summary of Part Five : Instantaneously Indra appears, and the darkness
disappears. Urging Yudhiṣ ṭ hira not to be angry, Indra gives him three rea-
sons why he had to go to hell: because all kings must see hell,1 48 because
of the lie he told Droṇ a, 149 and because sinners enjoy heaven fi rst and then
are taken to hell, while those who are virtuous endure hell for a moment
and then are taken to heaven.1 50
Next Dharma appears and tells Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira that this was another test
that he passed brilliantly since he was determined to stay in hell for the
sake of his brothers and Draupadī. Because Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira has now been
“purifi ed” and all his stains have been removed, Dharma urges him to
147. 18.2.43–44.
148. 18.3.11.
149. 18.3.14. For scholarship on this lie and its relevance to the conclusion of the epic, see
González-Reimann, “Ending the M ahā bh ā rata ,” 101–110.
150. 18.3.12–13.
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 213
bathe in the river and shed his body. After doing so, Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira encoun-
ters his family and his friends in heaven. I will call this heaven “heaven
#2,” in contrast to the earlier heaven where he encountered Duryodhana,
which I will call “heaven #1.”1 51
Analysis: In what follows, I will argue that there are two distinct inter-
pretations of the conclusion of the epic’s central story. The interpretation
that an audience member receives depends upon the extent to which s/he
has allowed herself to be guided by the epic’s strategies. The fi rst interpre-
tation I will call “the literal interpretation.” Here the audience takes the
text and Indra at face value. According to this interpretation, Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira
goes to heaven #1 and fi nds Duryodhana, then to hell where he encounters
his brothers and Draupadī, and then to heaven #2 where he is reunited
with his family and loved ones.
However, according to “the suggested interpretation,” each one of
these steps has been problematized by the text.1 52 To begin with, is heaven
#1 really heaven? Indra justifi es Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s journey to hell by telling
him that the good have to go to hell fi rst before they journey to heaven. But
the text tells us that Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira went to heaven #1 fi rst, not to hell. So who
is right? Indra or the text? And if Indra is right, then heaven #1 was not
really heaven, but part of Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s experience of hell.
And why do Indra and Dharma make such a fuss about the fact that
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira goes to heaven #1 in his body, especially in light of the fact that
when Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira goes to heaven #2, he has to shed his body? Does this
indicate that because Yudhiṣ ṭ hira remained in his body when he went to
heaven #1 it was not really heaven? Dharma does say, after all, that it is
only after Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira passes his third test (i.e., the hell trick) that he is
purifi ed and all his stains removed. These ambiguities lead us to question
whether or not Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s body was really so pure that he achieved the
rare feat of winning heaven in it.
Furthermore, was Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s experience of hell really hell? Dharma
tells Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira that his experience was not real, but an illusion (m ā y ā ). 153
Further, immediately after Yudhiṣ ṭ hira decides to stay with his brothers
151. For a description of both the merits and faults of heaven in the epic, see “The Measure
of Rice” in The Book of the Forest (3.247.1–35). For an overview of the concept of heaven in
Indian thought, see Frederick M. Smith, “Heaven, Indian Conceptions of,” in T he Routledge
Encyclopedia of Philosophy , ed. Edward Craig (New York: Routledge, 1998), 4:253–257 .
152. See chapter 1 for a full explication of suggested meaning or d hvani .
153. 18.3.34.
214 disorienting dharma
and Draupadī, hell is instantaneously transformed into heaven #2, which
not only begs the question of whether hell was really hell, but also whether
heaven #2 is really heaven. According to the “suggested interpretation,”
once we are taken to heaven #2, our confi dence in the distinction between
heaven and hell has been seriously undermined, for how can we believe
that heaven #2 is really heaven after we have just witnessed heaven and
hell blur into one another? Given the fact that each of these steps is under-
mined by the text, we are not able to accept what I have called “the literal
interpretation.” In fact, what the epic shows us is that the distinction
between heaven and hell is a ruse . And because we are not confi dent that
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira is really taken to heaven #2, we are suddenly distanced from
the narrative world of the text as we were in part one above.
Our estrangement from the text is potentially jarring since the beliefs
that the text set us up to have are now undermined, or “ruptured,” by it.
When the text took us to heaven #1 and then to hell, it showed us that we,
along with Yudhiṣ ṭ hira, had certain expectations, specifi cally that we
would fi nd the P ā ṇ ḍ avas in heaven and Duryodhana in hell. However,
these expectations were not met by the text. Instead it presented us with a
heaven that contained Duryodhana and a hell that contained the Pā ṇ ḍ avas.
Thus, we were encouraged to feel disappointment, even outrage, just like
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira.
Furthermore, by promoting our distance from the narrative world
when Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira goes to heaven #2, the text encourages us to refl ect
upon what we have at stake in fi nding Duryodhana in hell and the
P ā ṇ ḍ avas in heaven. Isn’t it because then we, like Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira, could make
some sense of the awful suff ering that Duryodhana caused the Pā ṇ ḍ avas,
and thus could be comforted by the fact that there is some justice in the
world?
The text, therefore, shows us that heaven and hell are conceptual cate-
gories that we are greatly invested in emotionally because, on some level,
they soften the blow caused by the fact that the world contains a tremen-
dous amount of suff ering. After the text reveals to us that heaven and hell
are illusions, however, we are encouraged to grapple with the possibility
of existing in a world without such conceptual categories to provide us
with this comfort. This opens us up to the disclosure eff ected by what I
have called “the suggested interpretation” of the conclusion of the
Mah ā bh ā rata : that all the suff ering in the epic simply took place and that
is it. In the end, the text does not grant us the solace of divine retribution,
or justice, or even an explanation for the tremendous suff ering that many
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 215
of the characters endured. Rather, through setting us up to have certain
expectations about who would be in heaven and who in hell, and then
rupturing these expectations, the text reveals to us the extent to which we
yearn for such comforts. It does so ostensibly for the purposes of dissolv-
ing such yearning, and thereby opening us up to the following radical
insight, that a fundamental feature of human existence is that suff ering
exists on a monumental scale and that is it. Suff ering is not a phenom-
enon that can be understood, or justifi ed, or rationalized away; it simply
exists. Further, the text encourages us to respond to this insight not with
grief—for grief was shown to be literally the downfall of virtually all the
characters in this scene—but with profound acceptance. Thus, the epic’s
conclusion constitutes one more argument against grief, but here the “ar-
gument” targets our grief, rather than a character’s grief, and encourages
our acceptance. The simplicity of this disclosure and its acceptance is de-
ceptive because, in truth, it is a vision of the world that is very hard, if not
impossible, to confront.1 54 This disclosure is the tragic theodicy, and by
“tragic” I mean the starkly realistic vision that is revealed to us by the text.
(I am using the term “realistic” in the sense that Irawati Karve, David
Shulman, and B. K. Matilal apply the term to the M ah ā bh ā rata , as a
“harsh, bare, stark, and demanding philosophy of life.”)1 55
But how, one might ask, does the Mah ā bhā rata’s theodicy provide a
rationale for the existence of suff ering? The epic’s response undermines the
very formulation of the theodicy question itself, for why else would one seek
a rationale for suff ering other than to attempt to understand why suff ering
exists? But according to the M ah ā bh ā rata the person who seeks this kind of
a rationale for suff ering is the person who refuses to face the harsh reality
of life, that suff ering exists simply and totally and that there are no concep-
tual categories that one can rely upon to make sense of this suff ering.1 56
154. In her essay “The Love of God and Affl iction” Weil argues that it is almost impossible
for humans to psychologically and cognitively face the presence of radical suff ering. To do
so is the highest ethical achievement. Simone Weil, T he Simone Weil Reader , 439–468 .
155. Karve, Y ug ā nta , 197 . See also Matilal, “Elusiveness and Ambiguity in Dharma-Ethics,”
94 and Shulman, “Toward a Historical Poetics,” 26 .
156. Levinas calls theodicy—that is, the impulse to fi nd meaning in suff ering—a tempta-
tion. He calls for the end of theodicy, arguing that the disproportion between suff ering and
every framework that has tried to make sense of it was shown in Auschwitz “with an obvious
clarity.” Emanuel Levinas, “Useless Suff ering,” in Entre Nous: Thinking-of-the-Other , trans.
Michael B. Smith and Barbara Harshav (New York: Columbia University Press, 1998),
91–104 .
216 disorienting dharma
Therefore, the M ah ā bh ā rata addresses the theodicy issue by criticizing the
question “is there a rationale for suff ering?”—which the text’s narrative
strategies encouraged us to ask—and instead of providing a straightforward
answer, it presents a starkly realistic vision of the structure of existence. (It
may be worth noting here that these ideas overlap considerably with
Ānandavardhana’s reading of the epic. For Ānandavardhana, the “work” of
the conclusion of the M ahā bh ā rata is to generate in the sensitive reader a
dispassion for worldly aff airs, a dispassion that when heightened through
suggestion, is transmuted into ś ā ntarasa , or the heightened emotion of
tranquility.)
Conclusion
Now let us stand back and ask what is distinctive about how the
Mah ā bhā rata handles the theodicy question. We have discovered that the
narrative does not provide a straightforward, literal answer to the ques-
tion. Instead it throws it back at us. What is distinctive here, however, is
the way that the text does this—through its narrative strategies—and
what it accomplishes in so doing. Through its strategies of rupture, the
text sets us up to have certain beliefs and expectations. It then pulls the
rug out from under us by delivering an outcome that is in fact the oppo-
site of the one that we were encouraged to expect. This disjuncture
between what the text’s strategies set us up to expect and what the text
delivers creates a rupture, that is a space, where immense emotional,
ethical, and theological work is carried out because it forces us to face
what otherwise would be impossible to see. By being confronted with an
outcome opposite to the one the text set us up to expect, we are sus-
pended in a moment of intense disorientation, even shock, where we are
forced to face why we had so much at stake in the expected outcome in
the fi rst place. We are forced to face, in essence, ourselves with our hopes,
fears, and thoughts exposed. Precisely what the text is exposing through
its strategies of rupture is the fact that human beings have a desperate
need to rationalize suff ering (in order to avoid confronting it) and strong
preconceived notions of what would count as a rationale. Thus the the-
odicy question is a place of immense ethical and theological potential in
the eyes of the composers of the Mah ā bh ā rata , presumably because it is
a question that carries hopes, fears, and thoughts that can be manipu-
lated and then exposed in such a way that it “reorients” us toward the
text’s ultimate goal, which, in the words of Abhinavagupta is “knowledge
Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative Strategies 217
of reality.”1 57 It is no coincidence that the “answer”—or more precisely the
nonanswer, or suggested answer—comes at the conclusion of the central
narrative of the M ah ā bh ā rata , as if it were the last and fi nal “message”
delivered by a text that is notoriously reluctant to provide any clear-cut
answers. 158
157. Tubb, “ Śā ntarasa in the Mahā bh ā rata ,” 178 .
158. Reich agrees that the M ahā bhā rata does not end with closure. She argues that a truly
satisfying resolution is not achieved within the text. This is not, she insists, a failure. Rather,
she reads the text as a work of literature that does not force a monolithic solution. Reich,
“Ends and Closures in the M ah ā bhā rata ,” 10 .
Conclusion
d harma and s uffering
One might see [Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s] curse as still more extreme
as a rejection at the end of the day of the whole world of
dharma with its contradictions and cruelties, its subtle
meaning now exposed as little more than a veil for
unbearable suff ering.
— david shulman 1
In the end the sole question remains—is dharma worth
upholding if it can be maintained only at the cost of great
suff ering?
—greg bailey2
Those who know d harma have always said that d harma
protects those who put d harma fi rst . . . . I believe that
dharma never protects!
—karṆ a in his death scene. 8.66.43.
as we saw in chapter 5 Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s condemnation of dharma in Book
18 precipitates the quintessential instance of rupture in the text. It is a
shocking moment: Yudhiṣ ṭ hira, King Dharma rejects d harma , turning
his back on precisely the principle that he has ceaselessly endeavored to
uphold throughout the story. In deciding that it is preferable to stay with
his brothers and his wife in hell, rather than return to heaven,
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira is indicating that for him dharma —or, more precisely, his
1. “The Yak ṣ a’s Questions,” 163.
2. “Suff ering in the M ah ā bhā rata ,”123.
Conclusion: Dharma and Suff ering 219
specifi c understanding of d harma —is meaningless.3 Indeed, Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s
logic for condemning d harma is as follows: “Since my brothers and wife
were virtuous and committed no evil, they, according to my understand-
ing of dharma , deserved to win heaven, not hell. Since they did not
achieve heaven, but were placed in hell, I will condemn d harma .” By un-
packing Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira’s logic in this manner we see that Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s con-
demnation is also a moment where the M ahā bh ā rata’s aesthetics of
suff ering raises, once again, the specter of the problematic relationship
between dharma and suff ering. For precisely why does Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira con-
demn dharma ? Isn’t it because he assumed that his brothers and wife
would be protected from the possibility of experiencing the miseries of
hell because they acted in accordance with d harma ? In short, Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s
understanding of d harma entails a dharma that one performs for the
sake of something, some good or positive result that one will acquire
either in this life or in the afterlife (see my discussion of Fitzgerald’s fi rst
sense of dharma in the introduction of this book which has to do with
conducting one’s life so as to achieve happiness on earth and heaven
after death). It is this understanding of d harma that is called into ques-
tion by the presence of Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s brothers and wife in hell, and that
he angrily rebukes now.
As we also discovered in chapter 5 when Yudhiṣ ṭ hira censures dharma
(or more specifi cally, his particular understanding of d harma ) and
decides to remain with his brothers and wife, heaven and hell instanta-
neously dissolve into one another. What is the text’s aesthetics of suf-
fering “doing” in this quintessential moment of rupture? It is suggesting
that the notion of d harma performed for the sake of something, particu-
larly for the sake of acquiring merit to safeguard one from misfortune—
either in this life or beyond—is a fundamentally fl awed conception of
dharma . Why? Because it blinds human beings to the fundamental truth
of existence: the truth of universal suff ering. At the same time, the epic’s
aesthetics of suff ering is attempting to reorient the sensitive reader/
receiver toward a notion of d harma that is divested of the idea of rewards
(heaven is the ultimate reward according to the logic of dharma in the
fi rst sense) as well as stripped of the notion that dharma would, or could,
provide protection from suff ering (for the absence of suff ering is inherent
3. Shulman, “The Yakṣ a’s Questions,” 163 .
220 disorienting dharma
in the idea of heaven). The epic’s aesthetics of suff ering suggests that
only such a conception of d harma (i.e., d harma in Fitzgerald’s second
sense, which is predicated on the goal of expunging all desire) would be
an accurate and realistic refl ection of and response to the true structure
of the world.
Equally important as w hat the M ahā bh ā rata ’s aesthetics of suff ering
communicates about d harma in this fi nal scene is h ow it is doing
so: meaning is conveyed through “doing,” or to use Ānandavardhana’s
terminology, “suggesting.” What specifi cally does the text do? As dem-
onstrated in chapter 5 , it sets us up to have certain expectations—
namely that those who adhere to d harma will win heaven and those
who transgress it will be relegated to hell, and then it pulls the rug out
from underneath these expectations. By not providing us with the out-
come that we were set up to expect, the text disengages us; this distance/
separation “does work” because it provides a space for meta-refl ection,
a space where we are directed to see that a fundamental feature of
human life is suff ering on a monumental scale and nothing, not even
dharma , can protect us from this fact. Thus we see that through close
attention to the work or “doing” of the text we have access to levels of
meaning that lie far beyond its explicit content. Through close atten-
tion to the work of the text, we also see that the M ah ā bhā rata contains
an implicit literary theory; it provides us with a template for how to
read works of literature, particularly with respect to the task of locating
those moments where texts are “doing” or suggesting ideas rather than
directly stating them. As Ānandavardhana and the M ahā bhā rata both
would argue, an essential matter carries far greater “luster” by not
being stated literally. Moreover, the M ah ā bh ā rata shows us how much
ethical and theological “work” a literary text can do by expressing
meaning in this way. Chapters 2 through 5 all demonstrated how the
Mah ā bh ā rata conveys its messages about the existence of suff ering and
the means to move beyond it predominantly through “doing” rather
than “saying.” These chapters have also demonstrated that expressing
meaning in this way is especially powerful when the messages con-
veyed contain truths that the human mind is almost incapable of con-
fronting, truths such as those related to the existence of suff ering, evil,
human frailty, and so on.
The title of this book, “Disorienting D harma ,” is inspired by the
journey to heaven episode mentioned above: When Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira dis-
covers that his virtuous brothers and wife are suff ering the torments of
Conclusion: Dharma and Suff ering 221
hell, he indicates that his mind is disoriented.4 Why? Because, as
discussed above, in this moment his understanding of d harma , the
principle that he has struggled relentlessly to uphold throughout the
story, is upended. Indeed, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s experience in this climactic
scene points to a larger phenomenon in the text. As characters struggle
to determine the path of d harma , they are frequently “disoriented” by
dharma ’ s “subtle” nature and they become confused and often lose their
way. As a result, d harma is often transgressed with disastrous conse-
quences that repeatedly entail enormous suff ering. The bewilderment
of the elders in the dicing scene and their inability to “solve” Draupadī ’s
riddle-question—a failure that leads directly to Draupadī ’s violation—is
one example among many.
On another level, this title points to an essential aspect of the “work” of
the aesthetics of suff ering. As I have discussed in this conclusion and
throughout the book, one function of the epic’s aesthetics of suff ering is to
disorient the sensitive reader, moving him or her away from a conception
of dharma that assumes that it off ers any sort of protection from suff ering
(i.e., dharma in Fitzgerald’s fi rst sense). Such an understanding of d harma
is fl awed, the epic’s aesthetics of suff ering suggests, because it obscures a
fundamental feature of reality, that of universal suff ering. While the as-
sumption that dharma off ers protection is undermined throughout the
epic, one place where it happens quite dramatically—in addition to the
epic’s conclusion—is the dicing scene. Draupadī’s violation in this scene
haunts virtually every character in the epic precisely because she, a vir-
tuous woman, was not protected by her protectors. Thus, in eff ect, she was
not protected by d harma .5 In some sense, the scene of Draupadī’s violation
is the moment to which all other subsequent moments in the epic are a
response.6 From this event onward, characters struggle to regain a world
of meaning, that is, a world in which d harma still makes sense in spite of
the presence of unjust suff ering.7 As I argued in chapter 2 , our confi dence
4. aho cittavikā ro ‘ya ṃ sy ā d vā me cittavibhramaḥ //18.2.48. Literally, “Alas! This may be an
agitation of my mind or a disorientation of my mind.”
5. See Kar ṇ a’s statement at the opening of this chapter.
6. Gitomer writes, “[i]n the Sanskrit Mahā bh ā rata and in a number of other tellings the vi-
olation of Draupadī and its consequences become the primary dynamism of the narrative.”
“King Duryodhana,” 224.
7. Shulman, “The Yakṣ a’s Questions,” 41 .
222 disorienting dharma
is “disoriented” as well, but to what end? More precisely, what sort of
understanding of d harma are we being reoriented towards?
To come at these questions from a diff erent angle, why is d harma veiled
in the epic? As mentioned in the introduction to this book, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira says
in the Vulgate, “the truth of d harma lies hidden in a secret cave.”8 The text
presents the concept to us through the strategies of riddle-question, paradox,
and rupture. It would seem that the work of the aesthetics of suff ering then
lies not in revealing to us what d harma is, but in showing us what it is not.
(Thus two of the most lauded virtues in the epic—a hi ṃ sa and ā n ṛ śamsya ,
noninjury and noncruelty—are negative categories).9 The implication here
is that all our old notions about d harma must be renounced and transcended
for a wider experience of d harma to be accessed. 10 Why? Perhaps there is
some problem with these beliefs, particularly with respect to the issue of
suff ering. The fact that the epic forces us to face time and time again the
uncomfortable truth that d harma off ers no protection from misfortune sug-
gests that a wider experience of d harma entails active participation in (not
just the perception of) the presence of radical unmerited suff ering and the
understanding that no conceptual category—d harma above all—protects us
from this truth. Accordingly, a wider experience of d harma would be avail-
able to the person who did not act in the name of dharma for the sake of
anything, above all in the name of protection from anguish, grief, and mis-
fortune. Once again, we see that the aesthetics of suff ering strongly supports
Fitzgerald’s second sense of d harma , which refers to the overcoming of all
attitudes that are oriented toward personal goals and merit. It also strongly
supports Ānandavardhana’s reading of the epic which, as discussed in chap-
ter 1 , argues that the M ah ā bh ā rata is a literary work that inspires the reli-
gious sentiment of peace or detachment (ś ā nti ), thus pointing the reader
toward liberation from the world of suff ering ( mokṣ a .)
Several scholars have focused on the two concepts noted above, a hi ṃ sa
(noninjury) and ā n ṛ śamsya (noncruelty), arguing that they constitute the
8. 3.313.17 in the Vulgate. Kinjawadekar, ed. M ah ā bhā ratam .
9. See Lath, “The Concept of Ān ṛ śamsya .” According to Shulman and others, ā n ṛ śamsya is
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s proclaimed ideal. Yudhiṣ ṭ hira calls it the highest d harma at 3.297.55.
10. Shulman, “ The Yakṣ a’s Questions ,” 57–58 . Shulman speaks about this process with
respect to Yudhiṣ ṭ hira, whose view of d harma by the end is “badly battered.” Shulman sug-
gests that as a result Yudhiṣ ṭ hira undergoes a “shift in consciousness” which opens him up
to a wider experience of d harma .
Conclusion: Dharma and Suff ering 223
supreme moral principles in the epic.1 1 However, it is important not to
omit a crucial link in the chain of ethical transformation in the epic. The
Mah ā bh ā rata’s aesthetics of suff ering fi rst and foremost is not trying to
change how we act, but is attempting to reorient our minds and thus refi g-
ure how we see (i.e., with a calm mind that is indiff erent to the changes
wrought by time).1 2 As previously mentioned, after the war both Bhīma
and K ṛ ṣ ṇ a, in an eff ort to persuade Yudhiṣ ṭ hira to stop grieving and agree
to rule, tell him that the real battle he must confront is one with his mind
( manas ). According to Bhīma, Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s “battle” involves accepting
“the coming and going of creatures” or the transitory nature of life.1 3
However, the idea that the text’s aesthetics of suff ering might en-
courage a transformation in behavior follows logically from this epistemo-
logical shift.1 4 Being highly attuned to the sorrow of other creatures (caused
by transitoriness) would presumably lead to, at least in most cases, the
avoidance of all actions that would contribute to the ocean of sorrow that
the Mah ā bh ā rata’s aesthetics directs us to recognize.1 5 However, there
might be extreme cases where violence must be committed for the sake
of some greater good, such as protecting the world from being overtaken
by power-hungry aggressors—even if these aggressors are one’s own
kin; Arjuna’s situation in the B hagavadgītā is an example of such an
extreme case.
11. Arti Dhand, “The Dharma of Ethics, The Ethics of Dharma : Quizzing the Ideals of Hin-
duism,” J ournal of Religious Ethics 30/3 (2002): 354–355 ; Fitzgerald, T he Mah ā bhā rata , Vol.7,
111–112 ; Hiltebeitel, R ethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , 202–214 ; and Lath, “The Concept
of Ān ṛ śamsya ,”114.
12. Shulman argues that Yudhiṣ ṭ h ira’s ideal of ā n ṛ śamsya crumbles in the journey-to-heaven
episode, suggesting that there is more to dharma than simply the ideal of noncruelty. Shul-
man, “The Yak ṣ a’s Questions, 50–59 . As Gary Tubb notes, Ānandavardhana considers the
primary end of the Mahā bh ā rata to be the state of mind in the reader. Tubb, “ Śā ntarasa ,”
198 . Woods writes, “The purpose and function of the text is clearly designed to be more than
exemplary or even didactic; the intent is therapeutic in seeking to prompt the mind to a great
awareness of spiritual truths . . . .” Woods, Destiny and Human Initiative , viii . Hiltebeitel in
his recent monograph on d harma argues that “d harma is never just about ‘action.’” Hilte-
beitel, Dharma , 20 .
13. 12.16.21–25 and 14.12.1–14.
14. Dhand agrees, see “The D harma of Ethics, The Ethics of Dharma ,” 356.
15. A recent set of articles on the Mahā bhā rata’s ending comes to this conclusion as well. See
Bruce Sullivan, “The M ahā bh ā rata : Perspectives on its Ends and Endings,” International
Journal of Hindu Studies 15 (2011):6 .
224 disorienting dharma
On a third level, the title of this project pertains to academic discus-
sions of dharma in the Mah ā bh ā rata and entails a suggestion. In this book
I have proposed that it might be fruitful to “disorient” such discussions
from the isolated topic of d harma and reorient them on the issue of suf-
fering, particularly d harma ’s relationship to suff ering. What is at stake in
many, if not most, discussions of d harma in the Mahā bh ā rata , either ex-
plicitly or on the level of suggestion, is the issue of human despair. Suf-
fering, we could say, is the primary aesthetic ground for ethics in the epic.
Appendix
Glossary of Characters
Abhimanyu—son of Arjuna and Subhadrā
Arjuna—P ā ṇ ḍ u’s third and last son by Kuntī, fathered by the god Indra
Aśvatthā man—son of Dro ṇ a and ally of Duryodhana
Balar ā ma—Kṛ ṣ ṇ a’s brother
Bhagavadgīt ā — sermon preached by K ṛ ṣ ṇ a to Arjuna at 6.23–40
Bharata—founder of the Bhā rata lineage
Bh ā ratas—descendants of Bharata (includes both the Kauravas and the Pā ṇ ḍ avas)
Bhīma—P ā ṇ ḍ u’s second son by Kuntī, fathered by the wind god Vā yu
Bhī ṣ ṃ a—Śa ṃ tanu’s son by Gaṅ g ā ; great uncle of the P ā ṇ ḍ avas and Kauravas
Brahm ā —the creator god
brahmins—members of the highest of the four primary social classes, serving as
priests and scholars
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra—father of the Kauravas; elder brother of P ā ṇ ḍ u; husband of G ā ndh ā rī;
born blind
Draupadī—joint wife of all fi ve Pā ṇ ḍ ava brothers
Dro ṇ a—teacher of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and Kauravas; father of Aśvatthā man
Duḥś ā sana—second son of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra
Duryodhana—fi rst and favorite son of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra; enemy of the P ā ṇ ḍ avas
G ā ndh ā rī—wife of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra; mother of the Kauravas
H ā stinapura—capital of the kingdom of the Kauravas
Indraprastha—Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s capital after the division of the kingdom
Janamejaya—descendant of the Bh ā ratas (great-grandson of Arjuna) at whose sacri-
fi ce the M ah ā bh ā rata is narrated by Vaiśaṃ p ā yana
Kar ṇ a—Kuntī’s son by the god Sūrya; brought up by a charioteer and his wife; a
great ally of Duryodhana and fi erce enemy of Arjuna
226 Appendix: Glossary of Characters
Kauravas—literally “descendants of Kuru,” so applicable to both the sons of
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and P ā ṇ ḍ u; in practice reserved for the former
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a—a V ṛ ṣ ṇ i prince, son of Vasudeva, cousin of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas, and as brother of
Subhad ā , Arjuna’s brother-in-law; supreme lord Viṣ ṇ u/N ā r ā ya ṇ a
k ṣ atriyas—members of the second-highest of the four primary social classes, serving
as warriors and rulers
Kuntī—fi rst wife of P ā ṇ ḍ u and mother of the three eldest Pā ṇ ḍ avas (Yudhiṣ ṭ hira,
Bhīma, and Arjuna)
Kuru—descendant of Bharata and ancestor of the Kauravas and Pā ṇ ḍ avas
Kurus—descendants of Kuru
M ā drī—second wife of Pā ṇ ḍ u and mother of the Pā ṇ ḍ ava twins Nakula and Sahadeva
(youngest of the fi ve Pā ṇ ḍ avas)
M ā rka ṇ ḍ eya—a great seer
Nakula—one of Pā ṇ ḍ u’s twin sons by Mā drī, fathered by the twin Aśvin gods
N ā rada—a great seer
N ā r ā ya ṇ a—Vi ṣ ṇ u as supreme god; a divine seer associated with Nara
P ā ṇ ḍ avas—the sons of Pā ṇ ḍ u (and their allies)
P ā ṇ ḍ u—father of the P ā ṇ ḍ avas; elder brother of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and Vidura; husband
of Kuntī.
Parik ṣ it—posthumous son of Abhimanyu; Arjuna’s grandson and father of
Janamejaya
Sahadeva—one of Pā ṇ ḍ u’s twin sons by Madrī, fathered by the twin Aśvin gods
Śakuni—brother of Gā ndh ā rī and ally of Duryodhana
Sa ṃ jaya—aide to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra; narrates events of the great battle to the blind king
Śaunaka—chief of the seers in the Naimiṣ a forest to whom Ugraśravas recites the
Mah ā bh ā rata
Subhadr ā —sister of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a and wife of Arjuna
sūta—a member of a mixed social class, serving as bards and charioteers; said to
spring from the union of a kṣ atriya man and a brahmin woman
Ugraśravas—the sūta bard who recites the M ah ā bh ā rata to the seers in the Naimiṣ a
forest
Utta ṅ ka—an ascetic sage
Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana—pupil of Vy ā sa who recites the Mah ā bh ā rata at Janamejaya’s snake
sacrifi ce
Vasudeva—brother of Kuntī; father of Kṛ ṣ ṇ a
Vidura—younger brother of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and P ā ṇ ḍ u; uncle of the P ā ṇ ḍ avas and
Kauravas
Vi ṣ ṇ u—with Śiva, one of the two great gods of the M ah ā bh ā rata
Vy ā sa—composer of the Mah ā bh ā rata ; biological father of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra, P ā ṇ ḍ u, and
Vidura
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira—Pā ṇ ḍ u’s eldest son by Kuntī, fathered by Dharma
Bibliography
Adarkar, Aditya. “Kar ṇ a in the Mah ā bh ā rata .” PhD diss., University of Chicago,
2001.
——— . “The Mah ā bh ā rata and Its Universe: New Approaches to the All-Encompassing
Epic.” History of Religions 47/4 (2008): 305–319.
Alter, Robert. The Art of Biblical Narrative . New York: Basic Books, 1981.
Apte, Vaman Shivaram. T he Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary . Kyoto: Rinsen Book
Company, 2003.
Athavale, V. B. “The Roles of Vyā sa, Sañjaya, Vaiśamp ā ya ṇ a and Sauti in the Kuru
War Narration.” The Journal of the Ganganatha Jha Research Institute 3/2 (1946):
121–141.
Austin, Christopher R. “The S ā rasvata Y ā tsattra in M ah ā bhā rata 17 and 18.” I nterna-
tional Journal of Hindu Studies 12/3 (2008): 283–308.
——— . “Draupadī’s Fall: Snowballs, Cathedrals, and Synchronous Readings of the
Mah ā bh ā rata .” International Journal of Hindu Studies 15/1 (2011): 111–137.
Awasthi, Suresh. “The Mah ā bh ā rata in Performance: Forms and Tradition.” In The
Mah ā bh ā rata Revisted , edited by R. N. Dandekar, 109–129. New Delhi: Sahitya
Akademi, 1990.
Bailey, Greg. “Suff ering in the M ah ā bh ā rata : Draupadī and Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira.” In Suf-
fering: Indian Perspectives , edited by Kapil N Tiwari, 38–60. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1986.
——— . “Introductory remarks on future research on the Sanskrit Epics and
Pur ā ṇ as.” In C omposing a Tradition: Concepts, Techniques and Relationships , edited
by Mary Brockington and Peter Schreiner, 1–16. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of
Sciences and Arts, 1999.
Balslev, Anindita Niyogi. A Study of Time in Indian Philosophy . Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz, 1983.
——— . “Time and the Hindu Experience.” In Religion and Time , edited by Anindita
Balslev and J. N. Mohanty, 163–181. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1993.
228 Bibliography
Banerjee, Ron D. K. “The Mahā bh ā rata: Ambiguity, Irony, and Maya.” J ournal of the
Institute of Asian Studies 6/1 (1988): 39–57.
Barnes, Julian. “For Sorrow There is No Remedy.” T he New York Review of Books ,
April 7, 2011. www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2011/apr/07/sorrow-there-
no-remedy/?pagination=false . Accessed May 15, 2011.
Basham, A. L. History and Doctrines of the Ājīvikas: A Vanished Indian Religion .
London: Luzac, 1951.
Bedekar, V. M. “The Doctrines of Svabh ā va and K ā la in the Mah ā bh ā rata and Other
Old Sanskrit Works.” In T ime in Indian Philosophy: A Collection of Essays , edited
by Hari Shankar Prasad, 187–202. Delhi: Sri Satguru, 1992.
Belvalkar, S. K.“Sa ṃ jaya’s ‘Eye Divine.’” Annals of the Bhankarkar Oriental Research
Institute 27 (1946): 310–331.
——— , ed. Devabodha’s Commentary on the Bhī ṣ ṃ aparvan from the Mahā bh ā rata .
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1974.
Bemporad, Jack. “Suff ering.” In The Encyclopedia of Religion . 2nd ed. vol. 13, edited by
Lindsay Jones, 8804–8809. Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2005.
Bhagavat, Durga. Riddle in Indian Life, Lore, and Literature . Bombay: Popular
Prakashan, 1955.
Bharadwaj, Saroj. T he Concept of “Daiva” in the Mahā bh ā rata . Delhi: Nag Publishers,
1992.
Bharata. N ā ṭ yaś ā stra of Bharatamuni, with the Commentary Abhinavabhā ratī by
Abhinavaguptā c ā rya . Parimal Sanskrit Series, 4. 4 vols. Edited by R.S. Nagar.
Delhi: Parimal, 1981.
——— . The N ā ṭ y aś ā stra: A Treatise on Indian Dramaturgy and Histrionics, Ascribed to
Bharata Muni , 2 vols. Translated by Manmohan Gosh. Calcutta: Asiatic Society,
1950.
Bhatta, C. Panduranga. Dice-play in Sanskrit Literature: A Study . Delhi: Amar
Prakashan, 1985.
Bhattacharya, A. N. Dharma-Adharma and Morality in Mah ā bh ā rata . Delhi: S.S.
Publishers, 1992.
Bhattacharya, N. N. “The King and the Dice: A Study in the Rituals of the Rā jasūya.”
Journal of the Oriental Institute of Baroda 23/4 (1974): 288–307.
Bhattacharya, Shashthi Prasad. Ś ā nta Rasa and Its Scope in Literature . Calcutta: San-
skrit College, 1976.
Bialosky, Jill. H istory of a Suicide: My Sister’s Unfi nished Life . New York: Atria Books,
2011.
Biardeau, Madeleine. “Some More Considerations about Textual Criticism.” P ur ā ṇ a
X/2 (1968): 115–124.
——— . “É tudes de Mythologie Hindoue (IV): Bhakti et Avat ā ra .” Bulletin de l’École
Française d’Extrême-Orient 63 (1976): 111–262.
——— . “ Études de Mythologie Hindoue (V).” Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-
Orient 65/1 (1978): 87–237.
Bibliography 229
——— . Études de Mythologie Hindoue: Tome I: Cosmogonies Pur ā ṇ iques . Paris: École
Française d’Extrême-Orient, 1981.
——— . “Introduction.” L e Mah ā bh ā rata . Paris: Flammarion, 1985–8.
——— . “Some Remarks on the Links Between the Epics, the P ur ā ṇ as and Their
Vedic Sources.” In S tudies in Hinduism , edited by Gerhard Oberhammer, 69–177.
Wein: Osterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1997.
Bilimoria, Purushottama. “Ethics of Emotion: Some Indian Refl ections.” In Emo-
tions in Asian Thought: A Dialogue in Comparative Philosophy , edited by Joel Marks
Roger T. Ames, 65–90. Albany: State University of New York, 1995.
Black, Brian. The Character of the Self in Ancient India: Priests, Kings, and Women in
the Early Upaniṣ ads . Albany: State University of New York Press, 2007.
——— . “Eavesdropping on the Epic: Female Listeners in the Mahā bh ā rata .” In
Gender and Narrative in the Mah ā bhā rata , edited by Simon Brodbeck and Brian
Black, 53–78. London; New York: Routledge, 2009.
Blackburn, Stuart H. et al., eds. O ral Epics in India . Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1989.
——— . Inside the Drama-House: Rā ma Stories and Shadow Puppets in South India .
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996.
Booth, Wayne. T he Rhetoric of Fiction . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.
——— . The Company We Keep: An Ethics of Fiction . Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1988.
Bowker, John. P roblems of Suff ering in Religions of the World . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1970.
Bowlby, Paul. “Kings without Authority: The Obligation of the Ruler to Gamble in
the Mah ā bhā rata.” Studies in Religion /Sciences Religieuses 20 (1991): 3–17.
Bowles, Adam. Dharma, Disorder, and the Political in Ancient India: The
Āpaddharmaparvan of the Mahā bh ā rata . Boston: Brill, 2007.
——— , tr. M ahabharata Book Eight: Karna, Vol. 1 . New York: NYU Press, JJC
Foundation, 2007.
——— , tr. Mahabharata Book Eight: Karna, Vol. 2 . New York: NYU Press, JJC Foun-
dation, 2008.
Brereton, Joel. “Edifying Puzzlement: Ṛ gveda 10.129 and the Uses of Enigma.”
Journal of the American Oriental Society 119/22 (1999): 248–260.
Brockington, John L. T he Sacred Thread . Edinburgh: The University Press, 1981.
——— . The Sanskrit Epics . Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1998.
——— . “The Concept of Dharma in the R ā m ā ya ṇ a .” Journal of Indian Philosophy
32/5–6 (2004): 671–685.
Brockington, Mary. “Husband or King? Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s Dilemma in the M ahā bh ā rata .”
Indo-Iranian Journal 44/3 (2001): 253–263.
——— . “Husband or Slave? Interpreting the Hero of the Mah ā bh ā rata .” In E pic
Undertakings , edited by Robert P. Goldman and Muneo Tokunaga, 23–32. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 2009.
230 Bibliography
Brockington, Mary, and Peter Schreiner, eds. Composing a Tradition: Concepts, Tech-
niques and Relationships . Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts, 1999.
Brodbeck, Simon. “Husbands of the Earth: K ṣ atriyas , Females, and Female K ṣ atriyas
in the Strīparvan .” In Epic Undertakings , edited by Robert P. Goldman and Muneo
Tokunaga, 33–63. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, 2009.
——— . The Mah ā bh ā rata Patriline: Gender, Culture, and the Royal Hereditary .
Farnham, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2009.
——— . “Gendered Soteriology: Marriage and the K armayoga .” In G ender and Narra-
tive in the Mah ā bh ā rata , edited by Simon Brodbeck and Brian Black, 144–175.
London; New York: Routledge, 2009.
Cavell, Stanley. D isowning Knowledge in Seven Plays of Shakespeare . New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Chaitanya, Krishna. The Mahā bh ā rata: A Literary Study . New Delhi: Clarion Books,
1985.
Chari, V. K. Sanskrit Criticism . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1990.
Chatterjee, Margaret. “Some Strands of Thought Relating to the Problem of Evil.” In
Relativism, Suff ering, and Beyond: Essays in Memory of Bimal K. Matilal , edited by
P. Bilimoria and J. N. Mohanty, 319–335. New York: Oxford University Press,
1997.
Cherniak, Alex, tr. M ahabharata Book Six: Bhisma, Vol. 1 . New York: NYU Press; JJC
Foundation, 2008.
——— , tr. M ahabharata Book Six: Bhisma, Vol. 2 . New York: NYU Press; JJC Foun-
dation, 2009.
Clark, Timothy. M artin Heidegger (Routledge Critical Thinkers). New York: Rout-
ledge, 2002.
Collins, Steven. “ Nirv ā ṇ a , Time and Narrative.” History of Religions 31/3 (1992):
215–246.
——— . Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities: Utopias of the Pali Imaginaire . Cam-
bridge Studies in Religious Traditions 12. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1998.
Courtright, Paul B. G a ṇ eśa: Lord of Obstacles, Lord of Beginnings . New York: Oxford
University Press, 1985.
Creel, Austin. D harma in Hindu Ethics . Calcutta: Firma KLM Private Ltd, 1977.
Crisp, Roger, ed. How Should One Live? New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Crisp, Roger, and Michael Slote, eds. V irtue Ethics . Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1997.
Critchley, Simon. T he Ethics of Deconstruction: Derrida and Levinas . Oxford: Blackwell,
1992.
Crosby, Kate, tr. Mahabharata Book Ten-Eleven: Dead of Night and The Women . New
York: NYU Press; JJC Foundation, 2009.
Culler, Jonathan D. L iterary Theory: A Very Short Introduction . New York: Oxford
University Press, 1997.
Bibliography 231
Das, Gurcharan. The Diffi culty of Being Good: On the Subtle Art of Dharma . New York:
Oxford University Press, 2009.
Davis, Richard H. Introduction to R eligions of India in Practice , edited by Donald S.
Lopez Jr., 3–54. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995.
Davis, Todd, and Kenneth Womack. M apping the Ethical Turn: A Reader in Ethics,
Culture, and Literary Theory . Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 2001.
De, Sushil Kumar. S ome Problems of Sanskrit Poetics . Calcutta: Firma K.L Mukhopad-
hyay, 1959.
——— . History of Sanskrit Poetics . Calcutta: Firma KLM Private Ltd, 1976.
de Vreese, K. “The Dice Game in Ancient India.” In Orientalia Neerlandica: A Volume
of Oriental Studies , 349–362. Leiden: A.W. Sijthoff , 1948.
DeGrazia, David. “Suff ering.” In Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy , edited by
Edward Craig, 213–215. New York: Routledge, 1998.
Deussen, Paul, The Philosophy of the Upaniṣ ads . Authorized English Translation by
A. S. Geden. New York: Dover Publications, 1996.
Deutsch, Eliot. Review of Ś ā ntarasa and Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Aesthetics . By
J. L. Masson, M. V. Patwardhan. T he Journal of Asian Studies , 30/1 (1970): 215–26.
Devabodha. D evabodha’s Commentary on the Bhī ṣ ṃ aparvan from the Mahā bh ā rata .
Edited by S. K. Belvakar. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1947.
——— . Devabodha’s Commentary on the Sabh ā parvan from the Mah ā bh ā rata . Edited
by R. D. Karmarkar. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Institute, 1949.
Dhand, Arti. “The D harma of Ethics, The Ethics of D harma : Quizzing the Ideals of
Hinduism.” Journal of Religious Ethics 30/3 (2002): 347–372.
——— . “The Subversive Nature of Virtue in the Mahā bh ā rata : A Tale about Women,
Smelly Ascetics, and God.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 72/1
(2004): 33–59.
——— . Woman as Fire, Woman as Sage: Sexual Ideology in the Mah ā bh ā rata . Albany:
State University of New York Press, 2008.
Didion, Joan. T he Year of Magical Thinking . New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2005.
Dimmit, Cornelia and J. A. B van Buitenen, trans. and eds. C lassical Hindu My-
thology: A Reader in the Sanskrit Purā ṇ as . Philadelphia: Temple University Press,
1978.
Dimock, Edward C., et al. T he Literatures of India . Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1974.
Doniger, Wendy. T he Implied Spider: Politics and Theology in Myth . New York:
Columbia University Press, 1998.
Doniger, Wendy, and Brian K. Smith, trans. T he Laws of Manu . New York: Penguin,
1991.
Dumézil, Georges. M ythe et Épopée . Paris: Gallimard, 1968.
Dunham, John.“The M ah ā bh ā rata : A Survey Discussion.” In E ssays on the
Mah ā bh ā rata , edited by Arvind Sharma, 1–18. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1991.
Eco, Umberto. T he Role of the Reader . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1979.
232 Bibliography
——— . Six Walks in the Fictional Woods . Charles Eliot Norton Lectures, 1993. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994.
Eco, Umberto, with Richard Rorty, et al. Interpretation and Overinterpretation , edited
by Stefan Collini. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Edgerton, Franklin. “S abh ā parvan . Introduction.” In P oona Critical Edition of the
Mah ā bh ā rata . Vol. 2, ix-l. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1944.
Eliade, Mircea. Y oga: Immortality and Freedom . Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1969.
——— . The Myth of the Eternal Return: Or, Cosmos and History . Translated by William
R. Trask. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971.
Falk, Nancy. “Draupadī and the Dharma.” In B eyond Androcentrism: New Essays on
Women and Religion , edited by Rita M. Gross, 89–114. Missoula, MT: Scholars
Press, 1977.
Farley, Wendy. T ragic Vision and Divine Compassion: A Contemporary Theodicy .
Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, 1990.
Fish, Stanley. Surprised By Sin: The Reader in Paradise Lost . Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1967.
Fitzgerald, James L. “The Mokṣ a Anthology of the Great Bhā rata: An Initial Survey
of Structural Issues, Themes, and Rhetorical Strategies.” PhD dissertation.
Chicago: University of Chicago, 1980.
——— . “The Great Epic of India as Religious Rhetoric: A Fresh Look at the
Mah ā bh ā rata .” J ournal of the American Academy of Religion 51/4 (1983): 611–630.
——— . “India’s Fifth Veda: The Mahā bh ā rata ’s Presentation of Itself.” In Essays on
the Mah ā bhā rata , edited by Arvind Sharma, 150–170. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1991.
——— . “Making Yudhiṣ ṭ hira the King: The Dialectics and the Politics of Violence in
the Mah ā bh ā rata .” Rocznik Orientalistyczyny 54/1 (2001), 63–92.
——— .“The Rā ma J ā madagnya Thread of the M ah ā bh ā rata : A New Survey of Rā ma
J ā madagnya in the Pune Text.” In S tages and Transitions: Temporal and Historical
Frameworks in Epic and Purā ṇ ic Literature , Proceedings of the Second Dubrovnik
International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Pur ā ṇ as, August, 1999,
edited by Mary Brockington, 89–132. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and
Arts, 2002.
——— , trans. The Mahā bh ā rata, Volume 7: Book 11: The Book of the Women; Book 12:
The Book of Peace, Part 1 . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
——— . “The Many Voices of the Mah ā bhā rata .” Journal of the American Oriental
Society 123/4 (2003): 803–818.
——— . “Dharma and Its Translation in the M ah ā bh ā rata .” Journal of Indian Philos-
ophy 32/5–6 (2004): 671–685.
——— . “ Mahā bh ā rata .” In The Hindu World , edited by Shushil Mittal and Gene
Thursby, 52–74. New York: Routledge, 2004.
Flood, Gavin. “Hinduism.” In M aking Moral Decisions , edited by John Bowker and
Jean Holm, 68–94. London: Pinter Publishers, 1994.
Bibliography 233
——— . An Introduction to Hinduism . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1996.
Forster, E. M. Aspects of the Novel . New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1956.
Frasca, Richard. The Theatre of the Mah ā bh ā rata: Terukkutu Performances in South
India . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1990.
Gaeff ke, Peter. Review of Studies in Comparative Aesthetics by Eliot Deutsch. Journal
of the American Oriental Society 99/1 (1979): 167–168.
Ganguli, K. M. trans. The Mahā bh ā rata . 4 vols. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal
Publishers, 2000.
Garbutt, Kathleen, tr. M ahabharata Book Four: Virata . New York: NYU Press; JJC
Foundation, 2007.
——— , tr. Mahabharata Book Five: Preparations for War, Vol. 1 . New York: NYU Press;
JJC Foundation, 2008.
——— , tr. Mahabharata Book Five: Preparations for War, Vol. 2 . New York: NYU Press;
JJC Foundation, 2008.
Gerow, Edwin. A Glossary on Indian Figures of Speech . Paris: Mouton, 1971.
——— . “Abhinavagupta’s Aesthetics as a Speculative Paradigm.” J ournal of the
American Oriental Society . 114/2 (1994): 186–208.
——— . History of Indian Literature , vol. 5, fascicle 3. Edited by Jan Gonda. Wies-
baden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1997.
Gerow, Edwin, and Ashok Aklujkar. “On Ś ā nta Rasa in Sanskrit Poetics.” J ournal of
the American Oriental Society 92 (1972): 80–87.
Gethin, Rupert. The Foundations of Buddhism . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
——— . “He Who Sees Dhamma Sees Dhammas : Dhamma in Early Buddhism.”
Journal of Indian Philosophy 32 (2004): 513–542.
Gilbert, Sandra M. Death’s Door: Modern Dying and the Way We Grieve: A Cultural
Study . New York: Norton, 2006.
Gitomer, David. “King Duryodhana: The Mahā bh ā rata Discourse of Sinning and
Virtue in Epic and Drama.” J ournal of the American Oriental Society 112/2 (1992),
222–232.
Glucklich, Ariel. T he Sense of Adharma . New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.
——— . “Dharma: Hinduism.” In T he Encyclopedia of Religion . 2nd ed. vol. 4, edited
by Lindsay Jones, 2327–2331. Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2005.
Goldman, Robert P. G ods, Priests, and Warriors: The Bhṛ gus of the Mahā bh ā rata . New
York: Columbia University Press, 1977.
——— , trans. T he R ā m ā ya ṇ a of V ā lmīki , Vol. 1, Bal ā k ā ṇ ḍ a . Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1984.
——— . 1997. “E ṣ a Dharmaḥ Sanā tanaḥ: Shifting Moral Values and the Indian
Epics.” In Relativism, Suff ering and Beyond: Essays in Memory of Bimal K. Matilal ,
edited by P. Bilimoria and J. N. Mohanty, 187–223. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1997.
Gonda, Jan. Aspects of Early Vi ṣ ṇ uism . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1969.
234 Bibliography
González-Reimann, Luis. The Mahā bh ā rata and the Yugas: India’s Great Epic Poem
and the Hindu System of World Ages . New York: Peter Lang, 2002.
——— . “Time in the M ah ā bh ā rata and the Time of the M ah ā bh ā rata .” In E pic and
Argument in Sanskrit Literary History: Essays in Honor of Robert P. Goldman , edited
by Sheldon Pollock, 61–73. New Delhi: Manohar, 2010.
——— . “Ending the M ah ā bh ā rata : Making a Lasting Impression.” I nternational
Journal of Hindu Studies 15/1 (2011): 101–110.
Green, Ronald. “Theodicy.” In T he Encylopedia of Religion . 2nd ed., vol. 12, edited by
Lindsay Jones, 9111–9121. Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2005.
Greer, Patrica.“Kar ṇ a Within the Net of the Mahā bh ā rata : Reading the Itih ā sa as
Literature.” PhD diss., University of Virginia, 2002.
Hacker, Paul. “Dharma in Hinduisms.” Zeitschrift fur Missionswissenschaft und
Religionswissenschaft 49 (1965): 93–106.
Halbfass, Wilhelm. “Karma, A pūrva , and ‘Natural’ Causes: Observations on the
Growth and Limits of the Theory of S a ṃ s ā ra .” In K arma and Rebirth in Classical
Indian Traditions , edited by Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty, 268–302. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1980.
——— . India and Europe: An Essay in Understanding . New York: State University of
New York Press, 1988.
——— . “Karma and Rebirth, Indian Conceptions of.” In Routledge Encyclopedia of
Philosophy , edited by Edward Craig, 209–218. New York: Routledge, 1998.
Hallisey, Charles. “Buddhism.” In E vil and Suff ering , edited by Jacob Neusner, 36–66.
Cleveland, Ohio: The Pilgrim Press, 1998.
Hallisey, Charles, and Anne Hanson. “Narrative, Sub-ethics and the Moral Life:
Some Evidence from Theravā da Buddhism.” J ournal of Religious Ethics 24/2
(1996): 305–27.
Handelman, Don, and David Shulman. G od Inside Out: Śiva’s Game of Dice . New
York: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Haney, William. Literary Theory and Sanskrit Poetics: Language, Consciousness, and
Meaning . Lewiston ME: Edwin Mellen Press, 1993.
Hara, Minoru. “Śrī: Mistress of a King.” O rientalia Suecana 45–46 (1996): 33–61.
Hasan-Rokem, Galit, and David Shulman, ed. U ntying the Knot: On Riddles and Other
Enigmatic Modes . New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Hauerwas, Stanley. A Community of Character: Toward a Constructive Christian Social
Ethic . Notre Dame, IN.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1981.
Heesterman, J. C. The Ancient Indian Royal Consecration . The Hague: Mouton & Co.,
1957.
——— . The Broken World of Sacrifi ce: An Essay in Ancient Indian Ritual . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1993.
Hegarty, James. 2001. “An Apprenticeship in Attentiveness: Narrative Patterning in
the Dyūtaparvan and the Nalop ā khy ā na of the Mah ā bh ā rata .” R ocznik Orentalisty-
czny 54/1 (2001): 33–62.
Bibliography 235
——— . “Extracting the K ath ā - ā m ṛ ta (elixir of story): Creation, Ritual, Sovereignty
and Textual Structure in the Sanskrit M ah ā bh ā rata .” Journal of Vaishnava Studies
14/2 (2006): 39–60.
——— . Religion, Narrative, and Public Imagination in South Asia: Past and Place in the
Sanskrit Mah ā bh ā rata . New York: Routledge, 2012.
Heim, Maria.”The Aesthetics of Excess.” J ournal of the American Academy of Religion
71/3 (2003): 531–554.
——— . “Diff erentiations in Hindu Ethics.” In T he Blackwell Companion to Religious
Ethics . Edited by William Schweiker, 341–354. Malden, MA: Blackwell Pub,
2003.
Herman, Arthur. T he Problem of Evil and Indian Thought . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1976.
Hess, Linda. “Staring at Frames Till They Turn into Loops: An Excursion Through
Some Worlds of Tulsidas.” In L iving Banaras: Hindu Religion in Cultural Context ,
edited by Bradely R. Hertel and Cynthia Ann Humes, 73–102. Albany: State Uni-
versity of New York Press, 1993.
Hill, Peter. F ate, Predestination, and Human Action in the Mahā bhā rata: A Study in the
History of Ideas . New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers, 2001.
Hiltebeitel, Alf. “The Mah ā bh ā rata and Hindu Eschatology.” H istory of Religions 12/2
(1972): 95–135.
——— . The Ritual of Battle: Krishna in the Mah ā bh ā rata . Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1976.
——— .“K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and the M ah ā bh ā rata (A Bibliographical Essay).” Annals of the Bhan-
darkar Oriental Institute 60 (1979): 65–107.
——— . “Towards a Coherent Study of Hinduism.” Religious Studies Review 9/3
(1983): 206–212.
——— . “Two K ṛ ṣ ṇ as, Three K ṛ ṣ ṇ as, Four K ṛ ṣ ṇ as, More K ṛ ṣ ṇ as: Dark Interactions in
the M ah ā bhā rata .” In Essays on the Mah ā bh ā rata , edited by Arvind Sharma, 101–9.
New York: E.J. Brill, 1991.
——— . “ Mahā bh ā rata .” In V ai ṣ ṇ avism: Contemporary Scholars Discuss the Gauḍ īya
Tradition , edited by Steven J. Rosen, 49–76. New York: Folk Books, 1992.
——— . “Epic Studies: Classical Hinduism in the Mah ā bh ā rata and the R ā m ā ya ṇ a.”
Annals of the Bhankdarkar Oriental Research Institute LXXIV (1993): 1–62.
——— . “Religious Studies and Indian Epic Texts.” Religious Studies Review 21/1
(1995): 26–32.
——— . “Reconsidering Bh ṛ guization.” In Composing a Tradition: Concepts, Tech-
niques and Relationships: Proceedings of the First Dubrovnik International Confer-
ence on the Sanskrit Epics and Pur ā ṇ as, August 1997 , edited by Mary Brockington
and Peter Schreiner, 155–168. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Science and Arts,
1999.
——— . Rethinking India’s Oral and Classical Epics: Draupadī Among Rajputs, Muslims
and Dalits . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
236 Bibliography
——— . “Draupadī’s Question.” In Is God a Feminist? The Politics of South Asian
Goddesses , edited by Alf Hiltebeitel and Kathleen M. Erndl, 113–22. New York:
New York University Press, 2000.
——— . Rethinking the Mahā bh ā rata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education of the Dharma
King . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
——— . “India’s Epics: Writing, Orality, Divinity.” In T he Study of Hinduism , Studies
in Comparative Religion, edited by Arvind Sharma, 114–38. Columbia, SC:
University of South Carolina Press, 2003.
——— . “On Reading Fitzgerald’s Vy ā sa,” Journal of the American Oriental Society
125/2 (2005): 241–61.
——— . Dharma . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2010.
——— . Dharma: Its Early History in Law, Religion, and Narrative . New York: Oxford
University Press, 2011.
Hiltebeitel, Alf, and Randy Kloetzli. “K ā la .” In The Hindu World , edited by Sushil
Mittal and Gene Thursby, 553–86. New York: Routledge, 2004.
Holdrege, Barbara. “Hindu Ethics.” In A Bibliographic Guide to the Comparative Study
of Ethics . Edited by John Carmen and Mark Juergensmeyer, 12–69. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1991.
——— . “Dharma.” In T he Hindu World , edited by Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby,
213–248. New York: Routledge, 2004.
Hopkins, E. Washburn. E pic Mythology . New York: Biblio and Tannen, 1969.
——— . The Great Epic of India: Its Character and Origin . New York: Scribner’s Sons,
1901.
Huberman, Eric. “A Note on the Multi-Centered Imagination of the Mahā bh ā rata .”
Journal of Vaishnava Studies 4/3 (1996): 151–60.
Hudson, Emily T. “Heaven’s Riddles or the Hell Trick: Theodicy and Narrative
Strategies in the Mahā bh ā rata .” In The Mahā bh ā rata: What is Not Here is
Nowhere Else (Yannehā sti na Tadkvacit) , edited by T. S. Rukmani, 225–38. New
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers, 2005.
——— . “Time that Ripens and Rots All Creatures: Temporality and Its Terrors in
the Sanskrit Mahā bh ā rata .” Studies in the Literary Imagination 41/1 (2008):
41–62.
——— . “Listen But Do Not Grieve: Grief, Paternity, and Time in the Laments of
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra.” In G ender and Narrative in the Mahā bh ā rata , edited by Brian Black
and Simon Brodbeck, 35–52. New York: Routledge, 2009.
Ingalls, Daniel H. H. “D harma and M ok ṣ a ,” Philosophy East and West 7 (1957): 41–8.
——— . Sanskrit Poetry: From Vidy ā kara’s Treasury , 2nd Ed. Cambridge MA.: Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press, 2000.
Ingalls, Daniel H. H., Jeff rey Moussaieff Masson, and M. V. Patwardhan, trans.
The Dhvanyā loka of Ānandavardhana with the Locana of Abhinavagupta . Har-
vard Oriental Series 49. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.
Bibliography 237
Iser, Wolfgang. T he Implied Reader: Patterns of Communication in Prose Fiction from
Bunyan to Beckett . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974.
Jatavallabhula, Danielle Feller. “Raṇ ayajña: The Mahā bh ā rata War as a Sacrifi ce.” In
Violence Denied: Violence, Non-Violence, and the Rationalization of Violence in
South Asian Cultural History , edited by E. M. Houben and K. R. van Kooij,
69–104. Leiden; Boston: Brill, 1999.
Jhanji, Rekha. “Good Life in M ahabharata : Purusarthas Revisited in the Light of
Narrative Ethics.” Panjab University Research Bulletin 31 1/2 (2000): 1–7.
Johnson, W. J., tr. The Sauptikaparvan of the Mahā bh ā rata: The Massacre at Night .
New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
——— , tr. Mahabharata Book Three: The Forest, Vol. 4 . New York: NYU Press; JJC
Foundation, 2005.
Kane, Pandurang Vaman. History of Dharmaś ā stra . 5 Vol. Poona: Bhandarkar Orien-
tal Research Institute, 1930–62.
Karmarkar, R. D., ed. Devabodha’s Commentary on the Sabh ā parvan from the
Mah ā bh ā rata . Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Institute, 1949.
Karve, Irawati. Y ug ā nta: The End of an Epoch . New Delhi: Sangam Press, 1974.
Katz, Ruth. Arjuna in the Mahabharata: Where Krishna Is, There Is Victory . Columbia
SC: University of South Carolina Press, 1989.
Kaufman, Whitley R. P. “Rebirth and the Problem of Evil.” Philosophy East and West
55/1 (2005): 15–32.
Kearney, Richard. On Paul Ricoeur: The Owl of Minerva . Aldershot, Hants, England:
Ashgate, 2004.
Keith, A. B. 1908. “The Game of Dice.” J ournal of the Royal Asiatic Society (1908): 824–828.
Kermode, Frank. The Sense of an Ending: Studies in the Theory of Fiction . London:
Oxford University Press, 1967.
Kilpatrick, T. B. “Suff ering.” In T he Encyclopedia of Religious Ethics , Vol. 12, edited by
James Hastings, 1–10. New York: Scribner, 1961.
Kinjawadekar, Ramachandra. ed. M ah ā bh ā ratam with the Commentary of Nīlakaṇ ṭ ha .
6 vols. Poona: Chitrashala Press, 1923–33.
Klaes, Norbert. Conscience and Consciousness: Ethical Problems of the Mah ā bh ā rata .
Bangalore: Dharmaram College, 1975.
Koskikallio, Petteri. “When Time Turns: Yugas, Ideologies, Sacrifi ces.” Studia Orien-
talia 73 (1994): 253–265.
Krishna, Anand Rai. “Depiction of the M ah ā bh ā rata Scenes in Indian Art.” In T he
Mah ā bh ā rata Revisited , edited by R. N. Dandekar, 201–214. New Delhi: Sahitya
Akademi, 1990.
Krishnamachariar, Madabhushi. H istory of Classical Sanskrit Literature . Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1970.
Kübler-Ross, Elizabeth, and David Kessler. O n Grief and Grieving: Finding the Meaning
of Grief through the Five Stages of Loss . New York: Scribner, 2005.
238 Bibliography
Kulkarni, S. M. “An Unresolved Dilemma in ‘ Dyūta-Parvan ’: A Question Raised by
Draupadī.” In Moral Dilemmas in the Mah ā bh ā rata , edited by Bimal Krishna
Matilal, 150–156. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1989.
Kuznetsova, Irina. Dharma in Ancient Indian Thought: Tracing the Continuity from the
Vedas to the Mahā bh ā rata . Devon: Hardinge Simpole Limited, 2007.
LaCapra, Dominick. R ethinking Intellectual History: Texts, Contexts, Language . Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1983.
Laine, James. Visions of God: Narratives of Theophany in the Mahā bh ā rata . Vienna:
Gerold & Co., 1989.
Larson, Gerald. “The Trimūrti of Dharma in Indian Thought: Paradox or Contra-
diction?” Philosophy East and West 22/2 (1972): 145–153.
——— . Classical S ā ṃ khya . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979.
Lath, Mukund. “The Concept of Ā n ṛ śa ṃ sya in the M ah ā bhā rata .” In The Mah ā bh ā rata
Revisited , edited by R. N. Dandekar, 113–119. New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 1990.
Le Naour, Jean-Yves. T he Living Unknown Soldier: A Story of Grief and the Great War .
Translated by Penny Allen. New York: Metropolitan Books, 2002.
Lerner, Paula. A strological Key in Mah ā bh ā rata: The New Era . Translated by David
White. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1988.
Levinas, Emmanuel. E ntre Nous: Thinking-of-the-Other . Translated by Michael
B. Smith and Barbara Harshav. New York: Columbia University Press, 1998.
Lingat, Robert. “Time and the Dharma.” C ontributions to Indian Sociology 6 (1962):
7–16.
Lipner, Julius. The Hindus: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices . London; New York:
Routledge, 1994.
Long, Bruce J. “The Concepts of Human Action and Rebirth in the M ah ā bh ā rata .” In
Karma and Rebirth in Classical Indian Traditions , edited by Wendy Doniger
O’Flaherty, 38–60. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980.
Macdonnell, Arthur Anthony. A Practical Sanskrit Dictionary . New Delhi: Munshi-
ram Manoharlal, 2003.
MacIntyre, Alasdair. A fter Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory . Notre Dame, IN: University
of Notre Dame Press, 1981.
Mahoney, William K. “Karman: Hindu and Jain Concepts.” In The Encyclopedia of
Religion . 2nd ed., vol. 8, edited by Lindsay Jones, 5093–5097. Detroit: Macmillan
Reference USA, 2005.
Malamoud, Charles. C ooking the World: Ritual and Thought in Ancient India. Trans-
lated by David White . Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Malinar, Angelika. “Blindheit und Sehen in der Erzählung des Mah ā bh ā rata.” In
Odysee-Rezeptionen , edited by A. Luther, 97–114. Frankfurt: Verlag Antike,
2005.
——— , ed. Time in India: Concepts and Practices . New Delhi: Manohar, 2007.
Marks, Joel, and Roger T. Ames, eds. E motions in Asian Thought: A Dialogue in
Comparative Philosophy . Albany: State University of New York Press, 1995.
Bibliography 239
Masson, J. L. “‘Telling Not Conveying’—S vaśabdhav ā cya .” Journal of Indian Philosophy
2/2 (1973): 145–55.
Masson, J. L., and M. V. Patwardhan. Ś ā ntarasa and Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of
Aesthetics . Bhandarkar Oriental Series 9. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, 1969.
——— . Aesthetic Rapture: The Rasā dhy ā ya of the Nā ṭ yaśā stra . 2 vols. Poona: Deccan
College, 1970.
——— . “The Dhvany ā loka and the Dhvany ā lokalocana: A Translation of the Fourth
Uddyota, Pt. I .” Journal of the American Oriental Society 97/3 (1997): 285–304.
Matilal, Bimal Krishna.“On the Universality of Suff ering.” In Suff ering: Indian Per-
spectives , edited by Kapil Tiwari, 12–22. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1986.
——— , ed. Moral Dilemmas in the Mah ā bh ā rata . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1989.
——— . “Moral Dilemmas: Insights from Indian Epics.” In E thics and Epics: The
Collected Essays of Bimal Krishna Matilal , edited by Jonardon Ganeri, 19–35.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.
——— . “Elusiveness and Ambiguity in Dharma-Ethics.” In Ethics and Epics: The
Collected Essays of Bimal Krishna Matilal , edited by Jonardon Ganeri, 36–48.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.
——— . “Dharma and Rationality.” In Ethics and Epics: The Collected Essays of Bimal
Krishna Matilal , edited by Jonardon Ganeri, 49–71. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2002.
——— . “K ṛ ṣ ṇ a: In Defence of a Devious Divinity.” In E thics and Epics: The Collected
Essays of Bimal Krishna Matilal , edited by Jonardon Ganeri, 91–108. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2002.
——— . “The Throne: Was Duryodhana Wrong?” In E thics and Epics: The Collected
Essays of Bimal Krishna Matilal , edited by Jonardon Ganeri, 109–122. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2002.
McCrea, Lawrence. The Teleology of Poetics in Medieval Kashmir . Cambridge, MA:
Department of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, Harvard University, 2008.
McGrath, Kevin. Strī: Women in Epic Mah ā bh ā rata . Boston, MA: Ilex Foundation,
2009.
Mehendale, M. A. “Draupadī’s Question.” Journal of the Oriental Institute, Baroda
35/3–4 (1985): 179–194.
——— . “Has the Vedic R ā jasūya any Relevance for the Epic Game of Dice?” In
Vidy ā -Vratin: Professor A. M. Ghatage Felicitation Volume , edited by V. N. Jha,
61–67. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications, 1992.
——— . “Is There Only One Version of the Game of Dice in the M ah ā bh ā rata ?”
Narang (1995): 33–39.
——— . R efl ections on the Mah ā bh ā rata War . Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced
Study, 1995.
Mehta, J. L. “Dvaipā yana: Poet of Being and Becoming.” In T he Mah ā bh ā rata Revis-
ited , edited by R. N. Dandekar, 101–11. New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 1990.
240 Bibliography
Mehta, Mahesh. “The Problem of the Double Introduction to the Mahā bh ā rata .”
Journal of the American Oriental Society 93/44 (1973): 547–50.
Meiland, Justin, tr. Mahabharata Book Nine: Shalya, Vol. 1 . New York: NYU Press; JJC
Foundation, 2005.
——— , tr. Mahabharata Book Nine: Shalya, Vol. 2 . New York: NYU Press; JJC
Foundation, 2007.
Mejor, Marek. “Suff ering, Buddhist Views of Origination of.” In Routledge Encyclope-
dia of Philosophy , vol. 9, edited by Edward Craig, 215–19. New York: Routledge,
1998.
Miller, Barbara Stoler. “The Original Poem: V ā lmīki R ā m ā yaṇ a and Indian Literary
Values.” Literature East and West 17 (1973):163–169.
——— . “The Character of Authorship in the Sanskrit Epics.” The Journal of Oriental
Research , Madras 56–72 (1992): 107–113.
——— . “The Authority of the Hindu Epics: Geneology, Authenticity, and Author-
ship.” In Religion and the Authority of the Past , edited by Tobin Siebers, 52–75.
Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press, 1993.
——— . “The Imaginative Universe of Indian Literature.” In Masterworks of Asian
Literature in Comparative Perspective: A Guide for Teaching , edited by Barbara
Stoler Miller, 3–14. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1994.
Miller, David. “Sources of Hindu Ethical Studies: A Critical Review.” J ournal of
Religious Ethics 9/2 (1981): 186–98.
Miller, J. Hillis. T he Ethics of Reading: Kant, De Man, Eliot, Trollope, James, and
Benjamin . New York: Columbia University Press, 1989.
——— . “Narrative.” In Critical Terms for Literary Study . 2nd ed, edited by Frank
Lentricchia and Thomas McLaughlin, 66–79. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1995.
Minkowski, Christopher Z. “Janamejaya’s S attra and Ritual Structure.” Journal of the
American Oriental Society 109/3 (1989): 401–20.
——— . “Snakes, Sattras , and the Mah ā bhā rata .” In Essays on the Mahā bhā rata ,
edited by Arvind Sharma, 384–400. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991.
——— . “The Interrupted Sacrifi ce and the Sanskrit Epics.” Journal of Indian Philos-
ophy 29 (2001): 169–86.
——— . “Nīlaka ṇ ṭ ha’s Instruments of War: Modern, Vernacular, Barbarous. ” Indian
Economic and Social History Review 41/4 (2004): 365–85.
Mohanty, J. N. “Feeling, Poetics, and Religion.” In E xplorations in Philosophy: Essays
by J.N. Mohanty , edited by Bina Gupta, 189–94. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2001.
Monius, Anne E. “Literary Theory and Moral Vision in Tamil Buddhist Literature.”
Journal of Indian Philosophy 28/2 (2000): 195–223.
——— . Imagining a Place for Buddhism: Literary Culture and Religious Community in
Tamil-Speaking South India . New York: Oxford University Press, 2001.
——— . “Love, Violence, and the Aesthetics of Disgust: Śaivas and Jains in Medieval
South India.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 32/2–3 (2004): 113–172.
Bibliography 241
——— . “Origins of Hindu Ethics.” In T he Blackwell Companion to Religious Ethics ,
edited by William Schweiker, 330–40. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2005.
Morson, Gary Saul. N arrative and Freedom: The Shadow of Time . New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1994.
Murdoch, Iris. T he Sovereignty of Good . London: Routledge and K. Paul, 1971.
——— . “Comic and Tragic.” In Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals , 90–146. New York:
Penguin Press, 1993.
Nagar, Ravi Shankar. “Suggestiveness (Dhvani) in the Mahā bh ā rata.” In M odern
Evaluation of the Mahā bh ā rata: Prof. R.K. Sharma Felicitation Volume , edited by
Satya Pal Narang, 244–49. Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1995.
Narasimhan, Chakravarthi V. T he Mah ā bhā rata: An English Version Based on Selected
Verses . New York: Columbia University Press, 1965.
Newton Adam. Narrative Ethics . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995.
Nussbaum, Martha C. T he Fragility of Goodness: Luck and Ethics in Greek Philosophy .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
——— . Love’s Knowledge: Essays on Philosophy and Literature . New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1990.
Oates, Joyce Carol. A Widow’s Story: A Memoir . New York: Ecco, 2011.
O’Flaherty, Wendy Doniger. T he Origins of Evil in Hindu Mythology . Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1976.
——— . “The Mah ā bh ā rata.” Religious Studies Review 4/1 (1978): 19–28.
——— . ed. The Concept of Duty in South Asia . New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House
Pvt. Ltd, 1978.
——— . ed. Karma and Rebirth in Classical Indian Traditions . Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1980.
——— , tr. The Rig Veda: An Anthology . Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1981.
——— . Dreams, Illusions, and Other Realities . Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1984.
——— . “Horses and Snakes in the Ā di Parvan of the Mah ā bh ā rata .” In A spects of
India: Essays in Honor of Edward Cameron Dimock Jr ., edited by Margaret Case
and N. Gerald Barrier, 16–44. New Delhi: Manohar and American Institute of
Indian Studies, 1986.
——— . O ther People’s Myths: The Cave of Echoes . Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1988.
Oldenberg, Hermann. D as Mah ā bh ā rata: Seine Entstehung, Sein Inhalt, Seine Form .
Göttingen: Vandenhoek und Ruprecht, 1922.
Olivelle, Patrick. Upaniṣ ads . New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
——— . The Law Code of Manu: A New Translation Based on the Critical Edition . New
York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
——— . “The Semantic History of Dharma: The Middle and Late Vedic Periods.”
Journal of Indian Philosophy 32/5–6 (2004): 491–511.
——— . Between the Empires: Society in India 300 BCE to 400 CE . New York: Oxford
University Press, 2006.
242 Bibliography
——— . D harma: Studies in Its Semantic, Cultural and Religious History . Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 2009.
——— . The Dharmasūtras: The Law Codes of Ancient India . New York: Oxford
University Press, 2009.
Panchinas, George. S imone Weil Reader . London: Moyer Bell, 1977.
Paniker, K. Ayyappa. Indian Narratology . New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre
for the Arts: Sterling Publishers, 2003.
Pathak, Shubha. “Why Do Displaced Kings Become Poets in the Sanskrit Epics?”
International Journal of Hindu Studies 10/2 (2006): 133–136.
Patil, Parimal. “An Invitation to Feeling Critically: Identifi cation, Estrangement and
the Loss of Emotional Freedom.” Unpublished manuscript.
Patton, Laurie L. “Beyond the Myths of Origin: Narrative Philosophizing in Vedic
Commentary.” In M yths and Fictions: Their Place in Philosophy and Religion , edited
by Shlomo Biderman and Ben-Ami Scharfstein, 225–54. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1993.
——— . Myth as Argument: The B ṛ haddevat ā as Canonical Commentary . New York:
Walter de Gruyter, 1996.
——— . Bringing the Gods to Mind: Mantra and Metonymy in Early Indian Sacrifi ce .
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005.
——— . “Trita’s Tumble and Agastya’s Ancestors: On the Narrative Construction of
Dharma.” In Boundaries, Dynamics and Construction of Traditions in South Asia ,
edited by Frederico Squarcini, 133–57. Firenze: Firenze University Press, 2005.
Perret, Roy W. Hindu Ethics: A Philosophical Study . Honolulu: University of Hawaii
Press, 1998.
Peterson, Indira. Design and Rhetoric in a Sanskrit Court Epic: The Kir ā t ā rjunīya of
Bh ā ravi . Albany: State University of New York Press, 2003.
Phelan, James. N arrative as Rhetoric: Technique, Audiences, Ethics, Ideology . Columbus:
Ohio State University Press, 1996.
Pilikian, Vaughan, tr. Mahabharata Book Seven: Drona, Vol. 1 . New York: NYU Press;
JJC Foundation, 2006.
——— , tr. Mahabharata Book Seven: Drona, Vol. 2 . New York: NYU Press; JJC
Foundation, 2009.
Pollock, Sheldon, tr. T he R ā mā ya ṇ a of V ā lmīki: An Epic of Ancient India , Vol. 2.
Ayodh ā k ā ṇ ḍ a . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987.
——— .“Playing by the Rules: Ś ā stra and Sanskrit Literature.” In Shastric Traditions
in Indian Art , edited by Anna Libera Dallapicola, 301–312. Stuttgart: Steiner, 1989.
——— , tr. The Rā mā ya ṇ a of V ā lmīki: An Epic of Ancient India , Vol. 3. A raṇ yak ā ṇ ḍ a .
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987.
——— . “Literary History, Indian History, World History.” Social Scientist 23/10–12
(1995): 112–42.
——— . “Bhoja’s Ś ṛ ṅ g ā raprak ā śa and the Problem of Rasa : A Historical Introduction
and Annotated Translation.” Asiatische Studien/Etudes Asiatiques 52/11 (1998)
117–44.
Bibliography 243
——— . “The Social Aesthetic and Sanskrit Literary Theory.” Journal of Indian
Philosophy 29 (2001): 1–33.
——— , ed. Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions From South Asia . Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2003.
——— . The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and Power in
Premodern India . Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006.
——— . “The Mahabharata of Vyasa.” In T he Longman Anthology of World Literature,
Volume A: The Ancient World , 2nd edition, edited by David Damrosch, 829–832.
New York: Pearson/Longman, 2009.
Potter, Karl. “The Karma Theory and Its Interpretation in Some Indian Philosophical
Systems.” In Karma and Rebirth in Classical Indian Traditions , edited by Wendy
Doniger O’Flaherty, 241–67. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980.
——— . “Suff ering in the Orthodox Philosophical Systems: Is There Any?” In
Suff ering: Indian Perspectives , edited by Kapil Tiwari, 1–11. New Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1986.
Prasad, Leela. P oetics of Conduct: Oral Narrative and Moral Being in a South Indian
Town . New York: Columbia University Press, 2007.
Prince, Gerald. A Dictionary of Narratology . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press,
2003.
Raghavan, V. T he Number of Rasas . Madras: Adyar Library, 1940.
Rajagopalachari, C. M ahabharata . Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1996.
Ramanujan, A. K. “Where Mirrors Are Windows: Toward an Anthology of Refl ec-
tions.” History of Religions 28/3 (1989): 187–216.
——— . “Repetition in the Mah ā bh ā rata .” In Essays on the Mah ā bh ā rata , edited by
Arvind Sharma, 419–43. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991.
——— . “Is There an Indian Way of Thinking? An Informal Essay.” In C ollected
Essays of A.K. Ramanujan , edited by Vinay Dharwadker, 34–51. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2001.
Rayan, Krishna. T he Lamp and the Jar: Explorations of a New Horizon in Literary
Criticism . New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 2002.
Reich, Tamar C. “A Battlefi eld of a Text: Inner Textual Interpretation in the Sanskrit
Mahā bh ā rata .” PhD diss., University of Chicago, 1998.
——— . “Sacrifi cial Violence and Textual Battles: Inner Textual Interpretation in the
Sanskrit Mahā bh ā rata .” History of Religions 41/2 (2001): 142–69.
——— . “Ends and Closures in the Mah ā bh ā rata ,” International Journal of Hindu
Studies 15/1 (2011): 9–53.
Richman, Paula, ed. M any Rā m ā ya ṇ as: The Diversity of a Narrative Tradition in South
Asia . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.
Ricoeur, Paul. T ime and Narrative . 3 vols. Translated by Kathleen McLaughlin and
David Pellauer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984–90.
——— . Oneself as Another . Translated by Kathleen Blamey. Chicago: University
Chicago Press, 1992.
244 Bibliography
Rorty, Richard. C ontingency, Irony, and Solidarity . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1989.
Ross, Alex. “Sound and Vision: Glass’s ‘Koyaanisqatsi’ and the Art of Film Scoring.”
The New Yorker , June 27, 2005. http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2005/06/27/
050627crmu_music?currentPage=all . (Accessed November 1, 2008).
Sarma, Binod. E thico-Literary Values of the Two Great Epics of India . New Delhi:
Oriental Publishers, 1978.
Sax, Willam S. Dancing the Self: Personhood and Performance in the P ā ṇ ḍ av Līl ā of
Garhwal . New York: Oxford University Press, 2002.
Scheuer, Jacques. Ś iva dans le Mah ā bh ā rata . Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
1982.
Selby, Martha. Grow Long Blessed Night: Love Poems from Classical India . New York:
Oxford University Press, 2000.
Sharma, Arvind. “Of Sūdras , Sūtas and Ślokas : Why is the Mah ā bh ā rata Preemi-
nently in the Anuṣ ṭ ubh Meter?” Indo-Iranian Journal 43/3 (2000): 225–78.
Sharma, R. K. “Some Salient Features of Nīlaka ṇ ṭ ha’s Introduction to the
Mah ā bh ā rata .” Purā ṇ a 43 (2001): 95–100.
Sharma, Ursula. “Theodicy and the Doctrine of Karma.” M an . 8/3 (1973) 347–364.
Shulman, David. T he King and the Clown in South Indian Myth and Poetry . Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1985.
——— .“Fire and Flood: The Testing of Sītā in Kampan’s Irā mā vat ā ram.” In M any
R ā m ā ya ṇ as: The Diversity of a Narrative Tradition in South Asia . Edited by Paula
Richman, 89–113. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.
——— . “Toward a Historical Poetics of the Sanskrit Epics.” International Folklore
Review 8 (1991): 9–17; reprinted in The Wisdom of Poets: Studies in Tamil, Telugu,
and Sanskrit , edited by David Shulman, 21–38. New Delhi: Oxford University
Press, 2001.
——— . “Devana and Daiva.” In R itual, State and History in South Asia: Essays in
Honour of J.C. Heesterman , edited by D. H. A. Kolff , A. W. van den Hoek, M. S.
Oort, 350–65. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1992.
——— . “On Being Human in the Sanskrit Epic: The Riddle of Nala.” J ournal of
Indian Philosophy 22 (1994): 1–29.
——— . “The Yakṣ a’s Questions.” In U ntying the Knot: On Riddles and Other Enig-
matic Modes , edited by Galit Hasan-Rokem and David Shulman, 158–68. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1996; reprinted in T he Wisdom of Poets: Studies in
Tamil, Telugu, and Sanskrit , edited by David Shulman, 40–62. New Delhi: Oxford
University Press, 2001.
Siegel, Lee. Laughing Matters: Comic Tradition in India . Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1987.
Singer, Peter and Renata Singer. T he Moral of the Story: An Anthology of Ethics Through
Literature . Malden, MA: Blackwell Pub., 2005.
Bibliography 245
Sinha, J. P. T he Mah ā bhā rata: A Literary Study . New Delhi: Meharchand Lachh-
mandas, 1977.
Smith, Brian K. “Hinduism.” In E vil and Suff ering , edited by Jacob Neusner, 7–35.
Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim Press, 1998.
——— . “Samsara.” In T he Encyclopedia of Religion , 2nd ed. vol. 12, edited by Lindsay
Jones, 8097–98. Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2005.
Smith, Mary Caroll. “The M ah ā bh ā rata’s Core.” Journal of the American Oriental
Society 95/3 (1975): 479–82.
Smith, John D. “Old Indian: The Two Sanskrit Epics of India.” In Traditions of Heroic
and Epic Poetry, Volume One: The Tradition , edited by A. T. Hatto, 48–78. London:
Modern Humanities Press, 1980.
——— . “The Hero as Gifted Man: Nala in the M ah ā bh ā rata .” In T he Indian Narra-
tive: Perspectives and Patterns , edited by Christopher Shackle and Rupert Snell,
13–22. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1992.
——— . “Scapegoats of the Gods: The Ideology of the Indian Epics.” In O ral Epics in
India , edited by Stuart Blackburn, Peter Claus, Joyce Flueckiger, and Susan Wad-
ley, 176–194. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989.
——— . The Mah ā bhā rata: An Abridged Translation . London: Penguin Books, 2009.
Smith, Frederick M. “Heaven, Indian Conceptions of.” In Routledge Encyclopedia of
Philosophy . Vol. 4, edited by Edward Craig, 253–56. New York: Routledge, 1998.
Söhnen-Thieme, Renate. “On the Composition of the D yūtaparvan in the
Mah ā bh ā rata .” In C omposing a Tradition: Concepts, Techniques and Relationships:
Proceedings of the First Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and
Pur ā ṇ as, August 1997 , edited by Mary Brockington and Peter Schreiner, 139–78.
Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts, 1999.
Sontag, Susan. A Susan Sontag Reader . New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1982.
Sörenson, Sören. An Index to the Names in the Mahabharata with Short Explanations
and a Concordance to the Bombay and Calcutta Editions and P.C. Roy’s Translation .
London: Williams and Norgate, 1904–25.
Sternbach, Ludwik. Indian Riddles: A Forgotten Chapter in the History of Sanskrit
Literature . Hoshiarpur: Vishveshvaranand Vedic Research Institute, 1975.
Sternberg, Meir. The Poetics of Biblical Narrative: Ideological Literature and the Drama
of Reading . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1987.
Sukthankar, V. S., et al., eds. M ah ā bhā rata: Critical Edition . 24 vols. with H ariva ṃ śa .
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1933–70.
Sukthankar, V. S. “Prolegomena.” In The Ādiparvan: Being the First Book of the
Mahā bh ā rata . Edited by V. S. Sukthankar, i–cx. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1933.
——— . Critical Studies in the Mahā bh ā rata . Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, 1944.
——— . On the Meaning of the Mahā bh ā rata . Bombay: Asiatic Society of Bombay, 1957.
246 Bibliography
Sullivan, Bruce. Seer of the Fifth Veda: Kṛ ṣ ṇ a Dvaip ā yana Vy ā sa in the Mah ā bh ā rata .
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1999.
——— . “The Religious Authority of the Mah ā bh ā rata : Vyā sa and Brahm ā in the
Hindu Scriptural Tradition.” J ournal of the Academy of Religion 62/2 (1994):
377–401.
——— . “The M ah ā bh ā rata : Perspectives on its Ends and Endings.” I nternational
Journal of Hindu Studies 15/1 (2011): 1–7.
Sutherland, Sally J. “Sīt ā and Draupadī: Aggressive Behavior and Female Role-
Models in the Sanskrit Epics.” J ournal of the American Oriental Society 109/1
(1989): 63–79.
Sutton, Nicholas. R eligious Doctrines in the Mahā bh ā rata . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
2000.
Swanson, Christina. “Narrative Temporality and the Aspect of Time in Franz Kafka’s
Short Fiction.” PhD diss., University of California Irvine, 1999.
Taber, John A. “Duty and Virtue, Indian Conceptions of.” In R outledge Encyclopedia
of Philosophy , edited by Edward Craig. London: Routledge, 1998. http://www.
rep.routledge.com/article/F067 . Accessed July 19, 2011.
Tadpatrikar, S. N. “The K ṛ ṣ ṇ a Problem.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute 10 (1929): 269–343.
Thakur, M. M. T hus Spake Bhī ṣ ma . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1992.
Thapar, Romila.”The Historian and the Epic.” A nnals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Institute 60/1–4 (1979): 199–213.
——— . “Linear Time in Historical Texts of Early India.” In India and Beyond: Aspects
of Literature, Meaning, Ritual and Thought: Essays in Honour of Frits Staal , edited
by Dick van der Meij, 562–73. London: Kegan Paul International, 1997.
——— . Early India: From the Origins to AD 1300 . Berkeley: University of California
Press, 2002.
Tharakan. K. M. W estern and Eastern Poetics: A Comparative Study of Reader Response
in I.A. Richards and Abhinavagupta . New Delhi, Prestige Books, 1998.
Thomas, Lynn. “Paraśur ā ma and Time.” In Myth and Mythmaking: Continuous Evolu-
tion in Indian Tradition , edited by Julia Leslie, 63–86. Richmond: Curzon, 1996.
——— . “Disappearing Dragons and Russian Dolls: Unpacking the Vṛ tahatya in the
Āra ṇ yakaparva .” Journal of Vaishnava Studies 14/2 (2006): 9–38.
——— . “Does the Age Make the King or the King Make the Age? Exploring the
Relationship Between the King and the Yugas in the Mah ā bh ā rata ” Religions of
South Asia 1/2 (2007): 183–201
Timmerman, John H. R obert Frost: The Ethics of Ambiguity . Lewisburg, PA: Bucknell
University Press, 2002.
Tiwari, Kapil N., ed. Suff ering: Indian Perspectives . New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1986.
Tokunaga, Muneo. “Bhīṣ ma’s Discourse as a Śok ā panodana.” In Epic Undertakings ,
edited by Robert P. Goldman and Muneo Tokunaga, 371–82. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 2009.
Bibliography 247
Tompkins, Jane P., ed. R eader-Response Criticism: From Formalism to Post-Structur-
alism . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1980.
——— . “An Introduction to Reader-Response Criticism.” In Reader-Response Criti-
cism: From Formalism to Post-Structuralism , edited by Jane P. Tompkins, ix-xxvi.
Baltimore: John Hopkins Press, 1980.
Tubb, Gary A.“Ś ā ntarasa in the M ah ā bh ā rata .” In Essays on the Mahā bh ā rata , edited
by Arvind Sharma, 171–211. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1991.
van Buitenen, J. A. B.“On the Structure of the Sabh ā parvan of the Mah ā bh ā rata .” In
India Maior: Congratulatory Volume Presented to J. Gonda , edited by J. Ensink and
P. Gaeff ke, 68–84. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1972.
——— , tr. The Mah ā bhā rata. Vol. 1: The Book of the Beginnings . Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1973.
——— , tr. The Mah ā bh ā rata. Vol. 2: The Book of the Assembly Hall; The Book of the
Forest . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975.
——— , tr. The Mah ā bh ā rata. Vol. 3: The Book of Vir ā ṭ a; The Book of the Eff ort . Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1978.
——— , tr. The Bhagavadgīt ā in the Mah ā bh ā rata: A Bilingual Translation . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1981.
van Nooten, Barend A. T he Mah ā bh ā rata, Attributed to Kṛ ṣ ṇ a Dvaip ā yana Vy ā sa . New
York: Twayne Publishers, 1971.
Vassilkov, Yaroslav. “The M ah ā bh ā rata’s Typological Defi nition Reconsidered.” I ndo-
Iranian Journal 38/3 (1995): 249–256.
——— . “ K ā lav ā da (the Doctrine of Cyclical Time) in the M ah ā bh ā rata and the Con-
cept of Heroic Didactics.” In Composing a Tradition: Concepts, Techniques, and
Relationships: Proceedings of the First Dubrovnik International Conference on the
Sanskrit Epics and Pur ā ṇ as, August 1997 , edited by Mary Brockington and Peter
Schreiner, 17–34. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and the Arts, 1999.
Vendler, Helen. Poets Thinking: Pope, Whitman, Dickinson, Yeats . Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2004.
——— . Invisible Listeners: Lyric Intimacy in Herbert, Whitman, and Ashbery . Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 2005.
Weber, Max. T he Sociology of Religion . Translated by E. Fischoff . Boston: Beacon
Press, 1993.
Weil, Simone. T he Simone Weil Reader , edited by George Panchinas. London: Moyer
Bell, 1977.
White, David Gordon. “Dogs Die.” H istory of Religions 23/4 (1989): 283–303.
Wilmot, Paul, tr. M ahabharata Book Two: The Great Hall . New York: NYU Press; JJC
Foundation, 2006.
Winternitz, Moriz. G eschichte der Indischen Literatur . 3 vols. Leipzig: C.F. Amelangs
Verlag, 1908–22.
Witzel, Michael. “On the Origin of the Literary Device of the ‘Frame Story’ in Old
Indian Literature.” In Hinduismus und Buddhismus: 88 Fetschrift Fur Ulrich Sch-
neider , edited by Harry Falk, 380–414. Freiburg: Hedwig Falk, 1987.
248 Bibliography
Woods, Julian F. Destiny and Human Initiative in the Mah ā bhā rata . New York: State
University of New York Press, 2001.
Wynne, Alexander, tr. M ahabharata Book Twelve: Peace, Vol. 3 . New York: NYU Press;
JJC Foundation, 2009.
Younger, Paul, “The Concept of Duḥkha and the Indian Religious Tradition.” J ournal
of the American Academy of Religion 37/2 (1969): 141–152.
Zaehner, R. C. 1966. H induism . London: Oxford University Press, 1966.
Zimmer, Heinrich. Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civilization . Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1972.
Index
Note: Italicized letter n designates footnotes. Headings which appear periodically
throughout the page range are designated with p assim .
Abhimanyu , 16 , 17 , 158–159 K ṛ ṣ ṇ a as , 33 , 41
Abhinavagupta , 55 , 62 post-war , 131–140
on aesthetic v ersus underlying Sa ṃ jaya as , 35 , 41 , 107 , 112–113 ,
emotion , 54 132–134 , 139–140
The Eye (Locana) , 52 Vidura as , 42 , 107 , 134–135 , 139–140
on purpose of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 61 Vy ā sa as , 58 , 135–140 , 138n –139 n
on the sensitive reader , 55 , 63 , 71–72 , aestheticized emotion ( rasa) , 7 , 47
97 defi ned , 54
accountability , 109–115 , 127–131 , identifi cation with , 59 , 60
200–202 proximity/estrangement of audience
see also blame ; causality ; karma and , 59 , 60
action types of , 54–55
consequence and , 117–122 underlying emotion v ersus , 54
fate and , 180–189 see also emotion
freedom of , 22 aesthetics of suff ering , 27–35 , 218–224
insight and , 106 , 110–111 , 117–122 , 131 , Ānandavardhana and , 59–61
141 components of , 7–8
see also karma concept of suff ering and , 7
adharma defi ned , 50n defi ned , 6–7
Ādiparvan . see The Book of the Beginning fi ve components of , 27–35
(Ādiparvan) literary theory and , 7 , 47 , 50–73
advisor against grief , 30 , 33–35 , 41–43 , meaning within the M ah ā bh ā rata
58 , 105 and , 27
Bhīma as , 33 , 43 see also suff ering ( duḥkha)
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and , 107 agency . see agent of suff ering ;
G ā ndh ā rī as, 144 human agency
250 Index
agent of suff ering , 30 , 48 asceticism , 146n
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra as , 107 , 116–122 ā śramas (life stages) , 37
Duryodhana as , 81 , 97 The Book of the Assembly Hall , 74n , 199 ,
P ā ṇ ḍ avas as , 75 , 80 , 82 , 82n 202
ages . see world ages ( yugas) Āstika , 146n
ahi ṃ s ā (noninjury), renunciation Aśvatthā man , 16
movements and , 38–39 curse of , 110 , 110 n
Ājīvikas , 45 response to grief and , 42 , 142
Aklujkar, Ashok , 57 the two Aśvins (deities) , 12
ala ṇ k ā ra (fi gure of speech) , 53–54 attention, narrative ethics and , 68–69
ala ṇ k ā raś ā stra . see Sanskrit literary audience
theory aesthetics of suff ering and , 28–29
Ambikā , 11 n arguments against grief and , 132–140
Ānandavardhana , 47 , 56–61 , 105 , 176 , of the battle books , 123
216 , 220 ethics of , 6–7
aesthetics of suff ering and , 59–61 expectations of , 60
Light on Suggestion (Dhvanyā loka) , experience of , 146 , 147 , 164–176
51–52 , 55 , 56 frame stories and , 114–115 , 169n
literary theories of , 51–73 p assim grief of , 115
on repetition of motifs , 174 as integral part of the M ah ā bh ā rata ,
on the sensitive reader , 55 , 63–64 23–25
on tranquility , 163 listening by , 25 , 108 , 123 , 125 , 128
on transience , 57 motivating change in , 96–97
the Andhakas , 18 , 19 point of view and , 111
anger , 33 , 95 , 117 refi guration of , 32–33 , 32n
Āpaddharmaparvan , 6 storytelling style and , 25–27
Āpastamba Dharmasūtra , 50 suspense and , 78
arguments against grief , 31 , 112–113 , textualized , 23
131–140 time and , 147 , 164–176
audience and , 132–140 view of dharma by , 71
doctrine of time and , 157 , 159–163 view of Yudhi ṣ ṭ h ira by , 70–71
see also advisor against grief see also disorienting/reorienting
Arjuna , 12–17 , 19 , 20 audience ; proximity/estrange-
death of , 2 07 ment of audience; reader-
the great journey and , 207–214 p assim response theory ; sensitive
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 199 , 203–204 reader/spectator
response to grief and , 41 , 142 avat ā ra , K ṛ ṣ ṇ a as , 154 , 200 , 200n
ridicule of Duryodhana by , 75 , 80 aversion , 57
strength of , 117 , 118 , 158
Subhadr ā ’s lament and , 158–159 backshadowing , 128–131
time and , 147 Bailey, Greg , 178 , 218
The Book of the Ascent to Heaven , 206 Balar ā ma , 155
Index 251
the bard , 168–169 birth-death-rebirth cycle ( sa ṃ s ā ra)
see also Ugraśravas blame and , 134–135
the battle books , 108 , 122n defi ned , 45
backshadowing in , 128–131 driving force behind , 45–46
frame stories in , 122 , 127–131 human endeavor and , 196
frame-switching in , 128–131 Kalki and , 153
inconsistency in , 128 K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 152–154
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a in , 199 liberation from , 45
outcome of , 129–130 see also karma
Sa ṃ jaya’s narration of , 122–140 blame (do ṣ a)
stretching time and , 171–174 , 171n birth-death-rebirth cycle and , 134–135
see also warfare ; warrior class Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and , 109–115 , 116 , 125–126 ,
beauty of the battlefi eld motif , 173 127–131
beginning, book of . s ee The Book of the Duryodhana and , 110 , 112 , 125 , 127 , 143
Beginning (Ādiparvan) fate and , 112–113 , 125 , 127–128 , 133
Bhagavadgītā , 8 , 15 , 198 , 201 , 203–204 , karma and , 133 , 135 , 143
223 the Kauravas and , 112–113
Bh ā rata elders, silence of , 74–75 , 76–77 , K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 143 , 144 , 200–202
97–100 narrative strategies and , 128–131
Bhīma , 12 , 14–17 , 19 , 20 , 143 time and , 112–113 , 125–126 , 134–135 ,
as advisor against grief , 33 , 43 143 , 149
death of , 207 Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and, 143 , 143 n
the great journey and , 207–214 see also causality
passim blindness , 95 , 106–145
Hanum ā n and , 151–152 , 152n of the audience , 96–97
ridicule of Duryodhana by , 75 , 80 of Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra , 11 , 11 n , 85 , 85n , 87–88 ,
strength of , 117 , 118 , 158 141–143 , 185–186
Subhadr ā ’s lament and , 158–159 the divine eye and , 124
world ages and , 154–155 mistakes in seeing and , 75
Bhī ṣ ma , 3 , 12 , 13 , 16 , 18 , 122n , 161 Sa ṃ jaya and , 110 , 110n
death of , 124 , 126–128 , 129 The Book of Bhī ṣ ma (Bhī ṣ maparvan) ,
Draupadī ’s question to Yudhiṣ ṭ hira 122 n , 124 , 126–128 , 161
and , 92 , 101 The Book of Droṇ a (Dro ṇ aparvan) , 122 n
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 199 , 204 The Book of Karṇ a (Kar ṇ aparvan) , 122 n
peace negotiations and , 121 The Book of Peace , 153 , 162
The Book of Bhī ṣ ma (Bhī ṣ maparvan) , The Book of Śalya (Śalyaparvan) , 122 n
122 n , 124 , 126–128 , 161 K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 204
Bhī ṣ maparvan (The Book of Bhīṣ ma) , source of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s grief in , 129
122 n , 124 , 126–128 , 161 world ages and , 154
Bh ṛ gu lineage, dismissing time and , The Book of the Ascent to Heaven , 206
166–167 The Book of the Assembly Hall , 74 n , 199 ,
Bhūriśravas , 204 202
252 Index
The Book of the Beginning (Ādiparvan) , Buddhism
24 , 48 , 108 , 129 birth-death-rebirth cycle and , 45
dismissing time and , 166–167 dharma in , 36
doctrine of time and , 161
on K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s role in war , 202 caste , 37 , 151 , 152
placement of , 113–115 catastrophe as situational context , 108
source of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s grief in , 129 causality
world ages and , 154 death and , 115 , 115n
The Book of the Eff ort (Udyogaparvan) , suff ering and , 78 , 95 , 115 , 115n , 127–131 ,
48 , 108 149–156 , 205–216 p assim
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s request for narration of , warfare and , 95 , 115 , 115n , 127 ,
123–126 148–149 , 202–205
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s role in the peace see also blame ( do ṣ a)
negotiations in , 116–122 , 141 characters/characterization
doctrine of time in , 158 aesthetics of suff ering and , 7 , 27 ,
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a in , 199 , 203 29–31 , 47
world ages in , 154 decision-making and , 77–97 p assim
The Book of the Forest , 90 dharma and , 28
karma in , 191–195 of Dharma as dog , 207–210 , 207n
world ages in , 151–153 of Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra , 107–108 , 141–143
The Book of the Great Departure , 206 erosion of confi dence and , 94
The Book of the Horse Sacrifi ce , 200 glossary of , 225–226
The Book of the Night Massacre karma and , 196–198
(Sauptikaparvan) , 16 , 26 , 42 , 122n of K ṛ ṣ ṇ a , 198–205
The Book of the Stay in the Forest narrative strategies and , 77–97 p assim
Hermitage , 144 , 202 as negative role models , 73
The Book of the Women (Strīparvan) , 26 , proximity/estrangement and (s ee
48 , 144–145 , 191 , 195–196 proximity/estrangement of
Booth, Wayne , 65 audience )
Bowles, Adam, Dharma, Disorder, and time and , 147–148 , 148n , 164–176
the Political in Ancient India , 5 types of , 30
Brahm ā /Brahmanism , 182 see also individual character names, e.g .
birth-death-rebirth cycle and , 45 Vy ā sa
dharma in , 36–38 choice, narrative ethics and , 68
Brereton, Joel , 5 clarity of mind , 67 , 78 , 85–95 p assim ,
“Edifying Puzzlement: Ṛ g Veda 10.129 104
and the uses of Enigma,” 71 see also confusion of mind
B ṛ hadaśva , 50 code of warriors , 18 , 46 , 154–155 ,
Brodbeck, Simon, T he Mah ā bh ā rata 204–205
Patriline , 6 collapsing time , 164 , 167–171
Buddha, teaching of , 44 “The Colloquy of the Brahmin and the
buddhi . see wisdom ( buddhi) Hunter,” 191 , 193–195
Index 253
composition of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 8–9 of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra , 125
comprehensibility, proximity/ doctine of time and , 156–163
estrangement of audience and , 83 of Duryodhana , 129 , 144
conceptual categories emotion over , 207–208
aesthetics of suff ering and , 7 , 27 , grief and , 113
29–31 , 31–32 , 47–48 inevitability of , 112
dharma and , 31 , 122 of K ṛ ṣ ṇ a, Kali y uga and , 150 , 154
erosion of confi dence in , 94 world ages and , 151–152
failure of , 104 see also birth-death-rebirth cycle ; time
heaven and hell as , 31 , 214 , 218–219 decision-making , 77–97 p assim
understanding of , 28 aesthetics of suff ering and , 29–30
unreliability of , 215 by Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra , 116–122
conclusion of the central story , 205–217 , the dice game and , 77–78 , 93–95
206 n fate and , 180–189
confronting suff ering , 33 freedom of , 22
confusion of mind , 78 , 87–95 p assim narrative ethics and , 67
see also clarity of mind time and , 161
consequence , 117–122 deities . see God/deities ; theodicy of the
see also karma Mah ā bh ā rata ; individual deity
consequential time , 108 , 129–131 names, e.g . K ṛ ṣ ṇ a
consuming time , 164–166 delight, purpose of the M ah ā bh ā rata
content and form, opposition between , and , 61
59 , 96–97 , 205–216 passim , 206n delusion . see confusion of mind
contentment , 34 , 34n , 96 , 105 The Book of the Great Departure , 206
cosmological time , 107–108 , 108n , 129–131 descriptive passages, time and , 171–172
creator of the universe design of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s grand hall , 75 ,
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a as, 152–154 80 , 80 n
Śiva as , 155 desire
Critical Edition of the M ah ā bh ā rata , for clarity of mind , 104
9–10 dharma and , 39–40
cruelty (n ṛ śamsya) , 39 , 83 of Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra , 87–88 , 95
cycle of rebirth . s ee birth-death-rebirth tranquility and , 56
cycle despair , 95
dharma and , 39–40
daiva . see fate of Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra , 111 , 128
dangers of reading the M ah ā bh ā rata , of Duryodhana , 81
26–27 as emotional response , 35
dark nature of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 25–27 time and , 161
death destiny . see fate (daiva, di ṣ ṭ a)
of Abhimanyu , 158–159 destroyer of the universe
of Bhī ṣ ma , 124 , 126–128 , 129 K ṛ ṣ ṇ a as , 152–154
cause of , 115 , 115n Śiva as , 155
254 Index
detachment, tranquility and , 57 Dharma (deity) , 11 , 12 , 15 , 19 , 70 , 90 , 93
determinism, birth-death-rebirth cycle dog character and , 207–210 , 207n
and , 45 warfare and , 46
development of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 5 , Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and , 209–214 p assim
8–10 Dharma Ś ā stras , 36–38
Dhand, Arti, Woman as Fire, Woman as Dharma Sūtras , 36–38
Sage , 6 Dh ṛ ṣ ṭ adyumna , 16
dharma , 218–224 Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra , 12 , 15 , 17 , 18 , 25
aesthetics of suff ering and , 32 accountability of , 109–115 , 127–131
audience’s view of , 71 as agent of suff ering , 48 , 89 , 107 ,
characters closely linked to , 28 116–122
conceptual categories and , 31 , 122 blame and , 109–115 , 116 , 125–126 ,
confronting suff ering and , 33 128–131
defi ned , 3 , 36–40 , 122 blindness of , 11 , 11n , 85 , 85 n , 87–88 ,
dice game and , 76 , 90–91 , 93 , 141–143 , 185–186
99–104 characterization of , 107–108 , 141–143 ,
disorienting/reorienting audience to , 196–198
101–104 , 121–122 death of , 125
ethics and , 35 decision-making by , 116–122
grief and , 39–40 desire of , 87–89 , 95
happiness and , 22 dharma and , 118–122
importance of , 14 dice game and , 13–14 , 74–105 p assim ,
Kar ṇ a on , 218 127
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 201 , 203–204 emotion and , 89
k ṣ atriya , 18 , 46 , 154–155 , 204–205 fate and , 85–86 , 86n , 184–186
legislative/narrative divide and , 37–38 gambling and , 76
literature of , 36–40 human endeavor and , 184–186
perception of , 90 insights v ersus actions of , 106 , 110–111 ,
perfection and , 22 117–122 , 131 , 141
protection and , 99 instructions from Saṃ jaya to , 125
proximity/estrangement of audience instructions to Saṃ jaya from , 117–118
and , 101–104 karma and , 133 , 195–197
renunciation movements and , 38–40 K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 199 , 202
sources of , 37 lament of , 108 , 109–115 , 111n , 126–128 ,
subtle nature of , 3–4 , 75 132–133
suff ering and , 7 , 22 , 35–40 , 103–104 doctrine of time and , 158 , 161
Vidura’s discourse on , 118–122 placement of , 113–115
virtue and , 153 as listener , 108 , 123, 125 , 128
world ages and , 151–155 mind of , 87–89
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and , 218–224 narrative ethics and , 69
Dharma, Disorder, and the Political in as negative role model , 73
Ancient India (Bowles) , 5 paradox of , 106 , 121 , 131
Index 255
peace negotiations and , 116–122 , 141 proximity/estrangement of audience
proximity/estrangement of audience and , 83–84
and , 85–89, 141–143 dispassion , 58 , 68–69
request for narration by , 123–126 di ṣ ṭ a . see fate (daiva, di ṣ ṭ a)
response to grief and , 41 , 42 distance
Sa ṃ jaya’s narration of the battle to , aestheticized emotion and , 59 , 60
122–140 literary theory and , 71–72
time and , 108 , 158 , 162 , 185–186 , 186n the divine eye , 124
as victim of suff ering , 48 , 89 , 107 , doctrine of time ( k ā lav ā da) , 48–49 ,
122–140 148–149 , 156–164 , 201
violation of Draupadī and , 86 arguments against grief and , 157 ,
virtue of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas and , 106 159–163
wisdom of , 125 fate and , 160–161 , 161n
as witness to suff ering , 81 lament and , 157–159 , 175
dhvani . see suggestion manipulation of time and , 164–176
Dhvany ā loka (Light on dog character , 207–210 , 207n
Suggestion) (Ānandavardhana) , Draupadī , 3 , 16 , 19 , 20
51–52 , 55 , 56 audience’s view of Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and ,
diachronic reading , 9n 70
dice game , 13–14 , 48 , 74–105 , 127 death of , 207
collapsing time and , 167–171 depiction of , 97–100
direct adress formula in , 167–171 dice game and , 13–14 , 48 , 74–105
fate and , 180–189 passim
human endeavor and , 180–189 the great journey and , 207–214
legality of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s wager passim
during , 100–101 humiliation of , 97–100 , 97n
proximity/estrangement of audience marriage contest of , 13 , 110
and , 77–97 questioning of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira by , 76 ,
summary of , 75–77 92–93 , 97–98 , 100
symbolic importance of , 79n response to grief and , 142
time and , 170–171 as victim of suff ering , 97–100
dilemma as situational context , 108 violation of , 77 , 83 , 86 , 90 , 95 ,
direct address formula , 167–171 97–100
disgust , 57 virtue of , 97
disillusionment , 57 , 67–68 driving force behind s a ṃ s ā ra , 45–46
dismissing time , 164 , 166–167 Dro ṇ a , 12 , 14 , 16 , 42 , 101 , 122n , 199
disorienting/reorienting audience , 60 K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 204
aesthetics of suff ering and , 28 , 29–31 , peace negotiations and , 121
47–48 The Book of Dro ṇ a (Dro ṇ aparvan) , 122 n
to dharma , 101–104 , 121–122 Dro ṇ aparvan (The Book of Droṇ a) , 122 n
dice game and , 96–97 Drupada , 13
inevitability of suff ering and , 32 duḥkha . see suff ering
256 Index
Duḥś ā sana , 13 , 14 , 16 , 97 Eliade, Mircea , 43
Duryodhana , 12–19 p assim , 25 , 199 emotion
as agent of suff ering , 81 , 83 , 89 , 97 aestheticized (s ee aestheticized
blame of , 110 , 112 , 125 , 127 , 143 emotion )
death of , 129 , 144 dice game and , 89
despair of , 81 over death , 207–208
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s lament and , 109–115 , 161 responding to suff ering and , 34
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s wisdom and , 125 responding to time and , 175
dice game and , 13 , 7 4–105 p assim encyclopedic drive of the M ah ā bh ā rata ,
Draupadī ’s question to Yudhiṣ ṭ hira 21–22 , 28
and , 92 endeavor . see human endeavor
emotion and , 89 (puru ṣ ak ā ra)
envy of , 81 , 95 envy , 33 , 81 , 84 , 95
fate and , 183–184 estrangement . s ee proximity/estrange-
greed of , 95 ment of audience
Indra and , 136–138 , 138n –139 n ethics
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 203 , 204 of audience , 6–7
mind of , 79–85 dharma and , 35 , 49 , 103–104
mockery of , 75 purpose of the M ah ā bh ā rata and , 61
proximity/estrangement of audience refi guration of audience and , 32–33
and , 79–85 renunciation , 38–40
response to grief and , 41 ritual , 38
revenge of , 76 , 81 suff ering and , 49 , 224
as victim of suff ering , 80–81 , 80n , 89 Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and , 94
vision of , 75 , 84 see also morality ; narrative ethics
warfare and , 46 Euro-American view of the M ah ā bh ā rata ,
wickedness of , 117 20 , 150–151 , 189–190
world ages and , 154–155 evil , 117
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s grand hall and , 75 , 80 , exertion . See human endeavor
80 n , 84 , 203 (puru ṣ ak ā ra)
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s great journey and , 210 , 213 exile of the P ā ṇ ḍ avas , 77
Dv ā para yuga , 149–156 passim expectations of audience , 60
The Eye (Locana) (Abhinavagupta) , 52
Earth . see Indra (deity) eyesight of insight ( prajñ ā cak ṣ us) ,
Eco, Umberto , 62–64 110–111 , 131 , 141
“Edifying Puzzlement: Ṛ g Veda 10.129 see also insight
and the uses of Enigma”
(Brereton) , 71 Falk, Nancy , 97 , 97n
eff ort, book of . s ee The Book of the Eff ort family, protection by , 97–100
(Udyogaparvan) fatalism . s ee fate (daiva, di ṣ ṭ a )
egoism , 57 , 67–68 fate ( daiva, diṣ ṭ a) , 49 , 76 , 85–86 , 86n ,
elders, silence of , 74–75 , 76–77 , 97–100 90–91 , 93
Index 257
as antidote to grief , 136–138 , 138n – frame-switching , 128–131
139 n freedom of action , 22
birth-death-rebirth cycle and , 45
blame and , 112–113 , 125 , 127–128 , 133 gambling
conceptual categories and , 31 Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s opinion of , 76
doctrine of time and , 160–161 , 161n legality of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s wager while ,
freedom of action and , 22 100–101
God and , 181–182 Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and , 91 , 92 , 100–101 , 183 ,
human endeavor and , 180–189 183 n
inevitability of suff ering and , 32 see also dice game
Kaurava defeat and , 110–111 game of dice . s ee dice game
terminology for , 181–183 , 182n G ā ndh ā rī , 12 , 17 , 18
time and , 181 , 185–186 , 186n as advisor against grief , 144
fi gure of speech ( ala ṇ k ā ra) , 53–54 K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 203
Fitzgerald, James , 38–40 lament of , 143–145 , 159
foreseeing . see fate (daiva, di ṣ ṭ a ) response to grief and , 41 , 142–145
The Book of the Forest , 90 violation of Draupadī and , 86
karma in , 191–195 Ga ṇ eśa, Lord of Obstacles , 22–23
world ages in , 151–153 genre of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 25 , 114
form Gerow, Edwin , 57
of Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra’s lament , 114 Gethin, Rupert , 44
opposition between content and , 59 , Glass, Philip , 29
96–97 , 205–216 p assim , 206 n God/deities
in which Dharma appears , 207–210 , conceptual categories and , 31
207 n fate and , 181–182
in which K ṛ ṣ ṇa appears , 201 terminology for , 182 , 182n
in which time appears , 146–147 , 146n , see also theodicy of the Mah ā bhā rata ;
148 n individual deity names, e.g . K ṛ ṣ ṇ a
Four Noble Truths , 44 González-Reimann, Luis , 156
The Fragility of Goodness (Nussbaum) , grand hall of Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira , 75 , 80 , 80n ,
66 84 , 203
frame stories , 23–25 , 24n , 50 The Book of the Great Departure , 206
in the battle books , 122 , 127–131 the great journey ( mah ā prasthā nika) ,
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s lament and , 109 207 , 207 n
direct address formula and , 167–171 greed , 84 , 95
manipulation of time in , 164–176 Green, Ronald , 179
placement of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s lament grief , 129
and , 114–115 advisor against (s ee advisor against
Ugraśravas-Śaunaka frame , 109 , 114 , grief )
123 , 165 arguments against (s ee arguments
Vaiśa ṃ p ā yana-Janamejaya frame , 114 , against grief )
123 , 165 , 168–169 dharma and , 39–40
258 Index
grief (continued) identifi cation
as emotional response , 34 , 34n with aestheticized emotion , 59 , 60
fate as antidote to , 136–138 , 138n –139n literary theory and , 71–72
mind and , 33 , 40–43 , 41n ignorance . s ee mind ; wisdom
of others , 144–145 “The Iliad, Poem of Might” (Weil) , 67
quality of mind and , 33 illusion, use of in Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s grand
response to , 41–42 , 142–145 hall , 75 , 80 , 80 n , 84
time and , 113 , 161 implicit literary theory . s ee literary
truth as antidote to , 133 theory ; Sanskrit literary theory
wisdom as antidote to , 134–135 , 161 (ala ṇ k ā raś ā stra)
of Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira , 209 incarnation ( avat ā ra) , K ṛ ṣ ṇ a as , 154 ,
200 , 200 n
Hanum ā n , 151–153 incarnations of time , 146–147 , 146n , 148 n
happiness, d harma and , 22 Indian literature, self-refl exive nature
heaven , 206 of , 50
as conceptual category , 31 , 214 , 218–219 Indian religious discourse , 44
the great journey and , 209–215 indiff erence to wordly concerns
renunciation movements and , 38–39 (vair ā gya) , 57 , 67–68
suff ering and , 49 Indo-European approach to the
warfare and , 46 Mah ā bh ā rata , 20–21 , 21 n , 150–151
The Book of the Ascent to Heaven , 206 Indra (deity) , 12 , 19 , 20 , 136–138 ,
hell , 31 , 211–215 , 218–219 138 n –139 n , 204–205
The Book of the Stay in the Forest Hermit- Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and , 209–210 , 212–213
age , 144 , 202 Ingalls, Daniel H. H. , 59 , 62
Hill, Peter , 182 , 189 , 193 insight
Hiltebeitel, Alf , 9 , 20 , 37 , 156 , 165 action and , 106 , 110–111 , 117–122 , 131 , 141
Rethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata , 5 eyesight of , 110–111 , 131 , 141
Hinduism , 36–38 , 46–47 , 46n see also blindness ; perception ; vision
history of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 8–10 intelligence . s ee mind ; wisdom (buddhi)
The Book of the Horse Sacrifi ce , 200 interiorization , 29n
human agency , 22 , 124 , 126 , 128 , 140 Iser, Wolfgang , 62–63 , 65
human endeavor ( puru ṣ ak ā ra) , 49 Īśvarakṛ ṣ ṇ a , 44
birth-death-rebirth cycle , 196
conceptual categories and , 31 jackals motif , 174
defi ned , 182 Jainism , 45
fate and , 124 , 180–189 Janamejaya , 24 , 25 , 77–78 , 123
karma and , 196 manipulation of time and , 165 , 167 ,
human form, Kṛ ṣ ṇ a in , 201 168–169
humiliation Jar ā , 19
of Draupadī , 97–100 , 97n Jaratkaru , 146n
of Duryodhana , 75 , 80 , 82 , 82n Jayadratha , 14
hungry jackals motif , 174 jealousy . s ee envy
Index 259
k ā la . see time (k ā la) as creator and destroyer of the
k ā lav ā da . see doctrine of time universe , 152–154
Kali yuga , 149–156 p assim death of , 150
Kalki, birth of , 153 dharma and , 28 , 201 , 203–204
karma in human form , 201
birth-death-rebirth cycle and , 45 Kali yuga and , 150
blame and , 133 , 135 , 143 as Lord of the Universe , 198–205
characterization and , 196–198 moral code of warriors and , 204–205
defi ned , 189 power of , 199–202
human endeavor and , 196 strength of , 117
suff ering and , 49 , 189–198 , 191n Subhadr ā ’s lament and , 158
theodicy and , 189–190 , 196 , 198 suff ering and , 49
time and , 195 Utta ṅ ka and , 200–202
Kar ṇ a , 11–18 p assim , 98 , 122 n warfare and , 202–205
on dharma , 218 world ages and , 150–155
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 204 K ṛ ta yuga , 149–156 passim
world ages and , 154 k ṣ atriya dharma , 18 , 46 , 154–155 ,
The Book of Kar ṇ a (Kar ṇ aparvan) , 122 n 204–205
Kar ṇ aparvan (The Book of Karṇ a) , 122 n Kuntī , 11–20 passim
Karve, Irawati , 215
the Kauravas , 10–20 , 22 , 24 , 26 lament
audience’s view of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira and , 7 0 of Dh ṛ tarā ṣ ṭ ra , 108 , 109–115 , 111 n ,
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra and , 120 126–128 , 132–133
dice game and , 74–105 p assim doctrine of time and , 158
fate and , 110–111 placement of , 113–115
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 200–202 , 203 doctrine of time and , 157–159
response to grief and , 42 of G ā ndhā rī , 143–145 , 159
Sa ṃ jaya’s blame of , 112–113 of Subhadrā , 158–159
time and , 201 subjectivity of , 175
see also individual members, e.g . The Laws of Manu , 37
Duryodhana legality of Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s wager , 100–101
Kīcaka , 14 legislative/narrative divide, d harma and ,
kingship, world ages and , 155 37–38
Kloetzli, Randy , 165 length of the Mah ā bh ā rata , 21
knots within the M ahā bh ā rata , 22–23 liberation from birth-death-rebirth
K ṛ pa , 12 , 101 cycle , 45
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a , 13–20 p assim , 136 , 182 , 182 n life
accountability of , 200–201 quality of , 151
as advisor against grief , 33 , 41 stages of , 37
as avat ā ra , 154 , 200 , 200n transitory nature of (s ee transience )
blame of , 143 , 144 Light on Suggestion (Dhvany ā loka)
characterization of , 198–205 (Ānandavardhana) , 51–52, 55 , 56
260 Index
listening to the M ah ā bh ā rata , 25 , 108 , marriage contest ( svaya ṃ vara) , 13 , 110
123 , 125 , 128 the massacre narratives
see also sensitive reader/spectator stretching time and , 171–172 ,
(sah ṛ daya) 171 n
literal meaning v ersus suggestion , 52 world ages and , 153–154
literary devices . s ee narrative strategies Matilal, B. K. , 43 , 215
literary features of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 20–27 Maya , 80 , 84
see also narrative strategies McCrea, Lawrence , 128
literary theory McGrath, Kevin , 74
of Abhinavagupta (s ee meaning in literature , 52–55
Abhinavagupta ) meaning-without-saying (d hva ni) . see
aestheticized emotion and , 54–55 suggestion
aesthetics of suff ering and , 7 , 47 , 50–73 mental state . s ee clarity of mind ;
of Ānandavardhana (s ee confusion of mind ; mind
Ānandavardhana ) meta-feeling , 60
of the Mah ā bhā rata , 50–61 , 69–73 meta-refl ecting , 60
proximity/estrangement of audience mind
and , 71–72 clarity of , 67 , 78 , 85–95 p assim , 104
literature confusion of , 78 , 87–95 p assim
Indian, self-refl exive nature of , 50 desire and , 104
Mah ā bh ā rata as , 4–6 , 4n of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra , 111
meaning in , 52–55 the dice game and , 77–97 p assim
Locana (The Eye) (Abhinavagupta) , 52 of Duryodhana , 79–85
location of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s lament , 113–115 grief and , 40–43 , 41 n
Lord of the Creatures (Prajā pati) , 192 narrative ethics and , 67–69
Lord of the Universe (Kṛ ṣ ṇ a) , 198–205 quality of , 33 , 84
loss of recognition motif , 172–173 restraint and , 34
suff ering and , 33 , 43
MacIntyre, Alasdair , 66 see also wisdom
madness . see confusion of mind Minkowski, Christopher , 23 , 25
M ā drī , 11 , 12 mockery . see ridicule
The Mah ā bhā rata Patriline (Brodbeck) , 6 model author/model reader , 63–64
mah ā prasthā nika (the great journey) , moral blindness . s ee blindness ; insight ;
207 , 207 n vision
M ā nava Dharma Śā stra (The Laws of moral code of warriors , 18 , 46 , 154–155,
Manu) , 37 204–205
manipulation of time , 25 , 108 , 114 , morality
129–131 , 164–176 complexities of , 22
The Laws of Manu , 37 tragic literature and , 66–69
M ā rka ṇ ḍ eya , 14 Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and, 94
on karma , 191–196 see also ethics
on the world ages , 152–153 motifs, repetition of , 172–174
Index 261
motivating change in the audience , 96–97 time and , 49 , 108 , 129–131 , 164–176
moving beyond suff ering , 34 , 61 use of questions to drive , 25
Murdoch, Iris , 66 , 67–69 , 72 N ā ṭ yaś ā stra , 54
negative role models , 73 , 142
Nakula , 12 , 17 , 19 The Book of the Night Massacre
death of , 207 (Sauptikaparvan) , 16 , 26 , 42 , 122n
ridicule of Duryodhana by , 80 noninjury ( ahi ṃ s ā ) , renunciation
strength of , 117 , 118 movements and, 38–39
Story of Nala , 50 nonviolence , 151–152 , 152n , 167
N ā rada , 112 northern recension of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 9
the great journey and , 209 n ṛ śamsya (cruelty) , 39 , 83
on K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s role in war , 202 Nussbaum, Martha , 65–66
narration by , 125 The Fragility of Goodness , 66
N ā r ā ya ṇ a . s ee K ṛ ṣ ṇ a
narrative element ( vastu) , 53 , 72–73 Olivelle, Patrick , 36
narrative ethics , 65–69 omens motif , 173–174
aesthetics of suff ering and , 7 , 47 , 51 opposition between form and content ,
tragic literature and , 66–69 59 , 96–97 , 205–216 passim , 206n
see also ethics oral compositions , 9
narrative strategies, 5 , 23–25 Ordainer . see fate (daiva, di ṣ ṭ a)
aesthetics of suff ering and , 7 , 27 , orientation . s ee disorienting/reorienting
28–29 , 47 audience
arguments against grief and , 132–140 outcome of the battle books , 129–130
assigning blame and , 128–131 ownership , 100–101
backshadowing as , 128–131
character depictions and , 77–105 p assim the P ā ṇ ḍ avas , 10–20 , 22 , 24
conceptual categories and , 31 as agents of suff ering , 75 , 80 , 82 , 82n
conclusion of the central story and , dice game and , 74–105 p assim , 127
205–217 passim , 206 n exile of , 77
confronting suff ering and , 33 the great journey of , 207–214 p assim ,
defi ned , 28–29 , 59 207 n
depiction of Duryodhana and , 84 K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 199 , 200–202 , 204
direct address formula and , 167–171 power of , 118
frame stories as , 114 response to grief and , 35 , 42 , 144
model reader and , 63–64 ridicule of Duryodhana by , 75 , 80 ,
proximity/estrangment and , 77–105 82 , 82 n
passim , 108 , 141–143 strength of , 111 , 117–118 , 158
rupture as , 32 , 100–104 , 164 , 175 , 206 Subhadr ā ’s lament and , 158–159
Sa ṃ jaya’s narration of the battle , virtue of , 106 , 111 , 117
122–140 world ages and , 151–153
suggestion and , 59–60 see also individual members, e.g .
theodicy and , 178–217 p assim Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira
262 Index
P ā ṇ ḍ u , 11 , 12 , 20 problems raised by the M ah ā bh ā rata , 22
paradox of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra , 106 , 121 , 131 protection, lack of , 97–100
Parakṣ it, Aśvatthā man’s curse of , 110 , proximity/estrangement of audience ,
110 n 205–216 passim , 206 n
Patañjali , 43–44 aestheticized emotion and , 59 , 60
The Book of Peace , 153 , 162 from dharma , 101–104
peace negotiations , 153 , 162 dice game and , 77–105 p assim
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s role in , 116–122 , 141 disorienting/reorienting audience
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s role in , 199 , 203 and , 83–84
Sa ṃ jaya and , 117–118 , 120–121 literary theory and , 71–72
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira and , 120 as narrative strategy , 77–105 p assim ,
perception , 90 , 106 108 , 141–143
see also insight Pur ā ṇ ic approach to the M ah ā bhā rata ,
perfection, dharma and , 22 21 n
permanent feeling ( sth ā yībh ā va) , 54 purpose of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 61
personal conscience, d harma and , 37 puru ṣ ak ā ra . see human endeavor
personal suff ering , 31 , 34 , 144–145
dharma and , 39–40 quality of mind , 33 , 84
doctrine of time and , 162 questions within the M ah ā bh ā rata , 22
narrative ethics and , 68–69 about the nature of d harma ,
see also universal suff ering (s arvaṃ 121–122
duḥkham ) Draupadī ’s question to Yudhiṣ ṭ hira ,
phalaśruti -s (self-refl exive passages) , 50 76 , 92–93 , 97–98 , 100
physical suff ering , 43 use of, to further story , 24 , 25
placement of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s lament , see also riddle-question design of the
113–115 Mah ā bhā rata
poetic features , 5
point of view, of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra , 111 R ā ma , 14 , 151
Poona text , 10 Ramanujan, A. K. , 3 , 4 , 78
positive role models , 142–145 “Where Mirrors Are Windows:
power Toward An Anthology of
of agency , 22 , 126 , 128 Refl ections,” 50
desire for , 95 R ā m ā ya ṇ a , 8 , 14 , 28 , 52 , 54 , 56
of K ṛ ṣ ṇ a , 199–202 rasa . see aestheticized emotion
of the Pā ṇ ḍ avas , 118 reader-response theory , 7 , 47 , 51 , 61–65
Praj ā pati (Lord of the Creatures) , 192 reader/spectator . s ee sensitive reader/
prajñ ā cak ṣ us (eyesight of insight) , spectator
110–111 , 131 , 141 rebirth . see birth-death-rebirth cycle
Prakrit literature , 52 recensions of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 9–10
Pramadvarā , 166 recognition motif , 172–173
Pramati , 167 redactions of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 9–10
pride, death and , 207 refi guration of audience , 32–33 , 32n
Index 263
refl ection , 43 , 50 , 60 , 95 , 96 , 140 ridicule
religion of Draupadī , 97–100 , 97n
defi nition of , 44 of Duryodhana , 75 , 80 , 82 , 82n
Hanum ā n on , 151 ritual ethics , 38
study of , 46–47 , 46n river of blood motif , 173
renunciation movements , 38–40 role models , 73 , 142–145
reorientation . s ee disorienting/reorient- Ross, Alex , 29
ing audience royal splendor ( śrī) , 81 , 84
repetition of motifs , 172–174 rupture as narrative strategy , 32 ,
restraint, suff ering and , 34 , 34n , 135 100–104 , 164 , 175 , 206
Rethinking the Mah ā bh ā rata Ruru , 166–167
(Hiltebeitel) , 5
revelation of theodicy of the Sahadeva , 12 , 17 , 19
Mah ā bh ā rata , 206 death of , 207
revenge of Duryodhana , 76 , 81 ridicule of Duryodhana by , 80
reward, dharma and , 39–40 strength of , 117 , 118
Ṛ gveda hymn , 5 sah ṛ daya . see sensitive reader/spectator
Ricoeur, Paul , 66 Śakuni , 13 , 183 , 183n
Time and Narrative , 147 as instigator of the dice game , 76 , 79 , 85
riddle-question design of the use of tricks by , 92
Mah ā bh ā rata , 22–23 , 35 , 78 , as witness to suff ering , 81
95 , 115 , 115 n , 127 , 129–131 , Śalya , 122 n , 129 , 154 , 204
148–156 Śalyaparvan . see The Book of Śalya
birth-death-rebirth cycle and , 45–46 (Śalyaparvan)
conclusion of the central story and , The Book of Śalya (Śalyaparvan) . see The
205–217 , 206 n Book of Śalya (Śalyaparvan)
dharma and , 101–104 , 203–205 Sa ṃ jaya , 15 , 17 , 18 , 25 , 88
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s role in the dice game action and consequence and , 119–120
and , 85–86 as advisor against grief , 35 , 41 , 107 ,
estrangement from d harma and , 112–113 , 132–134 , 139–140 , 161
101–104 blindness and , 110 , 110n
fate and , 180–189 , 182n characterization of , 196–198
human endeavor and , 180–189 Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s lament and , 109–115 ,
karma and , 189–198 158 , 161
literary theory and , 71 doctrine of time and , 161
theodicy and , 178–217 p assim inconsistent statements of , 128
world ages and , 148–156 instructions from Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a to ,
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s acceptance of the dice 117–118
game and , 90–91 instructions to Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ r a from , 125
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira’s silence and, 92–93 K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 155 , 199
see also questions within the narration of the battle by , 122–140
Mah ā bh ā rata peace negotiations and , 117–118 , 120–121
264 Index
S ā ṃ khya , 44 sequential time , 108
sa ṃ s ā ra . see birth-death-rebirth cycle manipulation of , 164–176
Sanskrit literary theory ( ala ṇ k ā raś ā stra) movement within , 114
of Abhinavagupta (s ee Abhinavagupta ) Shulman, David , 21 , 22 , 26 , 74 , 146 ,
aestheticized emotion and , 54–55 165 , 215 , 218
aesthetics of suff ering and , 7 , 47 , sight . see blindness ; insight ; vision
51–64 Śikha ṇ ḍ in , 126
of Ānandavardhana (s ee silence
Ānandavardhana ) of Bh ā rata elders , 74–75 , 76–77
on ethical transformation , 65 of Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira , 92–93 , 97–100
meaning and , 52–55 Sinha, J. P. , 106
Sanskrit terms for suff ering , 40 Sīt ā , 14 , 151
ś ā ntarasa . see tranquility situational context , 29–31 , 108
sarva ṃ duḥkham . see universal suff ering Śiva, as creator and destroyer of the
(sarvaṃ duḥkham) universe , 155
S ā tyaki, 204 size of the Mahā bh ā rata , 21
Śaunaka , 24 , 165–167 Smith, John , 11
Sauptikaparvan (The Book of the Night social classes ( var ṇ as) , 37 , 151 , 152
Massacre) , 16 , 26 , 42 , 122n Sophocles , 66
scattered weapons motif , 174 southern recension of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 9
seeing . see blindness ; insight ; vision spectator . see sensitive reader/spectator
self-mastery, suff ering and , 34 , 34n splendor, royal ( śrī) , 81 , 84
self-pity, as emotional response , 34 , 34n śrī (royal splendor) , 81 , 84
self-refl exive nature of Indian literature . stages of life ( ā śramas) , 37
see refl ection state of mind . s ee mind
Senajit , 162 The Book of the Stay in the Forest
sensitive reader/spectator ( sahṛ daya) , 7 , 47 Hermitage , 144 , 202
aesthetics of suff ering and , 7 , 27–29 , sth ā yībhā va (permanent feeling) , 54
59 , 60 stoicism, suff ering and , 34 , 34n
conceptual categories and , 31 Story of Nala , 50
conclusion of the central story and , story summary of the M ah ā bh ā rata ,
205–217 passim , 206 n 10–20 , 25
confronting suff ering and , 33 storytelling style of the M ahā bh ā rata , 25–27
dangers of reading the M ah ā bh ā rata strength
and , 26–27 of K ṛ ṣ ṇ a , 117
dice game and , 96–97 of the P ā ṇ ḍ avas , 111 , 117–118 , 158
inevitability of suff ering and , 32 stretching time , 164 , 171–174
literary theory and , 71–72 Strīparvan (The Book of the Women) , 26 ,
model reader and , 63–64 48 , 144–145 , 191 , 195–196
suggestion and , 55 Subhadr ā , lament of , 158–159
see also audience ; reader-response subtle (sūkṣ ma) nature of dharma , 3–4 ,
theory 75 , 101
Index 265
suff ering (duḥkha) , 34 , 35 , 142–145 suicide
aesthetics of (s ee aesthetics of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s threat of , 135
suff ering ) Duryodhana’s threat of , 83 , 86
before and after the dice game , 77 the great journey and , 207 , 207n
agent of (s ee agent of suff ering ) sūk ṣ ma (subtle nature of d harma ) , 3–4 ,
cause of , 78 , 95 , 115, 115n , 127 , 129–131 , 75 , 101
149–156 , 205–216 p assim summary of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 10–20 , 25
concept of , 7 , 27–28 Sūrya (deity) , 11 , 14
confronting , 33 suspense in the M ah ā bh ā rata , 78
dharma and , 7 , 22 , 35–40 , 49 , Sutton, Nicholas , 183
103–104 svaya ṃ vara (marriage contest) , 13 , 110
doctrine of time and , 162 synchronic reading , 9n
ethics and , 224 system of world ages . s ee world ages
heaven and , 49 (yugas)
inevitability of , 32
karma and , 49 , 189–198 , 191n teleology of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 61
K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and, 49 temporal manipulation . s ee time
moving beyond , 34 , 61 textualized audience , 23
narrative ethics and , 66–69 theodicy of the M ah ā bh ā rata , 49
personal (s ee personal suff ering ) fate and , 180–189
physical versus mental , 43 human endeavor and , 180–189
proximity/estrangement of audience karma and , 189–190 , 196 , 198
and , 83 K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 198–205
refl exive versus transitive , 43 narrative strategies and , 178–217
restraint and , 34 , 34n , 135 passim
Sanskrit terms for , 40 problem of, defi ned , 179
study of religion and , 46–47 , revelation of , 206
46 n see also God/deities ; i ndividual deity
universal (s ee universal suff ering names, e.g . K ṛ ṣ ṇ a
( sarva ṃ duḥkham ) ) Time and Narrative (Ricoeur) , 147
victim of (s ee victim of suff ering ) time (k ā la) , 146–177 , 201
witness to (s ee witness to suff ering ) backshadowing and , 128–131
suggestion (d hvani ) , 47 , 50–73 , 105 blame and , 112–113 , 125–126 , 134–135 ,
aesthetics of suff ering and , 59–60 149
conclusion of the central story and , collapsing , 164 , 167–171
205–217 passim , 206 n conceptual categories and , 31
defi ned , 52 consequential , 108 , 129–131
literal meaning v ersus , 52 consuming , 164–166
narrative strategy and , 59–60 cosmological , 107–108 , 108n , 129–131
saying v ersus doing and , 70–71 decision-making and , 161
sensitive reader and , 55 descriptive passages and , 171–172
types of , 53–54 despair and , 161
266 Index
time (kāla) (continued) of design in Yudhiṣ ṭ hira’s grand hall ,
in the dicing scene , 170–171 75 , 80 , 80 n , 84
dismissing , 164 , 166–167 during the dice game , 76 , 91 , 92
doctrine of (s ee doctrine of time truth
(k ā lav ā da) ) as antidote to grief , 133
fate and , 160–161 , 161n , 181 , 185–186 , narrative and , 72–73
186n twilight of world ages ( yugas) , 149
freedom of action and , 22 the twins (Nakula and Sahadeva)
grief and , 113 , 161 ridicule of Duryodhana by , 80
ignorance about the nature of , 108 strength of , 117 , 118
incarnations of , 146–147 , 146n , 148n the two Aśvins (deities) , 12
inevitability of suff ering and , 32
karma and , 195 Udyogaparvan . see T he Book of the Eff ort
manipulation of , 25 , 108 , 114 , 129–131 , (Udyogaparvan)
164–176 Ugraśravas , 24
narrative strategies and , 49 , 129–131 , on audience experience , 146
164–176 despair and , 35
peace negotiations and , 121 frame stories and , 109 , 114 , 123
sequential , 108 , 164–176 manipulation of time in , 165–166 ,
stretching , 164 , 171–174 168–169 , 169n
of telling of war , 131 on K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s role in war , 202
theories of , 48–49 on world ages , 154
types of , 107–108 underlying emotion
of war , 131 , 154 aestheticized emotion v ersus , 54
wheel of , 156–163 of tranquility , 57 , 57n
see also world ages ( yugas) universal suff ering (s arva ṃ duḥkham ) ,
tragic literature , 66–69 31 , 34 , 75 , 144–145
tranquility (śā ntarasa) , 54 , 105 dharma and , 39–40
desire and , 56 doctrine of time and , 162
doctrine of time and , 163 grief and , 113
in the Mah ā bhā rata , 56–59 karma and , 195
suff ering and , 34 , 34n narrative ethics and , 68–69
underlying emotion of , 57 , 57n origin of , 45–46
transience , 33 , 45 , 136–138 religious thought on , 44–45
aesthetics of suff ering and , 61 see also personal suff ering
Ānandavardhana on , 57 , 61 Utta ṅ ka , 200–202
doctrine of time and , 157–163 Uttar ā , Aśvatthā man’s curse and , 110n
transitive suff ering , 43
transmigration , 45 vair ā gya (indiff erence to wordly
Tret ā yuga , 149–156 p assim concerns) , 57 , 67–68
tricks Vaiśa ṃ pā yana , 24 , 77–78
death of Abhimanyu and , 158–159 death of Draupadī and , 207
Index 267
frame stories and , 114 , 123 , 147 of Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira , 90–91 , 94
manipulation of time in , 165 , see also blindness ; insight
168–169 Vi ṣ ṇ u (deity) , 136 , 182 , 182n , 200 , 200 n
the great journey and , 207–209 see also Kṛ ṣ ṇa
V ā lmīki , 28 the V ṛ ṣ ṇ is , 18 , 19
van Buitenen, J. A. B. , 22 , 122 , 149 Vy ā sa , 9–24 p assim , 11 n
var ṇ as (social classes) , 37 , 151 , 152 as advisor against grief , 58 , 135–140 ,
Vassilkov, Yaroslav , 156 , 177 138 n –139 n , 162–163
vastu (narrative element) , 53 , 72–73 the divine eye and , 124
Vasudeva , 13 doctrine of time and , 162–163
V ā yu (deity) , 12
Veda, world ages and , 151 warfare
Vedic texts , 8–9 , 36 arguments against grief after , 131–140
limitations of , 102–103 beauty of battle motif and , 173
suff ering in , 44 cause of , 95 , 115 , 115n , 127 , 148–149 ,
victim of suff ering , 30 , 48 202–205
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra as , 107 , 122–140 failure to prevent , 118
Draupadī as , 97–100 K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s role in , 202–205
Duryodhana as , 80–81 , 80n moral code of , 18 , 46 , 154–155 , 204–205
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira as , 89–94 peace negotiations and , 116–122
Vidura , 11–18 passim telling of , 131
as advisor against grief , 42 , 107 , time of , 131 , 154
134–135 , 139–140 world ages and , 154–155
on dharma , 118–122 warrior class , 18 , 46 , 154–155 , 204–205
dice game and , 76 , 83–91 p assim weapons motif , 174
on karma , 195–196 Weber, Max , 179 , 189–190
violation of Draupadī and , 86 weight of affl iction , 77
violation of Draupadī , 77 , 83–100 p assim Weil, Simone , 66 , 67–69 , 72
violence , 151–152 , 152n , 167 “The Iliad, Poem of Might,” 67
violent nature of the M ah ā bh ā rata , wheel of time , 156–163
25–27 “Where Mirrors Are Windows: Toward
Vir ā ṭ a , 14 An Anthology of Refl ections”
virtue , 167 (Ramanujan) , 50
dharma and , 153 wickedness of Duryodhana , 117
of Draupadī , 97 wisdom (buddhi)
Hanum ā n on , 151–152 , 153 about the nature of time , 108
of the P ā ṇ ḍ avas , 106 , 111 , 117 as antidote to grief , 134–135 , 161
vision , 95 , 106–145 p assim confronting suff ering and , 33
of the audience , 96–97 of Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra , 125
the divine eye and , 124 fate and , 187
of Duryodhana , 75 , 84 karma and , 192
mistakes in seeing and , 75 , 84 see also mind
268 Index
witness to suff ering , 30 , 99 Draupadī ’s question to , 76 , 92–93 ,
Bh ā rata elders as , 74–75 97–98 , 100
Dh ṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra as , 81 fate and , 90–91 , 186–188
Śakuni as , 81 gambling and , 91 , 92 , 183 , 183n
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira as , 89–94 grand hall of , 75 , 80 , 80n , 84 , 203
Woman as Fire, Woman as Sage the great journey of , 207–214 , 207n
(Dhand), 6 greed of , 95
The Book of the Women (Strīparvan) , 26 , Indra and , 209–210 , 212–213
48 , 144–145 , 191 , 195–196 karma and , 191–195
Woods, Julian , 195 K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 199 , 202–203 , 204
world ages ( yugas) , 48–49 , 148–156 , M ā rkaṇ ḍ eya and , 152–153
163–164 mind of , 91–93
dawn of , 1 49 as a moral guide , 94
death of K ṛ ṣ ṇ a and , 150 , 154 news of Dhṛ tar ā ṣ ṭ ra’s death and , 125
defi ned , 149–150 peace negotiations and , 120
duration of , 149–150 , 152 proximity/estrangment and ,
end of , 153–154 89–94
twilight of , 149 response to grief and , 33 , 42 , 43 , 142 ,
209
yoga/renunciation-ethics , 38–40 royal splendor of , 81 , 84
Yoga Sūtra , 43 silence of , 92–93 , 97–100
Yudhi ṣ ṭ hira , 12–20 passim Story of Nala and , 50
acceptance of the dice game by , 76 time and , 147
anger of , 95 , 117 as victim of suff ering , 89–94
audience’s view of , 70–71 violation of Draupadī and , 90
blame and , 143 , 143n vision of , 90–91 , 94
character types and , 30 warfare and , 46
dharma and , 28 , 38 , 90 , 153 , 218–224 as witness to suff ering , 89–94
Dharma and , 209–214 p assim yugas . see world ages (yugas)
dice game and , 13–14 , 74–105 p assim
dog character and , 207–210 , 207n Zaehner, R. C. , 182
