Th e Nay Science

Th e Nay Science
A History of German Indology
! !
"
Vishwa Adluri
and
Joydeep Bagchee
!
!
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide.
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With offi ces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Th ailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by
Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
© Oxford University Press 2014
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior
permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law,
by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction rights organization.
Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the
Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Adluri, Vishwa.
Th e nay science : a history of German Indology / Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–0–19–993136–1 (pbk. : alk. paper)—ISBN 978–0–19–993134–7 (hardcover : alk. paper)
1. Hindu philosophy—Study and teaching—Germany—History—18th century. 2. Hindu
philosophy—Study and teaching—Germany—History—19th century. 3. Mahabharata—Criticism,
interpretation, etc. 4. Bhagavadgita—Criticism, interpretation, etc. I. Bagchee,
Joydeep. II. Title.
BL1108.7.G3A37 2013
294.5(cid:9)9210460943—dc23
2013012873
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper
To all mothers
Once upon a time I studied theology . . . with the greatest interest,
and then found I did not have the faith required for the pulpit, and
thereupon transferred over to history
Jacob Burckhardt, “Letter to Friedrich von Preen, 7 July 1878.”
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments ix
Prologue xi
Introduction 1
A History of German Indology 1
Th e History of German Indology as a History of Method 7
Th e Origins of the Historical-Critical Method in the Neo-Protestantism
of the Eighteenth Century 1 1
Defi ning the Scope of Inquiry 1 9
Plan of Study 25
1. Th e Search for an Urepos 30
Introduction 30
Th e First Phase of German Gītā Reception 31
Th e Birth of German Mahābhārata Studies 40
Ideas of Heroic Epic 48
Th e Indo-Germanic Epic 53
Th e Birth of Modern Mahābhārata Studies 6 5
Holtzmann’s Legacy to Gītā Studies 7 1
2. Th e Search for German Identity 73
Introduction 73
Th e Genesis of Holtzmann’s Mahābhārata 7 5
Polemics against the Brahmans 7 7
Ideas of Critical Reconstruction 79
Ideas of Epic Composition 83
Ideas of Religious Confl ict 86
Ideas of Textual Corruption 91
Ideas of Historical Distortion 98
Ideas of Enlightened Religion 103
Ideas of Religious Persecution 108
Ideas of Religious Corruption 112
Ideas of Racial Contamination 1 21
Evaluating Holtzmann’s Textual Project 1 25
Mahābhārata Criticism after Holtzmann 140
A Problem of Reception 149
viii CONTENTS
3. Th e Search for the Original Gītā 156
Introduction 156
Th e Gītā Reemerges 157
Th e Pantheistic Gītā of Adolf Holtzmann 1 63
Pantheism and the Bhagavadgītā 171
Th e Th eistic Gītā of Richard Garbe 176
Ideas of Bhāgavata Religion 1 91
Th e Epic Gītā of Hermann Jacobi 200
Defending Philosophical Pantheism 207
Th e K (cid:17) (cid:18) (cid:16)a Gītā of Hermann Oldenberg 217
Resistances to Modernity 224
A Revelation and a Mystery 2 31
Th e Trinitarian Gītā of Rudolf Otto 242
God Reveals Himself 250
An Auto-Didact among Auto-Didacts 259
Th e Āryan Gītā of Jakob Wilhelm Hauer 2 67
By Reason of Race 274
Th e Method Becomes Autonomous 277
Th e Prejudices Are Institutionalized 296
An Essay in Understanding? 297
4. Th e Search for a Universal Method 314
Introduction 314
Th e Scientization of Protestant Th eology in the Critical Method 315
Th e Secularization of Protestant Th eology in the Study of the
History of Religions 324
Th e Institutionalization of Protestant Th eology in Indology 347
5. Problems with the Critical Method 356
Introduction 356
Steps toward a Scientifi c Indology 358
Steps toward a Positivist Philology 365
Construing the (Natural) Scientifi c Character of Philology 372
Historicism and the Seductions of Positive Sociology 381
Empiricism and the Search for General Propositions 393
Criticisms of the Positivistic Notion of Truth 403
Kant’s Critical Turn and the Signifi cance of Apriorism 410
Rethinking the Scientifi c Character of the Human Sciences 413
Conclusion: Gandhi on the Gītā 433
Bibliography 447
Index 473
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Vishnu S. Sukthankar, Shripad K. Belvalkar, Franklin Edgerton, and other scholars
at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute laid the foundation for this book with
the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata. Th is book is dedicated to their scholarship.
Th ere are many people who infl uenced the writing of this book. We would like to
gratefully acknowledge them here. First and foremost, we owe a debt to our teach-
ers Reiner Schürmann, Joan Stambaugh, Gail Soff er, and Arbogast Schmitt. Alf
Hiltebeitel and Madeleine Biardeau taught us to read the Mahābhārata thought-
fully. Arbogast Schmitt’s magisterial critique of modern rationality in Die Moderne
und Platon was a constant source of inspiration. We are indebted to Alf Hiltebeitel,
Graham Schweig, and Patrick Olivelle for reading this manuscript and off ering con-
structive criticism. We would like to acknow ledge the encouragement we received
from colleagues and friends Greg Bailey, Sushil Mittal, and Bruce Millen Sullivan,
and Sumit Guha. Th e enthusiastic support of Madhavi Kolhatkar, Wendy Doniger,
and Bob Goldman was especially crucial in the fi nal stages of this book. We are deeply
grateful to Carmen Hendershott at the New School for Social Research for her assis-
tance with the Reiner Schürmann Papers. Saroja Bhate, Neera Mishra, and many oth-
ers made it possible for us to present our work ā no bhadrā(cid:17) kratavo yantu viśvata (cid:17) . . . .
Th e fi nal form of this book owes much to the careful reading and comments of
Doug McGetchin and Brad Herling. Peter Park read an early draft, directed our atten-
tion to source materials, raised helpful questions, and inspired us to tighten up our
manuscript in a whole host of areas. Our families bravely bore us through years of
research, when we were practically incommunicado. We pay our respects to the mem-
ory of Indrasena and Suguna Adluri and to the memory of Sumati Bhandarkar, whose
love sustains this work. We thank Sandeep and Aruna Bagchee, whose love sustains
us even now. Joachim Eichner bore the brunt (and cost) of this painstaking study. Th e
book owes him a great deal. Gratitude is also due to Th omas Komarek for his patience
and support. Many wonderful family members and friends—Manfred and Milly
Eichner, Deepanshu Bagchee, Sudeep and Padmini Bagchee, Mijako Nierenköther, and
Christoph Boschan—showed their support in various ways. Satish Karandikar, Roman
Palitsky, Susan Ginsburg, Bob Buckland, and Sam Maclaine helped with various aspects
of the book. Rosemary Shojaie did an outstanding job copy editing the book; its fi nal
appearance is due in no small measure to her eff orts. We remember Marilyn Guarch,
who is surely watching over this book. Barbara Sproul and the Program in Religion
at Hunter College for their patience, understanding, and for the intellectual dialogue.
Finally, Cynthia Read, Senior Editor at Oxford University Press, deserves special recog-
nition for her patience and professionalism during this book’s long gestation.

PROLOGUE
Th e story of philology does not begin in Germany. Its prelude appears in a violent
encounter between a god and a maiden, in a story recounted by Plato. Th e Greek leg-
end concerns the story of Orithuia, the daughter of the Athenian king Erechtheus.
While playing on the banks of the river Ilisus with her friends, she is abducted by
Boreas, or the North Wind. Socrates and Phaedrus, out for a walk outside the city
walls, approach the river. Here is how the conversation between them unfolds:
PHAEDRUS: Tell me, Socrates, isn’t it from somewhere near this stretch of the Ilisus
that people say Boreas carried Orithuia away?
SOCRATES: So they say.
P HAEDRUS: Couldn’t this be the very spot? Th e stream is lovely, pure and clear, just
right for girls to be playing nearby.
SOCRATES: No, its two or three hundred yards farther downstream, where one crosses
to get to the district of Agra. I think there is even an altar to Boreas there.
P HAEDRUS: I hadn’t noticed it. But tell me, Socrates, in the name of Zeus, do
you really believe that that legend is true? (P haedrus 229a–c; Nehamas and
Woodruff trans.)
Since philology as the study of ancient accounts, mostly written, hangs on this ques-
tion, let us pay special attention to Socrates’ response.
S OCRATES: Actually, it would not be out of place for me to reject it, as our intellectu-
als do. I could then tell a clever story: I could claim that a gust of North Wind
blew her over the rocks where she was playing with Pharmaceia; and once she
was killed that way people said she had been carried off by Boreas—or was it,
perhaps, from Areopagus? Th e story is also told that she was carried away from
there instead. Now, Phaedrus, such explanations are amusing enough, but they
are a job for a man I cannot envy at all. He’d have to be far too ingenious, and
work too hard—mainly because after that he will have to go on and give a
rational account of the form of Hippocentaurs, and then of the Chimera; and
a whole fl ood of Gorgons and Pegasuses and other monsters, in large numbers
and absurd forms, will overwhelm him. Anyone who does not believe in them,
who wants to explain them away and make them plausible by means of some
sort of rough ingenuity, will need a great deal of time.1
1 . “Rough ingenuity” here should be understood as a method of historicization or posi-
tivising, as Socrates himself makes clear by his examples. Truth is thus reduced to method.
xii PROLOGUE
But I have no time for such things; and the reason, my friend, is this. I am still
unable, as the Delphic inscription orders, to know myself; and it really seems to me
ridiculous to look into other things before I have understood that. Th is is why I do
not concern myself with them. I accept what is generally believed, and, as I was say-
ing, I look not into them but into my own self: Am I a beast more complicated and
savage than Typhon, or am I a tamer, simpler animal with a share in a divine and
gentle nature? But look, my friend—while we were talking, haven’t we reached the
tree you were taking us to? ( Phaedrus 229c–230a)
Who is Phaedrus? He is an Athenian youth, a lover of speeches, and, more
important, someone who is later banished by the Athenians into exile for profan-
ing the mysteries. Th ese mysteries are part of a ritual associated with the goddess
Persephone. Th e Hymn to Demeter preserves her story: while she was gathering
fl owers with her friends, Hades the lord of the underworld seized her and took her
to his kingdom. But, like Christ, she conquers death through love and is thus resur-
rected, off ering the hope of immortality to all those who participate in her mysteries.
We provide the Christ parallel with great sensitivity, not so much as to make a com-
ment on Christ, but to clarify the often unacknowledged commitments of the com-
mentators on ancient texts. In 415 BCE , as part of a deliberate and violent iconoclastic
frenzy, the phallic statues of Hermes, which stood in the front yards of Athenian
homes, were mutilated, and the mysteries profaned. Phaedrus, although young,
beautiful, and a lover of l ogoi (i.e., semiscientifi c speeches on various matters), par-
ticipated in the profanation of the mysteries and mocked the soteriological hope of
the Athenians. It is to such an iconoclast, exiled for this reckless act, that Socrates is
addressing his speech. Orithuia is a stand-in for Persephone, albeit lacking the god-
dess’s soteriological hope: she is a mortal who simply dies. In the game of philology,
matters of life and death hang in a balance. With the technical skill in reading texts
comes the awesome responsibility to consider the mortal, philosophical, and ethical
ramifi cations of actions.
Returning to the Phaedrus , we detect the positivistic, scientifi c leanings of
Phaedrus. He is interested in speeches that are comprehensive and well-wrought,
and he does not believe in either gods or accounts of them. He is a smug technician
of words, pointedly without an ethical core. His adolescent, iconoclastic rationalism
is either unaware of or puzzled by Socrates’ position, and he asks Socrates if he really
believes in these tales. Th is is a question that philology, as it is practiced today, does
not explicitly ask, and thus we are grateful to Phaedrus for bringing forth this point.
Socrates’ answer complicates the violent simplicity of Phaedrus’ question. Th e ques-
tion presents a false dichotomy: either you believe these tales and you are simplistic,
old-fashioned, traditional, and unenlightened, or you do not believe these tales and
you are enlightened, scientifi c, and wise. Plato’s genius consists in adding a further
layer of complexity to this question: the freedom to think (as Socrates does) and
the freedom to act (iconoclastically, as Phaedrus does). Th us, individual and politi-
cal activism lurks not too far in the background. Phaedrus is exiled, and Socrates,
from the temporal point of view of the dialogue, will be executed. Socrates’ answer
goes beyond the righteous ravings of the so-called enlightened self-determining
PROLOGUE xiii
individualist and yet does not subscribe to some ancient theocratic authority.
Socrates’ answer displays a wise pragmatism that will sidestep both the political
dichotomy of the individual versus the state and the intellectual dichotomy of belief
versus reason.
Turning the tables, Socrates himself off ers a dichotomy: either one is clever
( sophōtatos ) and dabbles in the childish task of demythologizing ancient nar-
ratives, or one concerns oneself with self-knowledge. Socrates speaks from the
point of view of the second option. He is a lover of wisdom (278d). Th e diff erence
between a mature and immature philology is precisely philosophy. Otherwise, it
is a mere technique, a method. Socrates demonstrates that he is fully cognizant of
what it is the clever intellectuals do. He himself provides a cameo of the fi rst clever
philologist: fi rst disbelief and a pretension to intellectual maturity—to r eject such
tales. Th en there is the scientifi c demythologization: the god must be the North
Wind. Th en there is a collation of versions (“or, was it perhaps, from Areopagus?”).
Finally, there is the forgetting of the seriousness of thinking, replaced instead by
a “rough ingenuity” and much industry, that is, a hardworking ethic. Socrates, at
least, fi nds this “amusing.”
Th e serious question here is the “know thyself” commanded by the Delphic
inscription. Socrates restores the mythic and its task of defi ning the mortal human
being in relation to the divine. It is in that relation that the ultimate concern of
being human comes to the fore, the most serious and profound question of the
fate that determines our existence: death. Th us, texts that raise the question of life
and death or, more pointedly, the work of time and its all-encompassing destruc-
tive work require a bit more than this amusing rough ingenuity, a product of those
clever nonthinkers who have “a great deal of time.” Socrates alerts Phaedrus to
the dangers of reducing Persephone to Orithuia by detheologizing narratives: one
plays with mortal danger. Orithuia plays with Pharmaceia, who cannot save her.
Pharmaceia, as Derrida has shown, is nothing other than writing itself. Th us the
second half of this dialogue is devoted to a critique of writing and to textuality in
general. Once texts appear, they are always in danger of falling into the hands of
those who treat them as dead information. Th us, texts appear as epigrams, memen-
tos of a wisdom that is no longer accessible. Socrates quotes the epigram on the
tomb of Midas the Phrygian:
A maid of bronze am I, on Midas’ tomb I lie
As long as water fl ows, and trees grow tall
Shielding the grave where many come to cry
Th at Midas rests here I say to one and all.2
2 . Th e epigram is unusual because the order of its lines is irrelevant. It makes as much
sense whether one begins at the end or the beginning, or anywhere in between. Socrates
introduces it as a paradigmatic example of an ill-composed text, one that is not composed
with art and with attention to the soul of the listener. Th e epigram says the same no mat-
ter how it is read, and so it really says the same to anyone. It is, for Socrates, the perfect
example of a “dead letter.” Th e parallel is relevant here because the text-historical schol-
ars of Indology practice similar mortuary rites: they cut up texts, join up passages from
xiv PROLOGUE
Fully aware of their mortal error, Socrates continues to wryly mock the positivists
of textuality. “I am sure you notice that it makes no diff erence at all which of its
verses comes fi rst and which last.” But Phaedrus has meanwhile grown up, thanks to
Socrates’ pedagogy. “You are making fun of our speech, Socrates” (264c–d).
We ask again: what does Plato have to do with philology? Quite a bit. He is the
fi rst to use the word philology . In the P haedrus , Socrates refers to himself as a “lover of
speeches” ( philologoi , 236e), and in the Th eaetetus , Socrates speaks of his “love of argu-
ment” (p hilologia , 146a). But the most signifi cant discussion of the philologos occurs in
the Laches , where he is contrasted to the m isologoso r the “hater of speech.” Laches says:
I have just one feeling about discussions, Nicias, or, if you like, not one but two,
because to some I might seem to be a discussion-lover [ philologos ] and to others a
discussion-hater [ misologos ]. Whenever I hear a man discussing virtue or some kind of
wisdom, then, if he really is a man and worthy of the words he utters, I am completely
delighted to see the appropriateness and harmony existing between the speaker and
his words. And such a man seems to me to be genuinely musical, producing the most
beautiful harmony, not on the lyre or some other pleasurable instrument, but actually
rendering his own life harmonious by fi tting his deeds to his words in a truly Dorian
mode, not in the Ionian, or even, I think, in the Phrygian or Lydian, but in the only
harmony that is genuinely Greek. Th e discourse of such a man gladdens my heart and
makes everyone think that I am a discussion-lover [p hilologon ] because of the enthu-
siastic way in which I welcome what is said; but the man who acts in the opposite way
distresses me, and the better he speaks, the worse I feel, so that his discourse makes
me look like a discussion-hater [ misologon ]. ( Laches 188c–e; Sprague trans.)
Laches contrasts the lover of discussion, the p hilologos , with the hater of discus-
sion, the m isologos . Th e former is interested in ethics, pursuing virtue, philosophy,
and in the beauty of his soul. Th e latter acts in the opposite way and is distressing to
the true “philologist.” To understand the diff erence between the philologos and the
misologos , however, we must turn to the P haedo , where Socrates provides a fi rst (and
his only) defi nition of philologia : philology is linked to the argument for the immor-
tality of the soul. Socrates warns his interlocuters that there is a certain experience
they must avoid, namely:
Th at we should not become misologues [m isologoi ], as people become misanthropes
[ misanthrōpoi ]. Th ere is no greater evil one can suff er than to hate reasonable dis-
course [l ogous ]. Misology [ misologia ] and misanthropy [m isanthrōpia ] arise in the
same way. Misanthropy comes when a man without knowledge or skill has placed
great trust in someone and believes him to be altogether truthful, sound and trust-
worthy; then, a short time afterwards he fi nds him to be wicked and unreliable, and
then this happens in another case; when one has frequently had that experience,
other texts, read them backward or any which way they like, all the while insisting (as
the Phrygian epigram does) that the correct order neither counts nor exists. See espe-
cially Willibald Kirfel, Das Purā (cid:18)apañcalak(cid:19) a (cid:18)a: Versuch einer Textgeschichte (Bonn: Kurt
Schroeder, 1927), the Bible of the textual iconoclasts.
PROLOGUE xv
especially with those whom one believed to be one’s closest friends, then, in the end,
after many such blows, one comes to hate all men and to believe that no one is sound
in any way at all. Have you not seen this happen? ( Phaedo8 9d–e; Grube trans.)
When his interlocuter Echecrates assents, Socrates resumes. Here is the entire dia-
logue that follows between them:
SOCRATES: Th e similarity lies rather in this: it is as when one who lacks skill in
arguments puts his trust in an argument as being true, then shortly after-
wards believes it to be false—as sometimes it is and sometimes it is not—
and so with another argument and then another. You know how those in
particular who spend their time studying contradiction in the end believe
themselves to have become very wise and that they alone have understood
that there is no soundness or reliability in any object or in any argument,
but that all that exists simply fl uctuates up and down as if it were in the
Euripus and does not remain in the same place for any time at all.
P HAEDO: What you say, I said, is certainly true.
SOCRATES: It would be pitiable, Phaedo, he said, when there is a true and reliable
argument and one that can be understood, if a man who has dealt with such
arguments as appear at one time true, at another time untrue, should not
blame himself or his own lack of skill but, because of his distress, in the end
gladly shift the blame away from himself to the arguments, and spend the
rest of his life hating and reviling reasonable discussion and so be deprived
of truth and knowledge of reality.
PHAEDO: Yes, by Zeus, I said, that would be pitiable indeed.
SOCRATES: Th is then is the fi rst thing we should guard against, he said. We should
not allow into our minds the conviction that argumentation has nothing
sound about it; much rather we should believe that it is we who are not yet
sound and that we must take courage and be eager to attain soundness, you
and the others for the sake of your whole life to come, and I for the sake of
death. (P haedo 90b–91a)
What Socrates literally says is: those who perish between a speech and its oppo-
site ( peri tous antilogous logous diatripsantes , 90c); we may link this to the argument
for the immortality of the soul which is compared to Ariadne’s thread and which
may not be broken and which recalls the twine by means of which Th eseus was able
to fi nd his way back out of the Cretan labyrinth. Th us, what is at stake in philology
is emphatically not the l ogos itself, but a certain discriminative stance that allows
the reader or listener to distinguish between the logos and its opposite and thus,
like Th eseus, safely navigate home through them. In contrast, the one who hates the
logos , says Socrates, loses access to truth and knowledge ( aletheias te kai epistēmēs ) of
the things that are (t ōn de ontōn , 90d). 3
3 . Cf. Arjuna’s question of K (cid:17) (cid:18) (cid:16)a in the Bhagavadgītā: “Still, K (cid:17) (cid:18) (cid:16)a, a non-ascetic who,
while having faith, allows his mind to stray from this yoga before he achieves the ultimate
xvi PROLOGUE
As it is precisely this confrontation between the meaninglessness of mor-
tal existence and the need for ethical action that philosophical texts such as the
Mahābhārata and the Bhagavadgītā address, we focus on these two texts as paradig-
matic of the struggle of the German Indologist against philosophical, ethical, and
normative concerns. However, as a positive interpretation of these texts remains
beyond the scope of this work (for one must fi rst overcome the prejudices against
such an interpretation), let us now proceed with the deconstruction of this later phi-
lology (“Afterphilologie,” as Rohde calls it).
success of yoga—what becomes of him? Does he not, like a shredded cloud, fade away,
a failure either way, strong-armed lord, without foundation and astray on the path to
brahman ?” (6.37–38; the translation is van Buitenen’s; J. A. B. van Buitenen, trans., Th e
Bhagavadgītā in the Mahābhārata [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981]).
Th e Nay Science

INTRODUCTION
Th e root of evil (in theology) is the confusion between the text and the word of God.
J. S. Semler, Abhandlung von freier Untersuchung des Canon
A HISTORY OF GERMAN INDOLOGY
Th is book investigates German scholarship on India between the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries against the backdrop of its methodological self-understanding.
It pursues this inquiry out of a wider interest in German philosophy of the same
period, especially as concerns debates over scientifi c method. Th is twofold focus, that
is, on the history of German Indology and on the idea of scientifi c method, is deter-
mined by the subject itself: because German Indology largely defi ned itself in terms
of a specifi c method (the historical-critical method or the text-historical method), 1
1 . Th e “historical-critical method” is a broad term for a method applied in biblical criti-
cism. Th e method sets aside the theological meaning of the Bible in favor of its historical
context. Th e method can be summed up as “understanding the Bible out of [the conditions
of] its time.” (Th e phrase is a common one, and used, for instance in both Tschackert’s
article and as the title of Reventlow’s article; for both sources, see the third section of this
chapter.) Within the confi nes of this method, scholars have developed and applied various
techniques, such as literary criticism ( Literaturkritik ), form criticism (F ormkritik ), tendency
criticism ( Tendenzkritik ), and determining the history of transmission or of redaction(s)
( Überlieferungsgeschichte, Redaktionsgeschichte ) and of the text ( Textgeschichte ). Th e last,
especially in the adjectival form “text-historical [method]” ( textgeschichtliche Methode )
is often used as synonymous with the “historical-critical method” as it encompasses
the largest part of its historical tendency. In this work, we use them interchangeably.
Historical-critical method is used preferentially when discussing the method’s historical
origins (i.e., as a school), text-historical method when referring to its application to Indian
texts (i.e., in reconstructing histories of the text). As the present work demonstrates, the
application of the text-historical method is not scientifi c, and caution must be exercised
in using the terms text-historical or textual history : in the majority of cases, the textual
histories German scholars came up with using this method were a projection of their
fantasies. A standard but hardly critical overview of these steps can be found in Odil
Hannes Steck, Old Testament Exegesis: A Guide to the Methodology , trans. James D. Nogalski
(Atlanta, Scholar’s Press, 1995).
2 Introduction
a history of German Indology is simultaneously a history of method. In other words,
the history we trace here is not the history of the establishment and growth of schol-
arship on ancient India in Germany during this period. 2 Nor is it a cultural history of
German-Indian contacts (which has been pursued more or less critically elsewhere). 3
Th at there was an unprecedented surge in interest in India in nineteenth-century
Germany does not need to be restated here, 4 nor do we need to examine the factors
(Romantic interest in the Orient, imagined affi nity to the ancient Germanic race,
longings for a pristine civilization, etc.) that fueled this surge. Th ese issues have been
dealt with at length elsewhere.5 Th e reader wishing to learn more about these histori-
cal details is referred to the many excellent studies on these subjects. 6 Th is book is
also not a disciplinary history in the sense that it recounts details of departments or
scholars (who studied what with whom, which department established what profi le
when, etc.).7
2 . By far the most comprehensive is Douglas T. McGetchin, I ndology, Indomania, and
Orientalism: Ancient India’s Rebirth in Modern Germany (Madison, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson
University Press, 2009).
3 . Among the latter genre, the standard work is Wilhelm Halbfass’s I ndia and Europe: An
Essay in Understanding (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1988). Decidedly less
objective and less useful, in contrast, are the works motivated by a desire to present a
unique proximity between Indian and German culture; examples include Ludwig Alsdorf,
Deutsch-indische Geistesbeziehungen (Heidelberg: Kurt Vowinckel, 1942) and Helmuth von
Glasenapp, Das Indienbild deutscher Denker (Stuttgart: K. F. Koehler, 1960).
4 . For an examination of this growth from a comparative perspective (i.e., with French
and British Indology), see Pascale Rabault-Feuerhahn, L’archive des origines: Sanskrit,
philologie, anthropologie dans l’Allemagne du XIXe siècle (Paris: Éditions du Cerf, 2008).
Suzanne Marchand ( German Orientalism in the Age of Empire: Religion, Race, and Scholarship
[Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010]) also discusses this growth, albeit from a
diff erent perspective.
5 . Th e Romantic inheritance of German Indology is dealt with in Nicholas A. Germana,
Th e Orient of Europe: Th e Mythical Image of India and Competing Images of German National
Identity (Newcastle upon Tyne Cambridge Scholars, 2009) and, from a slightly diff erent
perspective, in Tuska E. Benes, In Babel’s Shadow: Language, Philology, and the Nation in
Nineteenth-Century Germany (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 2008). Tod Kontje
discusses the discourse on affi nities in his G erman Orientalisms (Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press, 2004). Although George S. Williamson’s Th e Longing for Myth in
Germany: Religion and Aesthetic Culture from Romanticism to Nietzsche (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2004) has a broader focus, it is also relevant to Indology. Two early
but still infl uential and enriching works on the unspoiled, exotic Orient are Dorothy
M. Figueira, Translating the Orient: Th e Reception of Sakuntala in Nineteenth-Century Europe
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1994) and Th e Exotic: A Decadent Quest
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1994).
6 . Not mentioned here are the numerous works on individual scholars or the extensive
literature from a Saidian perspective on the subject of German Orientalism, as they are not
germane to this book’s theme. Th e reader is referred to McGetchin’s book for a comprehen-
sive review of the scholarship.
7 . Indra Sengupta has produced detailed analyses of these institutional aspects of
Indology; see her From Salon to Discipline: State, University and Indology in Germany, 1821–
1914 (Heidelberg: Ergon Verlag, 2005). Also see her “ Shishyas of Another Order: Students of
Indology at the Universities of Bonn and Berlin” and “State, University, and Indology: Th e
Politics of the Chair of Indology at German Universities in the Nineteenth Century,” both
INTRODUCTION 3
Conditioned by the nature of the inquiry, there is some biographic information on
the principal protagonists of this history, 8 but our main focus is on elucidating how
these personal biographies tied in with a certain understanding of method.
In what sense, then, is this book a history? Th e history dealt with in this
book is discipline-refl exive , 9 by which we mean it studies the self-presentation or
self-understanding of the discipline’s practitioners: how did they view their disci-
pline? In what way did they see themselves as contributing to the task of translat-
ing or clarifying Indian literature to European audiences? What were the means, the
arguments, or the strategies used to justify their role as offi cial purveyors of Indian
culture to these audiences, and what role did the rhetoric of science and scientifi city
play in these arguments? 10
To be sure, this book also addresses wider historical issues, such as the longing
for national identity (seen most dramatically in the creation of an Āryan ideology)
and the institutional dominance of German scholarship (which was to infl uence
scholars of other nations into thinking that they, too, had to pursue Sanskrit stud-
ies in a German key), but these issues remain tangential to our central concerns.
Th us, although the fi rst chapter is framed as a discussion of the epic fantasies of
early German Indologists (Christian Lassen, Albrecht Weber, the two Holtzmanns 11 ),
the chapter is not intended as yet another contribution to the genre of “how did
in S anskrit and “Orientalism”: Indology and Comparative Linguistics in Germany, 1750–1958 ,
ed. Douglas T. McGetchin, Peter K. J. Park, and Damodar SarDesai (Delhi: Manohar, 2004),
137–71 and 271–305. McGetchin also includes two useful charts detailing the genealogies
of German Indologists in his Indology, Indomania, and Orientalism , 81 and 82–83.
8 . Th e materials presented here are but a fraction of the total materials gathered in
the course of research, as the book originated in a much narrower project: intellectual
biographies and bibliographies of the main German Gītā scholars. However, as the book’s
focus widened, much of this material was edited out. See, however, the entry on German
Indology at Oxford Bibliographies Online (www.oxfordbibliographies.com) for a useful sur-
vey of the fi eld.
9 . Th e term is Howard’s; see Th omas Albert Howard, Protestant Th eology and the Making
of the Modern German University (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 11. However,
as we use the term, we intend not only a consideration of these documents but also the
application of a “hermeneutics of suspicion.” Perhaps the word discipline-critical would
have been better.
10 . Th e terms translated here as “science” and “scientifi city” are Wissenschaft and
Wissenschaftlichkeit . Th e latter is occasionally also translated “scientism,” when we want
to express its ideological use in German Indology. “Scientifi city” is the rhetoric of “sci-
ence” applied by Indology; “scientism” is this rhetoric viewed as a historical formation.
Treatments of the rhetoric of “scientifi city” can be found in Howard, Protestant Th eology
(especially concerning “scientifi city” as the hallmark of Protestant scholarship as compared
to Catholic) and in Sheldon Pollock, “Deep Orientalism? Notes on Sanskrit and Power
beyond the Raj,” in O rientalism and the Postcolonial Predicament: Perspectives on South Asia ,
ed. Peter van der Veer and Carol A. Breckenridge (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, 1993), 76–133 (concerning the role played by the rhetoric of scientifi city in National
Socialist ideology).
11 . Both Adolf Holtzmann Sr. and his nephew Adolf Holtzmann Jr. wrote books on the
Mahābhārata. For clarity’s sake, whenever we mention Holtzmann without any further
specifi cation, the reference is to the younger Holtzmann. Whenever we cite the uncle, we
will always specify that it is the elder Holtzmann that is meant.
4 Introduction
German Indology contribute to Āryanism?” or “how did German Indology contribute
to National Socialism?” literature.1 2 Without negating the importance of this litera-
ture and without denying the responsibility German Indology bears for these events,
our book does not use German Indology as a lens to peer at wider German history.
Rather, the focus remains squarely on the writings themselves and, above all, on the
writers: what agendas, textual and otherwise, were they working out in their writ-
ings? What role did the idea of India play in these agendas, and how was this idea
expressed, reformulated, or otherwise adapted to suit these agendas? What under-
standing of science and scientifi c method was operative in their researches?
Th e history we trace here is the internal history of German Indology: the history
that does not appear in its offi cial histories (Ernst Windisch, Th eodor Benfey, Valentina
Stache-Rosen, et al.) 13 but is also not apparent from its nonoffi cial histories (however
useful they may otherwise be). 14 Th e present work diff ers from these in that it is both
more specifi c and broader: more specifi c, because it is interested only in the development
of the self-understanding of German Indology as a textual science; 15 broader, because it
makes general points regarding the nature of this textual science and especially the way
12 . On the former, see the relevant sections in Ruth Römer, Sprachwissenschaft und
Rassenideologie in Deutschland (Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 1985) and Th omas R. Trautmann,
Aryans and British India (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997). Léon Poliakov’s
Th e Aryan Myth: A History of Racist and Nationalistic Ideas in Europe (New York: Basic Books,
1974) is the archetype of all such works. On the latter, see Pollock, “Deep Orientalism?”
13 . Ernst Windisch, Geschichte der Sanskrit-Philologie und Indischen Altertumskunde,
2 vols. (Strassburg: Trübner, 1917–20); Th eodor Benfey, G eschichte der Sprachwissenschaft
und Orientalischen Philologie in Deutschland seit dem Anfange des 19. Jahrhunderts mit einem
Rückblick auf die Früheren (Munich: J. G. Cotta, 1869); Valentina Stache-Rosen, German
Indologist s: Biographies of German Scholars in Indian Studies Writing in German (New
Delhi: Max Mueller Bhavan, 1981); second revised edition by Agnes Stache-Weiske (New
Delhi: Max Mueller Bhavan, 1990). Ernst Windisch’s 1917–20 book is the insider’s version
of the discipline, highly fl awed, as is Stache-Rosen. A newcomer to this genre of hagio-
graphic writing is Jürgen Hanneder (see his Marburger Indologie im Umbruch: Zur Geschichte
des Faches 1845–1945 [Munich: P. Kircheim Verlag, 2010]).
14 . Th e tremendous growth in interest in examining this underilluminated and
undertheorized aspect of German history is surely a welcome development. Besides
the historical works mentioned, there are a number of literary treatments (e.g., Gita
Dharampal-Frick’s I ndien im Spiegel deutscher Quellen der Frühen Neuzeit [Tübingen: Max
Niemeyer Verlag, 1994] and Kamakshi Murti’s India: Th e Seductive and Seduced “Other”
of German Orientalism [Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2001]). In addition, there are the
edited volumes produced by Douglas T. McGetchin, Peter K. J. Park, and Damodar
SarDesai (S anskrit and “Orientalism”: Indology and Comparative Linguistics in Germany,
1750–1958 [New Delhi: Manohar, 2004]); Eli Franco and Karin Preisendanz (B eyond
Orientalism: Th e Work of Wilhelm Halbfass and Its Impact on Indian and Cross-Cultural
Studies [Atlanta: Rodopi, 1997]); and Fred. R. Dallmayr ( Beyond Orientalism [Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1996]). Th e reason this book does not engage many of these
works is because its concerns are somewhat diff erent and highly specifi c.
15 . In that sense, the book it comes closest to is Tuska Benes’s In Babel’s Shadow , which
also examines the link between this new philology and nationalism. However, this book
makes points that are more closely related to the origins of this new philology in the scrip-
tural hermeneutics associated with the Neo-Protestantism of the eighteenth century. In
that sense, its most direct predecessors are Th omas Albert Howard’s Protestant Th eology and
the Making of the Modern German University and R eligion and the Rise of Historicism: W. M.
INTRODUCTION 5
this science has been used to delegitimize an entire alternative tradition of hermeneu-
tics, that “other philology” as we call it, which has its origins not in nineteenth-century
Germany but in ancient Greece, specifi cally the Greek concern for the mortal soul. 16
In this sense, the history traced here is more accurately described as a genealogy
of method in Indology. 17 Its focus is not on the great and offi cial monuments (docu-
ments, events, authorized histories, or biographies) that mark the history of this dis-
cipline, but on the hidden and the obscure: the documents or events that, for one or
the other reason, Indology has found convenient to forget, the origins it has buried
or repressed.1 8 For example, we begin not with the self-important pronouncements
of Hermann Oldenberg, 19 but with two relatively minor German Orientalists: Adolf
Holtzmann Sr. and Adolf Holtzmann Jr. And yet, it is our claim that it is precisely in
the work of these and other writers, neglected as marginal and at odds with the image
of itself German Indology sought to project (enlightened, rational, posttheological,
and postconfessional), that we fi nd the greatest clues to Indology’s textual project.
By continuously shifting focus back and forth between its offi cial communiqués (by
L. de Wette, Jacob Burckhardt, and the Th eological Origins of Nineteenth-Century Historicism
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000). Th en again, its central chapter (on the
Bhagavadgītā) owes much to Bradley L. Herling’s excellent and informative Th e German
Gītā: Hermeneutics and Discipline in the German Reception of Indian Th ought, 1778–1831
(New York: Routledge, 2006), although it begins after the point where Herling leaves off .
Herling covers the fi rst phase of Gītā reception in Germany, beginning with the work of
J. G. Herder (1792) and F. W. Schlegel (1808) and continuining all the way to Hegel (1827
and 1831). We pick up the story in the second phase of Gītā reception in Germany with the
Gītā interpretations of the Indologists Adolf Holtzmann Jr. (1893), Richard Garbe (1905),
Hermann Jacobi (1918), Hermann Oldenberg (1919), Rudolf Otto (1934), and Jakob
Wilhelm Hauer (1937). Between these two phases, we might identify a transition phase,
characterized by the Gītās of C. R. S. Peiper (1834), Christian Lassen (1846, a revised edi-
tion of A. W. Schlegel’s Gītā of 1823), F. Lorinser (1869), and Robert Boxberger (1870)
(see bibliography for complete entries). Th is phase is dealt with in the fi rst chapter as a
prologue to our discussion of the German reception of the Mahābhārata.
16 . Th us, this book’s direct inspiration is ultimately the radical philology of Nietzsche
(articulated, among other works, in his Th e Birth of Tragedy out of the Spirit of Music ) and
its contemporary descendants, such as the work of Sean Alexander Gurd (see his Iphigenias
at Aulis: Textual Multiplicity, Radical Philology [Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2005]).
It also owes a tremendous debt to Reiner Schürmann, especially his Broken Hegemonies ,
trans. Reginald Lilly (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2003).
17 . Th e expression “Indology” translates the German I ndologie and is used here as a
broad term for a number of disciplines concerned with the study of the literary cultures of
ancient India. It has been chosen because it is ultimately the term that established itself
in German over against other possible terms, such as Indische Literatur, Indische Philologie,
Indische Altertumskunde, Orientalische Philologie, Vergleichende Sprachwissenschaft, Sanskrit
Philologie , and I ndogermanische Studien . All these terms refer, with slight diff erences in
accent, to the study of Indian texts on the basis of a method known as the “historical-critical
method”—although even that term has meant diff erent things to diff erent people at dif-
ferent times (see later).
18 . Th is will ultimately turn out to be its origins in the Neo-Protestantism of the eigh-
teenth century (see later) and its resulting theological inheritance.
19 . Oldenberg’s extensive writings on the subject are discussed in c hapter 5. Also see the
bibliography for a complete list.
6 Introduction
Indologists such as Hermann Oldenberg, Walter Slaje, Jürgen Hanneder) and its his-
torical reality (the work of Indologists such as Richard von Garbe, Hermann Jacobi,
Georg von Simson, and Erich Frauwallner), we break up the monolithic narrative of
an enlightened nonpolitical, nonideological science. In that respect, the function of
the history recounted here is to trace the vicissitudes of this passing phenomenon,
which, for a brief chapter in European history, advanced a claim to being science and
dominated Europe’s encounter with the Orient. 20
Is the history we present teleological? Is it essentializing? By narrowly defi ning the
scope of inquiry as German interpretations of the Mahābhārata and the Bhagavadgītā
insofar as they are based on the historical-critical method and refl ect certain
Enlightenment and Protestant anxieties, we avoid the problem of a teleological narra-
tive. Further, if one can at all speak of a telos here, it is a negative telos: we do not explain
how the discipline arose, but how it ended. Th us, it is really the dispersal or d iremption
of the text-historical method at the end of the twentieth century that interests us. 21 Far
from essentializing something called German Indology, we deconstruct this idea. If gene-
alogy is defi ned as the endeavor “to identify the accidents, the minute deviations—or
conversely, the complete reversals—the errors, the false appraisals, and the faulty cal-
culations that gave birth to those things that continue to exist and have value for us; it
is to discover that truth or being does not lie at the root of what we know and what we
are, but [only] the exteriority of accidents,” 22 then the aim of this book can be summed
up as showing how “truth or being does not lie at the root of what we know” (or think
we know) about German Indology and how the knowledge about India that we think we
possess in German Indology is “but the exteriority of accidents.” 23 What are the ways,
historically conditioned, in which we have been trained to think about Indian texts, and
what are the problems with these ways, once we examine them in the light of the under-
standing of method in the European humanities? How did a method that was radically
theological in its origins capture the imagination of Sanskritists around the globe and
become identifi ed with the ideal of objective, scientifi c investigation into Indian texts
tout court? What are the broader consequences that can be drawn from the diremption
of this method in German Indology for the humanities? Th ese are some of the questions
pursued by this study.
20 . At least, at an institutional level. But the contemporary irrelevance of German
Indology is testament to the fact that it never adequately met nor understood the German
public’s interest in India after the Second World War.
21 . See the bibliography for a number of texts attempting to survey the fi eld. For obvi-
ous reasons, most of these works are now out of date, but a comparison of the number
of departments listed with the number of departments still surviving is instructive. Also
see McGetchin, Indology, Indomania, and Orientalism , especially the chapter “Th e Study
of Sanskrit in German Universities, 1818–1914” for a comparison with the situation in
Indology’s heyday.
22 . Michel Foucault, “Nietzsche, Genealogy, History,” in Essential Works of Foucault, 1954–
1984, vol. 2, Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology , ed. James D. Faubion (New York: New
Press, 1998), 374.
23 . For preliminary work in this direction, see Vishwa Adluri, Review of Unifying Hinduism:
Philosophy and Identity in Hindu Intellectual History , by Andrew J. Nicholson, Humanities and Social
Sciences Online (H-Net), March 22, 2012, www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php?id=32207 .
INTRODUCTION 7
THE HISTORY OF GERMAN INDOLOGY AS A HISTORY
OF METHOD
Th ere are two reasons for this book’s focus on a narrower history of method. 24 Th e fi rst
is pragmatic: because German Indology defi nes itself in terms of a unique method-
ological access to Indian texts, when seeking to defi ne what makes German Indology
German Indology, we have to look at method rather than, say, race or national identity.
Pollock has found that these issues did inform the praxis of German Indology,2 5 but
the international acceptance of this mode of “doing” Indology cannot be explained
if one defi nes G erman Indology tautologically as “Indology done by Germans.”2 6
Th is is not to deny that German Indologists did see themselves as unique vis-à-vis
their American or British colleagues,2 7 but to highlight the fact that this sense of
uniqueness was founded on the consciousness of possessing a unique (and supe-
rior) m ethod .2 8 However, a brief look at that method suffi ced to show its problematic
antecedents: the historical-critical method is a creation of the Neo-Protestantism
( Neuprotestantismus ) of the eighteenth century (as discussed later) and hence sin-
gularly unsuited to the task of a global, objective, and secular Indology. 29 Th ere was
something fundamentally wrong about the way German Indologists perceived them-
selves. Th e perception gap between their self-assessment and their reality led to the
formulation of the fundamental question of this book: what happens when one sets
aside what Indologists say they do (or think that it is they are doing) and focuses
instead on what they actually do?3 0
24 . Narrower, that is, as compared with the scope of a general cultural history, not nar-
rower with regard to its implications, which, as we show, are wide-ranging.
25 . Pollock, “Deep Orientalism?”
26 . Th us, among “German” Indologists, we also include a number of American scholars,
including E. W. Hopkins and his latter-day incarnations James L. Fitzgerald and Kevin
McGrath. Th e story of why American scholars were by and large (an important exception is
Alf Hiltebeitel) unable to evolve an independent and self-confi dent approach to the Indian
epic is a topic for a future work.
27 . For a discussion, see Vishwa Adluri, “Pride and Prejudice: Orientalism and German
Indology,” I nternational Journal of Hindu Studies 15 , no. 3 (2011): 253–92.
28 . See, for example, the comments by Oldenberg, Hacker, Slaje, von Stietencron, and
Hanneder cited later.
29 . Friedrich Wilhelm Graf (“Zur Begriff sgeschichte einer theologischen Chiff re,” Archiv
für Begriff sgeschichte 28 [1984]: 214–68) attributes the term to F. C. Bauer. It has often been
used as a synonym for the more widely used Kulturprotestantismus ; nonetheless, as the lat-
ter has, at times, also been used pejoratively, we shall retain the term “Neo-Protestantism.”
30 . Such a question, of course, cannot lead to contrasting words, written or otherwise
imparted, with the way Indologists conduct themselves in their private lives. Th e point was
not to show that private religion existed alongside its public disavowal, which would only
correspond to the Kantian separation of the public and private realms and thus reinstate
the German sense of somehow having banished religion from public life. Rather, the ques-
tion became: can one detect, beyond or behind the overt comments German Indologists
make or have made regarding their discipline, the faint lines of a religion, a theological
inheritance that the Indologists might themselves not be aware of any longer? In that case,
one would have to read this literature again with a view to its religious subtext, applying
what Ricoeur, following Heidegger, has called a “hermeneutics of suspicion.”
8 Introduction
Th is initial set of refl ections defi ned the shape of this study. Because German Indology
defi ned itself in terms of a method (philology), but that method, in turn, turned out to
have a specifi c historical origin (in German academic theology), a history of German
Indology had to be pursued as a history of philology. Th is history occupies the fi rst four
chapters of this book. We then return to the question of the allegedly scientifi c charac-
ter of German Indology in the fi fth chapter. Here we fi nd that although the method in
Indology is informed by scientifi c positivism, this is only partially so. 31
To anticipate the conclusions of these fi ve chapters: Indology is an ill-conceived
theology that rests on an incomplete positivism for its defense, or it is a stillborn
positivism that is still hamstrung by a latent theology. In either case, it can be called
a science only if by this we mean the institutional and hegemonic aspects of science
rather than a rational, axiomatic, and universally demonstrable body of knowledge. 32
Th e second reason for focusing on a history of method was historical. Th e pub-
lic statements of Indologists such as Hermann Oldenberg, Willibald Kirfel, and
Paul Hacker showed that German Indologists were ill-informed about this history.
Although they accepted and even valorized the historical-critical method as the
fundament of their discipline, they were ignorant of its origins in the work of the
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century theologians and biblical critics J. S. Semler, G. L.
Bauer, and F. C. Bauer.
Th us arose a second complex of tasks for this study. It was not only that the
Indologists were in error about what they thought they were doing b ut also that they
were in error about their history . In fact, we found that no one in the history of German
Indology had actually undertaken a concrete examination of exactly when and where
a break with theology had occurred in the history of this discipline. When German
scholars spoke of the objectivity and agnosticism of the historical-critical method
vis-à-vis the commentarial tradition, it was clear they did not mean this in a sense
that was discipline-specifi c: they were merely assuming that their discipline, born
in the aftermath of the struggle between science and faith in the Enlightenment,
lacked a theological or metaphysical component. It is true that a general seculariza-
tion of European life took place in the nineteenth century, 33 but this cannot suffi ce
31 . McGetchin makes a similar argument regarding the Romantic roots of Indology in
Germany. However, our focus in this book is less on the Romantic inheritance of Indology
(which, as McGetchin shows, was much greater than Indologists have historically been
willing to concede) than on its theological inheritance, mediated via its adoption of histori-
cal methods and its faith in the critical potential of these methods to deconstruct tradi-
tional sources of authority.
32 . See Toulmin, who argues that there are two ways in which one can think of a sci-
ence: “We can think of it as a discipline, comprising a communal tradition of procedures
and techniques for dealing with theoretical or practical problems; or we can think of it
as a profession, comprising the organized set of institutions, roles, and men whose task
it is to apply or improve those procedures and techniques.” Stephen Toulmin, Human
Understanding (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1972), 142. German Indology
meets the latter defi nition, but, as we show in this book, it fails to meet the former.
33 . Th e thesis has been advanced most persuasively in Owen Chadwick’s book,
appropriately titled Th e Secularization of the European Mind in the Nineteenth Century
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975). For a contesting view, see Howard’s
Religion and the Rise of Historicism , cited earlier. In his recent book, Howard takes the
INTRODUCTION 9
as evidence of the secularism of Indology. It is not at all clear that this secularization
was devoid of a religious element. Scholars have debated at length about the nature
of the secularization Europe is supposed to have undergone in a debate that has
pitted the defenders of the secularization thesis or secularization paradigm (Steve
Bruce being the most prominent among them) 34 against opponents of the thesis
(e.g., David Martin, whose work brings much needed nuance and complexity to the
thesis).3 5 Some have called attention to the fact that this presumed secularization
was, in fact, no such thing, being rather another stage in the religious history of
Europe itself. 36 Far from the teleological narrative of history as a progression from
the darkness of religious orthodoxy and superstition to the Enlightenment, the overt
secularization of public institutions in the nineteenth century has left behind a com-
plex and ambiguous legacy. 37 Talal Asad has recently opposed: “a straightforward nar-
rative of progress from the religious to the secular is no longer acceptable.” 38 But even
on a charitable reading of the Enlightenment (i.e., one that views it as it wishes to
see itself and be seen by others), it is clear that secularization did not take place in
the same way and to the same extent in all areas. Th ere was need for greater preci-
sion. One would have to undertake individual and microscopic-scale analyses of the
individual disciplines themselves before one could assume this or that discipline was
secular. Further, what of Indology itself? Th ere were no studies of German Indology
we were aware of from the point of view of its relationship to religion. 39 Was it really
as secular and universal as its practitioners claimed?
view that the term (i.e., secularization) is “useful in a limited, heuristic sense, particularly
when applied to cultural realities in Western Europe since the Enlightenment” but points
out that “a priori notions of secularization have created great historiographical lacunae.”
Howard, Protestant Th eology and the Making of the Modern German University 8, no. 29. It is
in this sense that we concede a general secularization of European life here, although, as
we shall see, this does not suffi ce to explain the continued presence of concerns that might
be properly called religious and theological in German Indology.
34 . See his God Is Dead: Secularization in the West (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2002),
among numerous other articles.
35 . See his A GeneralTh eory of Secularization (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978) and
On Secularization: Towards a Revised General Th eory (Aldershot Ashgate, 2005).
36 . Among those to have made this claim most strongly is S. N. Balagangadhara, Th e
Heathen in His Blindness: Asia, the West & the Dynamic of Religion (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1994).
37 . Of course, only a part of what is at stake in this debate concerns Europe’s historical real-
ity: a greater part is concerned with the thesis that increasing modernity is necessarily accom-
panied by increasing secularism. Among those to have reconsidered this view is Peter Berger.
38 . Talal Asad, F ormations of the Secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity (Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 2003), 1.
39 . Marchand’s recent book does draw some connections, but for Orientalist disci-
plines more generally, as she does not delve into Indology specifi cally. Her work provides
an important corrective to Said’s analysis, showing how scholarly concerns (mediated
by Christian concerns with a universal narrative of history) played a signifi cant role in
German Orientalism. However, Marchand is simultaneously less critical (of the ideological
potential of this scholarship) and more hopeful (of its emancipatory potential for a “fully
universal Kulturgeschichte ” [G erman Orientalism in the Age of Empire , 495]) than we are. In
contrast, we see the practice of constructing such universal narratives itself as a remnant of
Christian tradition. Bradley L. Herling (Th e German Gītā ) and Peter K. J. Park (“A Catholic
10 Introduction
Th is complex of questions forms a second axis of inquiry for this study. Whereas
the fi rst studies the history of German Indology from the perspective of its method,
the second required us to address this history from the perspective of biography.
Where and in what way were German Indologists concealed theologians? What was
hindering them from being clear about their theological commitments? In what way
and to what extent could German Indology be treated as a posttheological, postcon-
fessional discipline? Once again, we trace these issues through the next four chapters
of this book. In the concluding section of the fourth chapter, we take up the question
of German Indology as a Neo-Brahmanic hierarchy (that is itself a Neo-Protestant
legacy). Here we demonstrate how this new church of historicism constituted itself
by giving itself a public mission (purifi cation of Indian texts), an aesthetic ideal (the
philologically tamed and purifi ed text, whose antithesis is the “monstrous” Indian
epic 40 ), and a clerical order (the scientist-scholars who must be defended, even when
they are National Socialists 41 ). Th e fi fth chapter then presents the “science” portion
of our argument. We conclude with a brief résumé of the book’s argument.
Th e intersection of these two axes (method-philology and biography-theology)
constitutes the vantage from which we contemplate the history of German Indology.
Th is doubled perspective also explains the book’s interweaving of textual-philological
materials (Holtzmann’s critical analysis of the Mahābhārata, Garbe and colleagues’
reconstructions of the Bhagavadgītā) with biographic-interpretive materials
(Oldenberg’s views on Indian philology vis-à-vis classical philology, Slaje’s remarks
on Indology as part of the landscape of the humanities, Hanneder’s views on the
need for a functional Indology as a bulwark against the forces of religious fundamen-
talism). Finally, because both questions of scientifi c method and religious outlook are
intimately bound up with the position of a discipline at the university, occasionally
this book also enters domains that might be considered political. Especially toward
the end of the book, we do ask what the justifi cation for Indology is. But these ques-
tions remain subsidiary to the project of illuminating the theological inheritance of
Indology. In the next section, we discuss how the historical-critical method origi-
nates in debates concerning the interpretation of scripture in eighteenth-century
Neo-Protestantism. It is this Neo-Protestant inheritance, we contend, that is the key
to understanding German Indology.
Apologist in a Pantheistic World: New Approaches to Friedrich Schlegel,” in S anskrit and
Orientalism: Indology and Comparative Linguistics in Germany, 1750–1958 , ed. Damodar
SarDesai, Peter K. J. Park, and Douglas McGetchin [Delhi: Manohar, 2004], 83–106) have
both commented on the signifi cance of the pantheism debate for German attitudes to
Indian philosophy. But to the extent that their work focuses more on the fi rst, philosophi-
cal phase of the German reception of Indian thought, it is true that, as yet, there have been
no studies of German Indology from the perspective of its theological commitments.
40 . For the expression, see Hermann Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata: Sein Inhalt, seine
Entstehung, seine Form (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1922), 1, 2, 16, and 172.
41 . For examples, see the work of Steinkellner and Slaje, discussed at various points in
this book.
INTRODUCTION 11
THE ORIGINS OF THE HISTORICALCRITICAL
METHOD IN THE NEOPROTESTANTISM OF THE
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
Our interest in a history of German Indology had generated the task of a history
of method. Th e latter, in turn, had generated the need for a history of German
Indology. Th e question of what German Indology was could not be answered unless
we answered the question of what its method was, and the question of what its
method was required us to examine the history of the discipline. Neither question
could be answered unless we fi rst looked at the origins of the method used in German
Indology: origins that lay not in Indology itself, but in the Neo-Protestantism of
the eighteenth century. Th us, at the outset some understanding of this background
becomes unavoidable.
Although German Indologists speak of their method broadly as the philological
method, this requires greater precision, for philology can mean and has meant many
diff erent things to many diff erent people. 42 At the outset, it is important to distin-
guish between two senses of textual criticism or critical method: a broader sense and
a narrower sense. In the broader sense, the expressions imply any inquiry that takes
a critical stance toward its objects. Drawing on a Kantian heritage, this concept of
criticism or critique (K ritik ) is too wide to be useful unless one specifi es what is criti-
cal about this critique. In Kant, Kritik has two primary senses: fi rst, a suspicion of
traditional authority (specifi cally, spiritual authority; this is the sense that comes to
the fore in his essay “What Is Enlightenment?” and other writings such as “Religion
within the Limits of Reason Alone”) and, second, a criticism of dogmatic metaphys-
ics (this is the sense that is at the bottom of his critical philosophy proper, i.e., the
three great Critiques ). It is not necessary to trace the further history of the concept
of criticism here. 43 Note, however, that it is not the second sense that comes down
to German Indology, which neither is nor wishes to be philosophy, and the thought
of critiquing metaphysics from the perspective of a refl ection on the “two sources of
human cognition” is as far removed from the minds of Indologists as possible.
Likewise, the sense of criticism found in German Indology is not the second, nar-
rower, more technical sense of this term. In this latter sense, the expressions “textual
criticism” or “critical method” refer to the two-stage process of a systematic recen-
sio (collection and analysis of manuscripts), followed by an analysis of the relations
of fi liation between these manuscripts based on this recensio . Th is process culmi-
nates in a mechanical reconstruction of the archetype (the oldest text from which all
extant manuscripts are derived). Th is is the method that has become famous under
the name of “Lachmann’s method,” and it is this (or its latter-day variations, e.g.,
42 . For a history of the term, see Axel Horstmann, “Philologie,” in Historisches Wörterbuch
der Philosophie , vol. 7, ed. Joachim Ritter and Karlfried Gründer (Basel: Schwabe, 1989),
552–72. Plato is the fi rst to use the term philologia in the Th eaetetus (146a); he also uses
the related p hilologos ( Th eaetetus 161a; Laches 188c, 188e; Phaedrus 236e), as discussed
earlier.
43 . But see Kurt Röttgers, Kritik und Praxis: Zur Geschichte des Kritikbegriff s von Kant bis
Marx (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1974) for an excellent overview of this history.
12 Introduction
the anti-Lachmannism of Joseph Bédier and his followers or the neo-Lachmannism
of Giorgio Pasquali and the Italian School) that philologists mean when they speak
of textual criticism.4 4 Th e method is critical because it seeks to eliminate sources of
subjective infl uence (e.g., the editor’s personal views of the tradition) by making the
process of the reconstruction of the archetype as mechanical as possible and because
it insists that every stage of the process be documented so as to enable other scholars
to follow, review, and, if need be, make changes to editorial choices. 45
Th is leaves the third possibility: the sense of criticism found in German Indology
is inherited from the fi rst of Kant’s two senses; that is, it implies a suspicion of tradi-
tional authority. Th is is the sense operative in Indology.4 6
But a generalized suspicion does not yet amount to a method . For this, we have
to look at a second historical source of infl uence upon German Indology: the area of
scriptural hermeneutics, especially as developed and practiced by scholars such as
J. S. Semler and F. C. Bauer in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Although his name is all but forgotten by Indologists today, Johann Salomo
Semler (1725–91) was one of the leading Protestant theologians of the eighteenth
century and the father of the historical-critical method. Born in a family of Lutheran
pastors (his father Matthias Nicolaus Semler was pastor of Saalfeld; his mother was
the daughter of a Lutheran pastor), Semler was initially deeply infl uenced by Pietism
but later distanced himself from the Pietists, mainly due to their opposition to sci-
ence and to historical research. From 1743 to 1750, Semler studied theology in Halle
with Baumgarten, one of the leading Ü bergangstheologen (transition theologians) of
his day. It is mainly due to Baumgarten’s infl uence and patronage that he became one
of the foremost Aufklärungstheologen (Enlightenment theologians) of the eighteenth
century. Baumgarten was a representative of the Wolffi an school of Enlightenment
philosophy and was especially interested in applying methods of historical interpre-
tation and rational demonstration (the latter borrowed from Wolff ’s philosophy) to
scripture. Scholars consider Baumgarten to be a forerunner of the historical-critical
method, but it was his student who took the fi nal step of separating the contingent
historical aspects of scripture from its ethical and religious content. In doing so,
Semler enabled a strictly historical understanding of scripture, albeit at the price of
44 . Th e question of whether the expression “Lachmann’s method” can at all be used as
an accurate description of what scholars today understand by “textual criticism” is one
that need not concern us here. It has become commonplace to refer to textual criticism
by this name, even though, as Timpanaro demonstrates in his book, Lachmann had many
important predecessors and was neither especially consistent in his use of stemmatic anal-
ysis use nor its greatest champion. See Sebastiano Timpanaro, Th e Genesis of Lachmann’s
Method , trans. G. W. Most (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005).
45 . For an excellent overview of the basic steps of the method, see Glenn W. Most’s excel-
lent “Editor’s Introduction,” in Sebastiano Timpanaro, Th e Genesis of Lachmann’s Method ,
trans. G. W. Most (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 1–32.
46 . See, for example, Oldenberg’s and von Stietencron’s comments (both cited later)
regarding the untenability of setting out from the traditional view, disparagingly referred
to by Oldenberg as “Inderwissen” (Indian knowledge).
INTRODUCTION 13
dissolving the identifi cation of God’s Word with holy scripture characteristic of old
Protestantism.4 7
Semler’s work is motivated by the desire to “secure fi rm ground for Christian
religion, ground that could stand up to the increasing historical, philosophical, and
scientifi c criticism [of Christianity] in the age of Enlightenment.” 48 Aware that dog-
matic theology had become untenable in the age of rationalism, his solution was
to acknowledge that parts of the Bible were historical, while still retaining the idea
of a true, unchanging, and divinely inspired religion. In his main work, A bhandlung
von freier Untersuchung des Canon (4 vols., 1771–75), 49 he demonstrated “the contin-
gent and historically conditioned nature of the canon and the signifi cant diff erence
between the Biblical books, which were [henceforth] to be considered as historical
sources.” 50 However, “he did not surrender the revelation of God thereby: rooted in
the salvifi c event brought about by the crucifi xion and resurrection of Christ, it [i.e.,
the idea of revelation] is attested to clearly [and] solely in the holy scripture that has
become historically manifest, the primordial human testament of God’s word, and
[it] serves as a ‘moral,’ that is, as an ethical-religious instruction of man concern-
ing the path to salvation. . . .”5 1 In contrast, the remainder of the Bible, for Semler,
mainly represented an “accommodation” (A kkomodation ) to the listener’s historical
circumstances and intellectual horizons. How does Semler justify this separation of
revelation from history?
In the main, he sets out to demonstrate a contrast between “the ‘true Christian’
content of New Testament doctrine from its Old Testament-Jewish garb.” 52 Th us,
whereas orthodoxy taught that the Bible and dogma were absolute, “Semler taught
that one must understand everything out of its time.”5 3 “Th e content of the Biblical
books is to be ‘localized’ and ‘temporalized,’ that is, explained out of its geographic
and temporal conditions, freed from these local and temporal components, and
thus to be used in its moral content for the moral betterment of humanity. With
this, Semler created the [method of] historical-critical exegesis [characteristic] of
Enlightenment theology.” 54
47 . Historically, Semler belongs among the group of Neologen associated with the Neologie
or Neue Lehre (new doctrine or new theology) who sought to mediate between the ratio-
nalism of the Enlightenment and Protestant theology. Th e N eologen were opposed, on the
one hand, to orthodoxy but also, on the other, to the radical Enlightenment and to the
critical rationalism of Kant. Caught between the orthodox camp and the modernizers, the
Enlightenment theologians, as they were known, were successful in stemming the tide
of rationalism for a while (even representing the consensus view for a time), before ulti-
mately being overtaken in turn by history.
48 . Werner Raupp, “Semler, Johann Salomo,” in B iographisches-Bibliographisches
Kirchenlexicon , vol. 14 (Herzberg: Verlag Traugott Bautz, 1998), 1445.
49 . J. S. Semler, Abhandlung von freier Untersuchung des Canon , 4 vols. (Halle: Carl
Hermann Hemmerde, 1771–75).
50 . Raupp, “Semler, Johann Salomo,” 1445–446.
51 . Ibid., 1446.
52 . Ibid.
53 . Paul Tschackert, “Semler, Johann Salomo,” in A llgemeine Deutsche Biographie , vol. 33
(Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1891), 698.
54 . Ibid.
14 Introduction
It is not necessary here to enter into the further details of Semler’s work, but
we note some important points regarding the historical-critical method that has
been his most enduring contribution to textual studies. To begin with, Semler’s
main interest was not the “problem of historical development as such”5 5 ; indeed,
contrary to its name, the historical-critical method was a reaction to the forces of
historicism, which it sought to accommodate alongside its theological commit-
ments. Semler’s main concern was an “explicitly theological and simultaneously
Enlightenment-pedagogical [aufklärerisch pädagogische] question: what are the
contents of the individual Biblical texts, and how far can reading them spiritually
edify the contemporary reader of the Bible. . ..”?5 6 Semler considered this question
to be the “fi nal purpose and the consequence” of all “properly founded and rational
religions” and hence “even more of the Christian [religion] (Canon I, 9/hg. Scheible,
18).”5 7 For Semler, this “aufklärerisch pädagogische” impetus, as Reventlow calls it,
has as its goal the purifi cation of Christianity itself in the name of “rational religion.”
Writes Semler:
I will not permit myself to enter into a quarrel, for I have used the words “rational
religion”; I know what one commonly says and can say, but I mean it in the honest,
innocent sense that Paul could address with λ ογικε ιατρεια . It is surely quite certain
that even within Christian religion, as it has been accepted and applied by people,
much that is irrational and incorrect has taken place: all this I wish to exclude
through this rider. 58
Confronted with the dual challenges of defending faith against the radical
Enlightenment, on the one hand, and of rescuing Protestant theology from ortho-
doxy, on the other, the historical-critical method presented an opportunity to
combine the insight into the historicity of existence with the need for a transhis-
torical truth. It allowed for the creation of a religion that, at least according to its
self-understanding, was rational (and hence, ahead of other religions). 59 Practically,
this meant sacrifi cing a section of the Bible (mainly the Old Testament and espe-
cially the books Ruth, Esther, Ezra, Nehemiah, and all the narratives concerning the
history of the Israelites). Of the Book of Esther, Semler says that it recounts “only
insignifi cant, purely Israeli, local occurrences”6 0 and hence “for those readers who
55 . Henning Graf Reventlow, “Die biblischen Schriften aus ihrer Zeit heraus begrei-
fen: Johann Salomo Semler,” in E pochen der Bibelauslegung , vol. 4: Von der Aufklärung bis
zum 20. Jahrhundert (Munich: C. H. Beck, 2001), 182.
56 . Ibid.
57 . Ibid. (for the source of the quotation, see the next note).
58 . J. S. Semler, A bhandlung von freier Untersuchung des Canon nebst Antwort auf die
tübingische Vertheidigung der Apocalypsis , vol. 1 (Halle: Carl Hermann Hemmerde, 1771), 9
(emphasis in original; quotation marks are the authors’ addition).
59 . Th is is a facet of the Protestant-German self-understanding we shall encounter
again and again in German Orientalism. Th e Indologists’ claim to being more objective
than the commentarial tradition is ultimately based on this consciousness of being ahead
on the evolutionary scale, of having undergone a Reformation and Enlightenment that
non-Western cultures are yet to undergo .
60 . Ibid., 34–35.
INTRODUCTION 15
have not neglected their capabilities under the Jews, these books can be called per-
fectly useless as regards their betterment.” 61 Th is also holds for all other events of
Israeli history: these are, says Semler, “common human events [Veränderungen].” 62
As Reventlow notes, “Th e entire domain of historical events is thus denied every
salvifi c quality. Further, as they are special events of Jewish history, they are without
signifi cance for the members of other nations [Völker].”6 3 “Is it a correct conclusion,”
Semler asks, “that because the Jews consider these books to be divine holy books ,
hence all other peoples [Völker] must consider this content divine and much more
honorable than the narration of the history and special occurrences of other peoples
[Völkern]?” 64 Th e “main objection,” as Reventlow notes, is that “Jewish history (the
history of Israel) is a particular history, which [thus] cannot have any signifi cance for
humanity as a whole, since it contains no universal truths.” 65 Once one surrenders the
dogmatic claims to universal validity, the only means left of considering these works
is the historical-critical perspective. Th e interpreter’s task becomes one of explaining
the contents of the texts out of their specifi c historical—that is, geographic, social,
and temporal—situation and, in so doing, of arriving at a “historically more nuanced
evaluation of the Bible.”6 6
Likewise, the second of the two great names associated with the historical-critical
method, Ferdinand Christian Bauer, 67 relied on a dogmatic distinction between a
Judaic-Petrine and a Christian-Pauline faction within early Christianity to set the
dialectic in motion. Semler had used the distinction to drive a wedge between the
Old and the New Testaments (and between the allegedly Judaic and Pauline sec-
tions of the New Testament as well) with the express intent of rescuing Protestant
theology. Bauer now sought to establish this distinction as historical fact through
his historical-critical researches into the Bible. Th us, in his 1831 article “Die
Christuspartie in der korinthischen Gemeinde, der Gegensatz des petrinischen und
paulinischen Christenthums in der ältesten Kirche, der Apostel Petrus in Rom,” he
identifi ed
two completely opposed systems that emerged from the contrast between Judaism
and Pauline Christianity. According to the one system, revelation is only the gen-
eral disclosure of what is already present that comes about with time, and all
instruction of what has been divinely revealed occurs only via extrinsic teaching;
according to the other system, revelation is a (cid:13) (cid:7)(cid:12)(cid:14)(cid:20) (cid:13) (cid:9)(cid:10) (cid:8)(cid:12)(cid:15) [new creation] that must
61 . Ibid., 37.
62 . Ibid., 24.
63 . Reventlow, “Die biblischen Schriften aus ihrer Zeit heraus begreifen,” 184.
64 . Semler, Abhandlung , 24.
65 . Reventlow, “Die biblischen Schriften aus ihrer Zeit heraus begreifen,” 184.
66 . Ibid., 189.
67 . Indeed, the fi rst recorded occurrence of the term that has since become the stan-
dard designation for the method can be found in Bauer’s “Über Zweck und Veranlassung
des Römerbriefs und die damit zusammenhängenden Verhältnisse der römischen
Gemeinde: Eine historische-kritische Untersuchung,” Tübinger Zeitschrift für Th eologie 8,
no. 3 (1836): 59–178. Bauer is also the fi rst to coin the term T endenzkritik to describe the
critic’s task of grasping the immanent intention of the authors of the New Testament.
16 Introduction
be understood in the depths of one’s own consciousness as a higher life-principle that
has been imparted through the divine Spirit; here Christ is only the teacher, there he
is the savior in the highest sense; here all religious value is accorded to legal dealings,
there to faith in the death of the savior.6 8
Bauer also adopts Semler’s idea of perfectibility (P erfektibilitätsgedanke ), according to
which history proceeds from lower forms of religion to higher. “Th e relationship of
Christianity to heathenism and Judaism,” he writes, “can only be determined as that
of absolute religion to the forms of religion that preceded and are inferior to it. It is
the advance from serfdom to freedom, from immaturity to maturity, from the youth of
humanity to a period of adult ripeness, from the fl esh to the spirit. . . . In Christianity,
man knows himself for the fi rst time to be elevated into the element of the Spirit and of
spiritual life, his relationship to God is now the relationship of Spirit to Spirit.”6 9 Apart
from its polemical signifi cance vis-à-vis heathenism and Judaism, however, one of the
most important consequences of Bauer’s teleological conception of intellectual history
was that it laid the intellectual foundation for a refl exive historical-critical examina-
tion of the documents of the past. Th e modern historical critic rather than the tradi-
tion was now established as the sole authority on the text. In fact, he became a kind of
religious functionary entrusted with the task of mediating between the text and the
present: historicizing the text had interrupted its ability to say anything to the reader,
requiring the creation of a specialized corps of interpreters capable of translating it back
into the present.7 0 As Semler’s biographer notes, “Even if the task that results from this
[starting point] for the interpreter is to understand the content of the concerned writ-
ings locally and temporally, the historical-critical Enlightenment scholar [historisch-
kritische Aufklärer] nonetheless succeeds in transforming the content written for the
reader of that era into our way of thinking and our representations and thus in present-
ing the very same New Testament previously criticized from a theoretical perspective
as unnecessary now as not merely the fi rst but also the unchanging source of Christian
faith.” 7 1 At the price of a pseudocritical concession to the historical spirit of the age,
Enlightenment theology ends up granting the critic absolute freedom to determine
what is essential and salvifi cally relevant in the text. 72
68 . F. C. Bauer, “Die Christuspartei in der korinthischen Gemeinde, der Gegensatz des
petrinischen und paulinischen Christenthums in der ältesten Kirche, der Apostel Petrus in
Rom,” Tübinger Zeitschrift für Th eologie 3, no. 4 (1831): 134–36.
69 . F. C. Bauer, P aulus, der Apostel Jesu Christi: Sein Leben und Wirken, seine Briefe und seine
Lehre. Ein Beitrag zu einer kritischen Geschichte des Urchristenthums. Zweite Aufl age, nach den
Tode des Verfassers besorgt von Dr. Eduard Zeller , part 2 (Leipzig: Fues’s Verlag, 1867), 232.
70 . Husserl will later call (European) philosophers the “functionaries of mankind”
( Beamten der Menschheit ), showing how completely this Erastian conception of religion has
been internalized within Germany philosophy by the twentieth century.
71 . Tschackert, “Semler, Johann Salomo,” 701–2.
72 . Th is is a central part of our argument, which we will develop in the following chap-
ters. Th e modern critic’s genealogy is theological, and even when he pretends to have no
theological commitments, he is actually the spiritual and political successor to the Catholic
chaplain (of course, now with an added civilizatory, purifi catory zeal). Nowhere is this
more apparent than in the history of Mahābhārata criticism, which is why this work has
INTRODUCTION 17
Th e further history of the method, which was later adopted by Schleiermacher,
is unimportant for us here. What is important to note is that the origins of the
historical-critical method are theological, both in the trivial and nontrivial senses. Th e
historical-critical method had been developed by J. S. Semler and applied by G. L. Bauer
to the study of the Old Testament and by F. C. Bauer to the study of the New Testament.
It progressively replaced the Protestant hermeneutic principle of scriptura sacra est ver-
bum dei (Th e Holy Bible is the Word of God) with the principle scriptura sacra continet
verbum dei (Th e Holy Bible contains the Word of God). Coupled with this new interpre-
tive tendency, there was a new urgency regarding the need to look past the literal sense
of the text (the so-called sensus literalis , which earlier Protestant theologians had held
to be the true sense of scripture) at the historical realities (the realia ) behind the text.
Semler held that only the historical-critical method was capable of retrieving the mean-
ing of the text via a critical, scientifi c inquiry. Even though scholars from F. C. Bauer
onward progressively set aside Semler’s concerns with private religion and progressively
transformed the method into a free-standing literary enterprise, this did not diminish
any of its theological signifi cance. Th e growing secularization of the theological method
was but the reverse side of a growing sacralization of literary studies themselves, while
the absolute authority the method claimed for itself remains an uneasy reminder of its
theological origins.7 3
It is thus one of the ironies of history that a method that was to become such a
core component of the methodological self-understanding of the textual sciences
(T extwissenschaften ) within the university not only had a theological origin but also was
essentially theological: in spite of the name h istorical-critical method , what Semler was
interested in was not history, but to identify that part of scripture that could be consid-
ered the pure Word of God. 74
In fact, since the separation and absolutization of the Word went along with a con-
comitant relativization of other aspects of scripture (parts felt to be Judaic) or other
people’s scripture (the Old Testament as a whole), the method was not only theological
but also religious . Th e entire critical enterprise was undertaken not to defend and legiti-
mate reason, but to rescue a kernel of dogmatic truth. Further, because the method was
essentially dialectical in nature, it had to assume a minimum of t wo redactorial agencies
or ideologies in the text.7 5
been chosen as the central text for evaluating the actual praxis of Indologists, as opposed
to their self-understanding.
73 . Th is claim has recently also been made by Michael W. Kaufmann in his “Th e Religious,
the Secular, and Literary Studies: Rethinking the Secularization Narrative in Histories of
the Profession,” New Literary History 38, no. 4 (2007): 607–28.
74 . McGetchin points out (personal communication) that freeing oneself from religion
is now considered “the miracle,” an observation that should place much of contemporary
scholarship in a new light. We make a similar claim in chapter 4, when we discuss Rudolf
von Roth and his conception of an “Allgemeine Religionsgeschichte” (universal history of
religions).
75 . In the case of the Mahābhārata, this requirement would be satisfi ed by positing an
Āryan-Hindu or a Kṣatriya-Brāhmaṇa distinction. Th e practitioners of this method today
(above all, James L. Fitzgerald and Kevin McGrath) do not even realize that their so-called
critical researches into the text are determined a priori by the requirements of the method.
18 Introduction
It did not matter whether these were called the New Testament–Old
Testament-Jewish aspects of the text (Semler) or identifi ed with the Judaic-Petrine
and Christian-Pauline factions within early Christianity (Bauer): what was crucial
was positing a diff erence in order to observe it (in the form of “scientifi c” proposi-
tions), only to then recover the part one had all along been interested in.7 6
Th e method was critical only in the weak (Kantian) sense identifi ed earlier that
it entailed an aff ect against scriptural authority. Th e fact that it, in practice, was fre-
quently used to separate out the Judaic element in scripture makes it ethically ques-
tionable, even though the method was thereby simply carrying forward the legacy of
Luther’s Reformation. Finally, we need to note that, in the historical-critical method,
the method determines the results rather than vice versa, so that the question of its
applicability to texts is always moot.
And yet it is precisely this method, so deeply permeated with the spirit of
eighteenth-century Protestantism and Enlightenment theology, that was ulti-
mately to be defi nitive for the new nineteenth-century discipline of Indology. Th e
enormous prestige of the new biblical criticism practiced by F. C. Bauer and the
so-called Tübingen School and the infl uence of nineteenth-century historicism made
it a foregone conclusion that this new discipline would adopt the spirit, if not the
very method, of this new historical-critical era. In practice, the introduction of the
historical-critical method was mediated via Orientalists such as Heinrich Ewald at
Tübingen. In a letter to his colleagues in 1840, Ewald warned them “in Germany to
pay much more attention to history than has been the case until now.”7 7 According to
Mangold, who cites the passage, this “impetus did not by any means echo unheard.
Alongside the affi rmation of philology, there were Orientalists even in the 1830s
and 40s who were interested in historical themes and imbibed the critical method
of the historians with its claim to a ‘systematic collection and critical examination
of all sources.’ ” 78 Polaschegg notes that “in the wake of new concepts of translation
that focused on the uniqueness of the source languages and tried to give it expres-
sion, Orientalist literature. . . began to manifest as a linguistic and literary mode .”7 9
“Simultaneously, there was a transformation of the Orient, which transformed
itself from a contemporary place, as it had been until then, to a historical space, and
thus to one to which one could only gain access via making hermeneutic eff orts.” 80
Th e text must have a history, because the method demands a history: it is in this sense that
this method can at all be called a historical-critical method.
76 . Th e analogue in material physics would be a physicist with a spectrometer who said, “I can
only use this spectrometer to analyze samples composed of at least two elements or impuri-
ties, but I cannot use it to analyze samples composed of a single pure element. And because
I am incapable of detecting a pure element, the only elements that I can detect in your impure
sample will be the two that you tell me are already in it.” Would one accept this as science?
77 . Heinrich Ewald, “Schluss dieser Ausgabe der Zeitschrift,” Zeitschrift für die Kunde des
Morgenlandes 3 (1840): 491.
78 . Sabine Mangold, E ine “weltbürgerliche Wissenschaft”: Die deutsche Orientalistik im 19.
Jahrhundert (Wiesbaden: Fritz Steiner Verlag, 2004), 104.
79 . Andreas Polaschegg, Der andere Orientalismus: Regeln deutsch-morgenländischer
Imagination im 19. Jahrhundert (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2005), 278 (italics in original).
80 . Ibid.
INTRODUCTION 19
“Protestant theology, the sole science in Germany that traditionally had a cognitive
interest in the Orient, held the methodical tools ready for such an understanding access
to the Orient. Facilitated by the diff erentiation of historical and systematic research
within Protestant theology, a fi eld arose of a historical-critical Oriental science that
institutionalized itself around the middle of the nineteenth century as an independent,
yet still historical-critical discipline.” 81
Th e trajectory traced by Oriental science from theological beginnings to an independent
yet still historical-critical discipline is the very one traced by Indology, with perhaps one
exception. Whereas the boundaries between Oriental science and theology (especially Old
Testament theology), conditioned by the nature of their subject, remained fl uid, Indology
was able, at least offi cially, to distance itself from theology even as it borrowed both tools (the
historical-critical method) and agendas (a continuation of its anticlerical, anti-authoritarian
stance) from the latter. For this reason, the history told here will largely take the form of
interrogating the statements of German Indologists to see where and in what form this
theological inheritance has, historically speaking, informed their concrete praxis.
DEFINING THE SCOPE OF INQUIRY
Although this book is intended as a history of German Indology, it naturally cannot
claim to be exhaustive. German Indology is a huge and diverse fi eld, extending from
scholarship on the Vedic hymns, Upanisạ ds, Dharmaśāstras, Purāṇas, and so on to
treatises on systematic philosophy ( sạ ḍdarśana ), Indian drama, poetry, literature, and
grammatical and scientifi c texts. It encompasses a number of technical aids such as dic-
tionaries, grammar books, and catalogues of manuscripts. However, the scope of our
inquiry was delimited by its double concern of presenting a history of German Indology
from the perspective of its method and a history of its method from the perspective of
its theological inheritance (the two, in the end, being one and the same). It would make
no sense to castigate lower criticism work for its ideological perspective.8 2
For this reason, it seemed most appropriate to focus on German interpretations
of the Indian epic, the Mahābhārata, and of a portion of the epic, the Bhagavadgītā. 83
Th ese texts played a crucial role in German intellectual circles beginning in the
81 . Ibid. (italics in original).
82 . Th is has been attempted by Peter van der Veer in his essay “Monumental Texts: Th e
Critical Edition of India’s National Heritage,” in Invoking the Past: Th e Uses of History in
South Asia , ed. Daud Ali (New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1999), 134–55, but with
less than successful results. Lower criticism work must be criticized from a lower critical
perspective, higher critical work from the perspective of revealing its underlying ideology.
83 . Th e Mahābhārata is one of two Sanskrit epics, the other being the Rāmāyaṇa.
Although we could also have expanded our focus to include the latter (many of the authors
studied in this book also wrote on the Rāmāyaṇa; some, like the Bonn scholar Hermann
Jacobi, also published entire books on it), there were two main reasons for limiting discus-
sion only to the Mahābhārata. First, the Mahābhārata played a much more central role
in the formation of German ideas of “critical” research. Even though German scholars
applied similar sorts of prejudices to the study of the Rāmāyaṇa, on the whole the text
was less productive for their ideology. Second, Rāmāyaṇa studies largely avoided the kind
20 Introduction
nineteenth century.8 4 To trace the story of the rise and fall of German Mahābhārata
and Bhagavadgītā studies is thus simultaneously to track the fate of the discipline
as a whole. Additionally, the availability of a critical edition of the epic allowed us
to delimit the scope of inquiry further. By presenting a comprehensive overview
of the textual tradition, the critical edition ruled out certain kinds of hypotheses
(e.g., Āryan “Urepos,” original bardic narrative). Further, when studying the stemma
created by Sukthankar for this text, as well as the critical edition text itself, we
became aware of a dissonance between the text’s literary self-consciousness and its
Wirkungsgeschichte and R ezeptionsgeschichte , on the one hand, and the interpreta-
tions of German writers on the epic, on the other. Th e text-historical method, which
was repeatedly called “scientifi c” (w issenschaftlich ), turned out to be far from a pre-
suppositionless science. What historical processes were driving the ideology behind
the articles of faith in higher criticism? A careful study of the genesis of Mahābhārata
studies in Germany thus became necessary.
We also could have extended this analysis across space and time (covering, for
example, the British and French reception of the text or extending the analysis back
in time to cover the fi rst phase of Oriental studies in Germany), but this would have
diluted the focus of the book and, moreover, made it unwieldy. Further, our argu-
ment was specifi c to a subunit of Oriental studies in Europe. We were claiming that
academic Indology, as it developed in Germany between the early nineteenth and
twentieth centuries, had been infl uenced by a Protestant inheritance mediated via
the historical-critical method. It would be a diff erent matter altogether (and a diff er-
ent book) to study what kinds of prejudices were in play in British or French Sanskrit
studies around the same time, and it would require similarly detailed textual research
to make those claims.
Although our analysis focuses on the vicissitudes of this discipline as it devel-
oped in Germany, it is important to specify that by German Indology we do not,
obviously, mean all Germans. We do not defi ne German Indology by national or
racial identity, any more than we mean that all German Indologists are alike. In
fact, the second chapter of this work (on German Gītā interpretations) is con-
cerned to demonstrate the tremendous latitude (deriving from personal predi-
lections) between these interpretations. Th ese diff erences, like the personal and
political diff erences between individual Indologists, must be borne in mind. Th ere
were frequent disagreements about approaches, the correct interpretation of texts,
of problems that affl ict Mahābhārata studies, largely due to the eff orts of the scholars
working on an English translation of the Rāmāyaṇa’s critical edition. Under the guidance
of Robert P. Goldman and Sally J. Sutherland, the Rāmāyaṇa translation scholars evolved a
balanced approach to the study of epic, combining textual refl ections with literary, ethical,
and epistemological concerns.
84 . Th e Bhagavadgītā has been the paradigmatic text for the German reception of Indian
thought, as scholars such as Figueira, Sharpe, and Herling have argued. Herling has pre-
sented a lucid account of the fi rst phase of German reception (the period 1778 to 1831).
Th e fi rst three chapters of this book cover the period thereafter (i.e., 1837–1937), trac-
ing the way the historicist and epic fantasies of Christian Lassen, Adolf Holtzmann Sr.
and Adolf Holtzmann Jr. provided the impetus for a less philosophical preoccupation with
Indian texts in academic Indology.
INTRODUCTION 21
and reconstructions of the tradition. Th ese disagreements were exacerbated by per-
sonal and political antagonisms and by the inevitable competition that must result
between members of a small, isolated community. One would not, for instance, want
to place a scholar such as Heinrich Lüders (forced to resign his professorship at the
University of Berlin in 1935 by the National Socialists)8 5 on the same level as Jakob
Wilhelm Hauer8 6 (National Socialist German Workers Party [NSDAP] member and
founder of the Āryan Seminar at the University of Tübingen) 87 or Erich Frauwallner
(NSDAP member and proponent of theories of racial superiority).8 8 Nor ought one
overlook the small but signifi cant minority of Jewish scholars (among them, Walter
Ruben, Richard Simon, and Otto Stein)8 9 or women Indologists (Else Lüders, Betty
Heimann) or the minority of German Indologists employed outside Germany (Georg
Bühler, until 1880 at Elphinstone College, Bombay, and Franz Kielhorn, until 1881 at
Deccan College, Pune).
What, then, do we mean by German Indology? As we use the term in this study,
we have in mind primarily a m ode of doing scholarship. Even though this mode origi-
nated in Germany, its application was international. For example, French, English,
Dutch, and American scholars quickly assimilated the text-historical method. 90
85 . See Pollock, “Deep Orientalism?” 95 and 122, n. 37.
86 . Jakob Wilhelm Hauer was a founder the Āryan Seminar (das Arische Seminar) at the
University of Tübingen and a member of the SS and SA. Interned after the war and found
guilty of collaboration with the Nazis, Hauer was banned from teaching until 1950. On
Hauer’s life and work, see the recent book by Šā‘ûl Bauman, D ie Deutsche Glaubensbewegung
und ihr Gründer Jakob Wilhelm Hauer (1881–1962) , trans. Alma Lessing (Marburg: Diagonal
Verlag, 2005). Th e older book by Margarete Dierks, Jakob Wilhelm Hauer, 1881–1962:
Leben, Werk, Wirkung: mit einer Personalbibliographie (Heidelberg: Schneider, 1986), in con-
trast, is mostly inaccurate and highly partisan.
87 . On the Āryan Seminar, see Horst Junginger, “Das ‘Arische Seminar’ der Universität
Tübingen 1940–1945,” in I ndienforschung im Zeitenwandel: Analysen und Dokumente zur
Indologie und Religionswissenschaft in Tübingen , ed. Heidrun Brückner, Klaus Butzenberger,
Angelika Malinar, and Gabriele Zeller (Tübingen: Attempto Verlag, 2003), 177–207.
88 . See his 1939 essay, “Der arische Anteil an der indischen Philosophie,” Wiener
Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 46 (1939): 267–91; and G eschichte der indischen
Philosophie , vol. 1 (Salzburg: Otto Müller Verlag, 1953).
89 . Th is rich and plural inheritance was, unfortunately, all but eliminated in the Second
World War. It would be interesting to see if Indology made any eff orts after the war to
rehabilitate Jewish Indologists or to recruit new members to their ranks.
90 . McGetchin (Douglas T. McGetchin, “Wilting Florists: Th e Turbulent Early Decades of the
Société Asiatique, 1822–1860,” J ournal of the History of Ideas 64, no. 4 [2003]: 565–80) traces
the decline of French Oriental studies in the period 1825–60 at least in part to debates over
method triggered by the “Florist” controversy of 1825–29. (Th e controversy had been triggered
by two articled published in the journal of the Société Asiatique by the young German scholar
F. E. Schultz in 1825. Schultz criticized the Florists, scholars more interested in the literary
qualities of translations, for their lack of philological accuracy. Th e clash of methods “almost
tore the Société Asiatique apart and succeeded in setting Orientalist scholars in France on an
exacting, scientifi c course,” yet, as McGetchin notes, it also had “a serious unintended conse-
quence: the adoption of this new agenda also inhibited the further growth of Oriental studies
in France.” Ibid., 565). While there are a number of factors—cultural, political, and institu-
tional—for the dominance of German Oriental studies by the mid-nineteenth century, there is
little doubt that the perceived rigour of German scholarship vis-à-vis their European counter-
parts played a role in this rise.
22 Introduction
Th e American Sanskritist Edward W. Hopkins studied in Berlin and Leipzig
(between 1878 and 1881) and, on his return, introduced the method to America. 91
(Before him, William Dwight Whitney had studied Oriental languages under Albrecht
Weber in Berlin and under Rudolf von Roth in Tübingen from 1850–53 and later
undertook a highly public campaign against Max Müller, whom he considered to be
popular as against the rigour of German academics.9 2 ) One could also characterize a
number of other American Sanskritists (e.g., James L. Fitzgerald) who did not study
in Germany as German Indologists. But although German Indology, in its practice, is
international, in its essential formulation and in its inception , it remains German. For
this reason, we are justifi ed in speaking of German Indology. However, the reader
must keep three things in mind at all times:
1. Th is epithet refers strictly and exclusively to an Indology based on the
historical-critical method and following certain agendas that can best be under-
stood out of German Protestantism.
2. Th is study takes a text-based approach, and its claims refer to a highly circum-
scribed group of texts and/or authors. Whether and in what way these claims can
be extended to the work of other Indologists working in other fi elds (e.g., Vedas,
Purāṇas) remains a subject for a separate study.
3. As German Indology is a broad term unifying various theoretical currents and
approaches (e.g., I ndische Literatur, Indische Philologie, Indische Altertumskunde,
Orientalische Philologie, Vergleichende Sprachwissenschaft, Sanskrit Philologie,
Indogermanische Studien) , the analysis here refers more narrowly to that part of
Indology identifi ed with a certain tradition of Indian historiography that followed
specifi c ideological and fundamentalist agendas in its historio-graphy of India.9 3
91 . See Franklin Edgerton, “Edward Washburn Hopkins, 1857–1932,” Journal of the
American Oriental Society 52, no. 4 (1932): 311–15.
92 . One of the reasons for Whitney’s virulent attacks on Müller was the latter’s rela-
tively generous assessment of Indian commentators. In contrast, Whitney wished to
inherit the mantle of German scholarship and thus joined scholars such as Albrecht
Weber and Rudolf von Roth in their polemics against the tradition. Although dis-
dain for traditional scholarship was commonplace among European scholars, there
was variation between individual schools with some Indologists being more open to
Indian knowledge. Whitney, resentful of Müller’s success, found that Müller’s more
positive evaluation of Indian thought offered him a weak spot to target. See Douglas
T. McGetchin,“The Whitney-Müller Conflict and Indo-German Connections,” in
Mapping Channels Between Ganges and Rhein: German-Indian Cross-Cultural Relations ,
ed. Jörg Esleben, Christina Kraenzle and Sukanya Kulkarni (Newcastle upon
Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2008), 29–50, see esp. 46–48.
93 . Th e term historio-graphy is Gerdmar’s, who clarifi es it thus: “History, then, is much
less an attempt to interpret historical empirical data of w ie es eigentlich gewesen , than an
ideological construct that expresses the author’s overall view on Jews and Judaism in
relation to early Christianity, by telling the story in a certain way. I therefore consciously
use the term historio- graphy , to stress that the writing of history is the writing of a story
that is an expression of the author’s viewpoints, as much as it is a mere description of
the object described.” Anders Gerdmar, Roots of Th eological Anti-Semitism: German Biblical
Interpretation and the Jews, from Herder and Semler to Kittel and Bultmann (Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 2009), 10–11. It is in this sense that we adopt and use the term.
INTRODUCTION 23
We shall therefore focus mainly on the Tübingen and Bonn schools of Indology.
Th e former, via the tradition of the Tübingen School of F. C. Bauer, David Friedrich
Strauss, and other evangelical theologians, has been most interested in prosecuting
religious goals in the name of a scientifi c study of India. 94 Th e latter, via the work
of Christian Lassen, amateur historian and anthropologist of race, 95 has been most
94 . Beginning with the Veda scholar Rudolf von Roth, who dedicated himself to the study
of the Vedas, there has been a tradition at Tübingen of focusing on literature that can
be assigned broadly to the category of “scripture.” Roth’s own teacher was the prominent
evangelical theologian Heinrich Ewald. Ewald defended a view of continual development
in the history of religions, with Christianity representing the highest stage of the evolu-
tion of man’s moral and spiritual being (see esp. his seven-volume work, Geschichte des
Volkes Israel bis Christus [H istory of Israel , 1843–59]; esp. vol. 1, 9; and vol. 7, 394). As
Stiftsinspektor (i.e., a member of the supervisory committee of the Evangelical Seminar),
Roth was also actively involved in the development of theological studies at Tübingen. His
student Richard Garbe set forth the theological focus of Tübingen Indology, as did Garbe’s
student, the Nazi Indologist J. W. Hauer, who actively promoted a primordial Germanic
religiosity through his organization, Deutsche Glaubensbewegung. Th e Tübingen focus
on religion is continued today by Heinrich von Stietencron, who suggests discarding the
term H induism altogether as part of a project of “rediscovering and accepting Hindu reli-
gious plurality.” Heinrich von Stietencron, “Religious Confi gurations in Pre-Muslim India
and the Modern Concept of Hinduism,” in H indu Myth, Hindu History: Religion, Art, and
Politics (Delhi: Permanent Black, 2005), 289. For Stietencron, the notion of a single Hindu
identity is itself an element of a “drive for . . . power politics”; it is guided “by a missionary
conception of one ‘Hinduism’ ” and hence made it “possible to claim for ‘Hinduism’ an
overwhelming majority among the religions existing in India simply by ignoring, in the
statistics, the existing religious diff erentiation between Vai ṣ ṇ avas, Śaivas, Śāktas, tribal
religions, Gā ṇ apatyas, etc.” Ibid. Stietencron has been recently criticized by Nicholson for
using, or rather, perverting scholarship in pursuit of interventionist agendas; see Andrew
J. Nicholson, U nifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in Indian Intellectual History
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2010), 201. Contemporary practitioners of the
Tübingen School include Angelika Malinar and Peter Schreiner; both are primarily con-
cerned with religious topics.
95 . Lassen’s dissertation, titled Pentapotamia indica: Commentatio geographica atque his-
torica (Bonn: Weber, 1827), undertook a geographical and historical investigation into
the Panjab, based mainly on the accounts of ancient travelers and of ancient texts such
as the Mahābhārata. Although written under the guidance of A. W. Schlegel, Lassen was
uninterested in philosophical or literary questions. Much of the work focuses on deducing
geographical facts from the similarity of place names in Greek and Sanskrit (see the review
of the work in J enaische Allgemeine Literaturzeitung 193 [1828]: 97–101). Lassen also set
forth this pseudohistorical approach in numerous later works, especially his monumental
Indische Alterthumskunde (fi rst volume published 1847 [fi rst half 1843; rev. ed. 1867 (fi rst
half 1866)], second volume 1852 [fi rst half 1849; rev. ed. 1873], third volume 1858 [fi rst
half 1857], fourth volume 1861, appendices 1862). Contemporary accounts of Lassen
tend to the hagiographic and rarely mention his interest in race; see, for example, Horst
Albach, “Der Indologe Christian Lassen,” in O rden Pour le Mérite für Wissenschaften und
Kunst. Reden und Gedenkworte , vol. 36: 2007–2008 (Göttingen: Wallstein, 2007), 109–13;
and the even more bombastic comments by Klaus Karttunen in “Christian Lassen (1800–
1876): A Neglected Pioneer of Indology,” in Expanding and Merging Horizons: Contributions
to South Asian and Cross-Cultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass , ed. Karin
Preisendanz (Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences, 2007), 109–19.
24 Introduction
interested in historical investigations, whereby one must keep in mind that the his-
tories these scholars came up with rarely existed outside their own minds. 96
Since it is this combination of religious, evangelical concerns with (pseudo)his-
torical methodology that became defi nitive for the discipline known as German
Indology, this book focuses mainly on what might be termed a Tübingen-Bonn axis.
Th is is not to say that this approach was employed o nly in Tübingen and Bonn. On the
contrary, it was adopted all over Germany.9 7
However, since the methodological approach we are interested in querying fi rst
emerges from the crossing of the religious-historical (r eligionsgeschichtlich ) per-
spective of Tübingen Indology (Richard von Roth, Richard Garbe, Heinrich von
Stietencron) with the historical reconstructions of the Bonn school (Christian
Lassen, Willibald Kirfel, Paul Hacker), we shall attune our inquiry to two sets of
questions:
1. What were the religious agendas German Indologists were pursuing, what was the
religious context that shaped them in their formative years, and what role did an
outwardly secularized conception of religion, namely, in the form of the “study of
religions” (R eligionswissenschaft ) or the “history of religions” (R eligionsgeschichte ),
play in their work?
2. What was the understanding of history these Indologists were operating with,
how did historical topics go proxy for religious goals, and in what way did the
positing of an outwardly secularized historical science as the end goal and culmi-
nation of human intellectual development itself contribute to the creation of a
teleological narrative of history?
Finally, one might also ask: why only Germans? Why not, for example, the English?
Extending this logic, one could generalize away the problems of Mahābhārata schol-
arship as one of inevitable misunderstandings that complicate any intercultural
encounter. Th ese issues have been dealt with admirably by Figueira and in the litera-
ture following her pathbreaking work. 98 But this study is precisely not adding to the
already prodigious literature on European Orientalism. Rather, it concretely studies
inceptive and enduring interpretations of the Indian epic from two perspectives: a
historical perspective and an epistemological perspective.
96 . Th is view is shared by Madeleine Biardeau; see her Hinduism: Th e Anthropology of a
Civilization , trans. Richard Nice (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1989), esp. 4–6.
97 . Other approaches were in play, such as the comparative linguistics of Franz Bopp
(1791–1867), and these approaches too made a grab for the popular imagination as
discussed by McGetchin in his chapter “Reaching the Public” ( chapter 5 of I ndology,
Indomania, and Orientalism ). But the r eligionsgeschichtliche method has dominated
German studies on the epics, the Purān ̣ as, and the Bhagavadgītā. In terms of volume,
these studies easily exceed the grammatical, linguistic, and lexical works produced by
German scholars.
98 . See her T ranslating the Orient and also her Th e Exotic: A Decadent Quest , both cited
earlier.
INTRODUCTION 25
Historically, the dominant principles that inform Mahābhārata study, especially
as “scientifi c” and “critical,” were forged in Germany. Th e S itz im Leben of early
Mahābhārata criticism is not Europe in general, but among Germanophone scholars.
Th e text-historical method itself arises historically out of a series of events that are
fi rst and foremost a part of German history. Further, certain theses regarding the
Mahābhārata, such as the war narrative hypothesis, the Āryan hypothesis, and its
correlate, the Brahmanic hypothesis, which have since become dogma within schol-
arship pertaining to this epic, were conceived and nurtured initially and for the most
part by German Indologists in the German language. Th at these hypotheses were
by no means compelling or even persuasive is shown by the work of the brilliant
French scholar Madeleine Biardeau and her American counterpart, Alf Hiltebeitel.
Th e reader ought to bear in mind that within Europe and in the United States, there
are o ther approaches to the study of the epic that serve as contemporary counterex-
amples to German Indology as it pertains to Mahābhārata studies.9 9
Epistemologically, at least since Foucault, we are aware of the hegemonic and nor-
mative dimensions of “science.” Th e term W issenschaft occurs frequently in German
Indology. What is the basis for this insistence on the rhetoric of scientifi city? Th e
text-historical method chooses a certain construction of history over every other
understanding of truth. Th us, instead of asking whether something is true, we now
ask, why did some people believe it to be true? Put simply, the truth of a thing is
reduced to its history. Th us in evaluating the text-historical method as practiced
by German Mahābhārata scholars, it would be inappropriate to apply some exter-
nal veridical standard. Th is study therefore outlines the institution, hegemony, and
diremption of the text-historical method. Th ese larger questions concerning how
truth is created and used guide this study; for this reason, we found it appropriate
to relate it to other views of truth and textual hermeneutics, such as Gadamer, and
other uses of texts, such as Gandhi.
PLAN OF STUDY
In chapter 1, we take a close look at some early interpretations of the
Mahābhārata, including Christian Lassen’s “Beiträge zur “Beiträge zur Kunde
des Indischen Altertum aus dem Mahâbhârata ,”1 00 Adolf Holtzmann Sr.’s Indische
99 . See, for instance, the studies by David Shulman, Frederick M. Smith, and Gregory
M. Bailey cited in the bibliography. All of these studies have brought to light important
facets of the Indian epic, using a variety of perspectives—literary, psychoanalytic, philo-
sophic, sociocultural, and biographic. Th e Mahābhārata has also been usefully studied in
conjunction with the Purān ̣ as, most notably by Madeleine Biardeau and Wendy Doniger.
But these authors represent a minority view within contemporary Mahābhārata studies,
which have largely followed the pseudocritical, racial approach pioneered by Christian
Lassen and further developed by Adolf Holtzmann Jr. and Hermann Oldenberg.
100 . Christian Lassen, “Beiträge zur “Beiträge zur Kunde des Indischen Altertum aus
dem M ahâbhârata I: Allgemeines über das Mahā bhā rata ” and “Beiträge zur Kunde des
Indischen Altertum aus dem M ahâbhârata II: Die Altindischen Völker”; both in Zeitschrift
26 Introduction
Sagen ,1 01 and Adolf Holtzmann Jr.’s Z ur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahābhārata and
Die neunzehn Bücher des Mahābhārata.1 02 This inceptive chapter shows how con-
cepts such as internal criticism ( innere Kritik ), tendency criticism ( Tendenzkritik ),
and text history and redaction history (T extgeschichte and R edaktionsgeschichte )
that originally developed in the context of biblical criticism were projected onto
the Indian epic. Even though the original field of application of these concepts
was Old Testament criticism, they were found useful in epic studies to separate
out an “Urepos” (a primordial epic or an original epic) from the text as extant, a
process that led to the postulation of two phases (stages or ideologies) in Indian
history: an Āryan-Indo-Germanic phase and a Brahmanic-Hindu phase. These
concepts had roughly the same heuristic value as the distinction between Petrine
and Pauline factions in primal Christianity had for biblical criticism.
In chapter 2, we focus on the work of Adolf Holtzmann Jr. Although not the fi rst
to postulate an Indo-Germanic original epic at the root of the three epic traditions
(i.e., Greek, German, and Indian),1 03 Holtzmann is the fi rst to develop the hypothesis
of an Urepos into a comprehensive theory. In doing so, he simultaneously creates the
image of the Āryans that is to be defi nitive for all future German scholarship: a heroic,
warlike race capable of both violence and greatness. Holtzmann also makes use of a
second distinction that is fundamental to German Bhagavadgītā scholarship: the dis-
tinction between the war narrative and the didactic episodes of the epic. 104
Th e dynamic between these two pairs of distinctions (Āryan versus Brahmanic,
war epic versus philosophical-didactic) constitutes the historical backdrop against
which German scholarship on the Gītā must be studied. Hence, understanding their
historical origins and the ideological value attached to them is a crucial step in map-
ping the history of this scholarship.
für die Kunde des Morgenlandes (1837): 61–86 and 341–53. Part 2 was continued in
Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 2 (1839): 21–70 and 3 (1840): 183–217.
101 . Adolf Holtzmann Sr., Indische Sagen. Zweite verbesserte Ausgabe , vol. 1 (Stuttgart:
Verlag von Adolphe Krabbe, 1854).
102 . Adolf Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahābhārata (Kiel: C. F. Haessler,
1892) and D ie neunzehn Bücher des Mahābhārata (Kiel: C. F. Haessler, 1893).
103 . Th e fi rst was, in fact, his uncle Adolf Holtzmann Sr., whose book I ndische Sagen we
also discuss in this volume.
104 . Although Holtzmann makes use of this distinction, he is not its inventor. It can
be traced back to the work of Christian Lassen, who in his 1837 article had suggested
that the original epic would have been expanded through the addition of didactic materi-
als. Although the earliest references to a “Bhārata” as opposed to a “Mahā-” or “Great”
“Bhārata” may be found in Lassen’s article, it is Goldstücker who gives the thesis its clas-
sic form, writing: “Th e groundwork of the poem, as mentioned before, is the great war
between two rival families of the same kin; it occupies the contents of about 24,000 verses.
Th is, however, was overlaid with episodical matter of the most heterogeneous kind. . . . ”
Th eodor Goldstücker, “Hindu Epic Poetry: Th e Mahâbhârata,” Th e Westminster Review
n.s., 33 (1868): 388, reprinted in Literary Remains of the Late Professor Goldstücker , vol.
2 (London: W. H. Allen, 1879), 86–154. Goldstücker, however, was reviewing Lassen’s
work (I ndische Alterthumskunde , vols. 1–4), which tells us something about how scholarly
myths, once they start, can be continually reinforced. By the time Hopkins gives the thesis
his imprimatur (in 1901 in his Th e Great Epic of India: Its Character and Origin [New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1901]) by introducing the terms “epic” and “pseudo-epic” to refer
to the two parts, the thesis is a fundament of Western approaches to the Mahābhārata.
INTRODUCTION 27
In chapter 3, we apply the hermeneutic perspectives gained in the previous chap-
ter to a reading of six German Gītās. 105 Th is chapter covers (in sequence) the “pan-
theistic Gītā” of Adolf Holtzmann Jr., the “theistic Gītā” of Richard Garbe, the “epic
Gītā” of Hermann Jacobi, the “Kṛṣṇa Gītā” of Hermann Oldenberg, the “trinitarian
Gītā” of Rudolf Otto, and the “Āryan Gītā” of J. W. Hauer. To these six “Indological
Gītās,” we also add a fi nal one: the “Brahmanic Gītā” of Georg von Simson. 106
Each of these Gītās operates with the basic conceptual vocabulary provided
by Holtzmann. By reconstructing their (often complex and mutually contradic-
tory) analyses of the poem, we are able to track how German Gītā scholarship
oscillates between the two poles of a heroic Āryan inheritance and its rationalis-
tic Enlightenment-Protestant inheritance. For example, Holtzmann valorizes the
“pantheistic” elements of the Bhagavadgītā as being more original than its “the-
istic elements.” He sees the former (founded on primitive nature worship) as the
genuine inheritance of the Indo-Germanic tribes. Th e latter, in contrast, represents
Brahmanic infl uence on the Gītā. He is opposed by Richard Garbe, who wishes to
reclaim the Indo-Germanic heritage as being consonant with nineteenth-century
Enlightenment Germany. Th e theistic elements are an original inheritance; the
pantheistic elements, in contrast, refl ect the Indian tendency to dissolve all dif-
ferences in the idea of an all-encompassing unity. Since pantheism, following the
It will not be questioned thereafter until the mid-twentieth century (in the work of V. S.
Sukthankar, editor of the Mahābhārata critical edition; see his On the Meaning of the
Mahābhārata [Bombay: Asiatic Society, 1957]).
105 . Th e expression “German Gītā” is, of course, borrowed from the title of Herling’s
book. We use it as a shorthand to designate German Gītā scholarship, although as Herling’s
book (and now our work) suggests, there is no essential “German Gītā,” but only a plurality
of interpretations. In spite of this plurality, however, there is a common ideology under-
pinning these interpretations and it is t his ideology we have in mind when we use the
expression in the singular.
106 . Other Gītās might have been considered. We could also have included the Gītās
of F. Otto Schrader (“the oldest Gītā as part of the pre-Vi ṣ ṇ uite Mahābhārata was at an
end with II, 38 . . . but was possibly expanded with a number of ślokas in the same tone,
before the Bhāgavatas placed the actual ‘Bhagavadgītā’ on this small foundation, which
[Bhagavadgītā] in the fi nal stage, [now] recognized as part of the Mahābhārata, passed
through the hands of a Vedāntic revisionist”; “Über Bhagavadgītā II, 46,” Zeitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 64 [1910]: 340) or of E. W. Hopkins (“Th is Divine
Song . . . is at present a Krishnaite revision of an older Vishnuite poem, and this in turn was
at fi rst an unsectarian work, perhaps a late Upanishad”; Edward Washburn Hopkins, Th e
Religions of India [Boston and London: Ginn & Company, 1895], 389) or of M. Winternitz
(“I would like to believe that of the fi nal songs of the Bhagavadgita only the twelve verses
XVIII. 55–66 are genuine and old, and these most probably constituted the conclusion of
the poem . . . . I therefore do not believe that Garbe is fully in the right when he eliminates
the 170 verses that contain Vedic-Brahmanic and pantheistic doctrines, but rather, I would
hazard that we ought to eliminate at least another 200 verses so that the old and genuine
Bhagavadgītā was smaller by more than one half of its present extent”; Review of Vier phi-
losophische Texte des Mahābhārata , by Paul Deussen and Otto Strauss, Wiener Zeitschrift für
die Kunde des Morgenlandes 21 [1907]: 197). Th e problem with these Gītās is that they are
derivative: Schrader and Winternitz wish only to extend Garbe’s ideas and Hopkins mainly
sets forth his ideas of the evolution of the Mahābhārata epic, ideas that, as we shall see, he
owes to Holtzmann’s Mahābhārata.
28 Introduction
Pantheismusstreit of the eighteenth century, had become socially unacceptable in
Germany, Garbe rejects it. Th e lusty, blood-drinking Āryans valorized by Holtzmann
now become good (proto-) Christians.
Chapter 3 concludes with an overview of these scholarly diff erences and debates.
We argue that the German Gītā is constituted less by its content (which can vary
enormously) than by certain presuppositions regarding the nature and function of
scholarship. Th ese may be summarized as:
1. A rejection of theology and philosophy. 107
2. Unbounded confi dence in the historian’s ability to recover an “original.”
3. A rejection of Indian hermeneutics as “uncritical.”
4. A claim to sovereignty over both text and tradition.
Th is fourfold characterization justifi es us in our claim that German Indology con-
stitutes less a national tradition than a certain m ode of doing scholarship.1 08 It is
this mode that needs to be subjected to analysis from both historical and critical
standpoints.
In chapter 4, we take up this task. We fi rst subject the statements of con-
temporary Indologists to historical analysis. Th us, we trace the antecedents of
their views in nineteenth-century isms: historicism, secularism, and scienticism
( Wissenschaftlichkeit ). Following Howard, we argue that these concepts represent
valid, albeit terminologically problematic, attempts to characterize fundamental
changes in European intellectual consciousness in the nineteenth century 109 but
that their legacy in the humanities is more complex and ambiguous than appears at
fi rst. Further, in the case of Indology, these processes were ill understood and rarely
refl ected upon. Only in this way could the situation arise that a method originating
in a refl ex against rationalism could come to be mistaken for the ideal of enlightened,
self-critical, and progressive scholarship. Indology today, we argue, especially in
some of its more reactionary strains, still refl ects this dogmatic inheritance. Th us, a
clarifi cation of Indology’s method from a historical standpoint is an essential step on
the way to a discussion of how the humanities can rethink their task after Indology.
Chapter 5 then subjects the statements of Indologists to critical analysis. Applying
perspectives from Schürmann to Gadamer, we show how Indology became a progres-
sively outmoded and isolated discipline. Even though contemporary scholars such as
107 . Th ere are important exceptions here, of course. Some, like Paul Deussen and Otto
Strauss, took philosophy seriously. Th ey even accepted and emphasized important ele-
ments of Indian theology. But this book focuses on the mainstream of German Indology,
which was not open to these ideas. In fact, Deussen, for all his signifi cance for German phi-
losophy via his translation of the Upani ṣ ads, rarely plays a major role in German histories
of the discipline. An alternative history could be written about the path German Indology
could have taken, but this book is concerned only with the path it did in fact take.
108 . However, the term should not be understood to mean that German Indology is
merely a style, a historical phenomenon, one possible approach among others. Th ere are
serious ethical and epistemological implications to this way of approaching Indian texts,
implications we clarify later in this book.
109 . See Howard, Religion and the Rise of Historicism , 3.
INTRODUCTION 29
Stietencron emphasize Indology’s nature as a historicist science, they fail to see that
just as historicism developed from the crisis of theology in the nineteenth century,
hermeneutic phenomenology developed from the crisis of historicism in the twen-
tieth. Th us, the very self-understanding of this discipline, as refl ected in the state-
ments of its theoreticians and defenders, is out of step with major developments
in contemporary philosophy. Further, the positivism Indology subscribes to is an
incomplete positivism: it takes the turn neither to a positivism dominated by social,
emancipatory, and aesthetic concerns, as in Comte, nor to a critical positivism domi-
nated by the rejection of a reality independent of the model-character of science, as
in Mach, nor to a logical positivism dominated by the verifi cation principle, as in
Carnap.
Th e analysis of German Indology from both historical and critical perspectives
sets the stage for an evaluation of the discipline in the conclusion. Here we focus
both on wider problems in the humanities, especially as these have been articulated
by thinkers such as Arendt and Adorno following the genocides of the Second World
War, and on more specifi c problems relating to Indology. A brief section on Gandhi’s
interpretation of the Gītā concludes our argument that, in the humanities, scientifi c
and methodological considerations are inseparable from ethical ones.
CHAPTER 1
"
Th e Search for an Urepos
Since every author . . . wishes to be understood, that is, that the same ideas as he himself had
be stimulated in others, but this cannot be accomplished when multiple and varied ideas are
associated with the same words, it follows that the meaning of the words of every writer, and
hence also of holy scripture, cannot be other than the one we call the historical meaning. . . .
G. L. Bauer, Entwurf einer Hermeneutik des Alten und Neuen Testaments
INTRODUCTION
Th is chapter examines the fi rst phase of German Gītā scholarship—its enthusias-
tic reception in the work of Romantics and philosophers such as J. G. Herder, F. W.
Schlegel, and Wilhelm von Humboldt—as a preliminary to our main concern: the
Gītā’s reception (and reconstruction) in the work of the German Indologists Richard
Garbe, Hermann Oldenberg, Hermann Jacobi, Rudolf Otto, Jakob Wilhelm Hauer,
and Georg von Simson. 1 Th e bulk of the chapter, however, is dedicated not to the Gītā,
but to the Indian epic, the Mahābhārata, of which the Gītā is a part. Our main aim in
this chapter is to understand how, following the Bhagavadgītā’s disappearance from
German intellectual consciousness through much of the nineteenth century, German
Mahābhārata studies, especially the racial and historicist prejudices of its leading lights
Christian Lassen, Adolf Holtzmann Sr., and Adolf Holtzmann Jr., laid the founda-
tions for the Bhagavadgītā’s renewed reception in the late nineteenth and early twen-
tieth centuries. 2 Our main concern will be to trace the historical conditions that made
it possible for the Gītā, following its disappearance in the wake of Hegel’s vociferous
criticisms of Indian philosophy, to be reconstituted toward the end of the nineteenth
century as an object of Indological research. Th is concern will simultaneously permit
1 . Th is is discussed in the third chapter.
2 . Lassen and Holtzmann Sr. are treated of in this chapter; Holtzmann Jr. is the subject
of the next chapter.
( 30 )
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 31
us to defi ne what we mean by German Indology more narrowly as a step toward our
evaluation of its claims to scientifi city in chapters 4 and 5.
THE FIRST PHASE OF GERMAN GĪTĀ RECEPTION
Even prior to the Indologists’ reconstructions of the Bhagavadgītā that are the sub-
ject of this book, there had been a tradition of Gītā reception in Germany. Th e earliest
translations of the Gītā emerged in the context of the Romantic fascination with the
Orient. Johann Gottfried Herder, Friedrich Majer, Friedrich Wilhelm Schlegel, August
Wilhelm Schlegel, as well as the philosopher-statesman Wilhelm von Humboldt had
produced Gītā editions or Gītā translations and commentaries (table 1.1 shows the
growth in German knowledge of the Gītā). In his Zerstreute Blätter of 1792, J. G.
Herder included three collections of verses from the Bhagavadgītā under the head-
ing of “Gedanken einiger Brahmanen” (Th oughts of some Brahmans).3 Th e collec-
tions included a total of eleven verses from chapters two and three of the Gītā and
were individually titled “Die Verstorbenen” (Th e Dead, verses 2.11, 13, 14, and 15),
“Dreifacher Zustand” (Th reefold Condition, verse 2.27), and “Religion” (Religion,
verses 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 16). Even though he explicitly described his collection
as a series of “Nachdichtungen” (poetic renditions) and had, in fact, made a number
of changes to the verses, these collections count as the earliest translations of the
Gītā into German. Herder’s poetic rendering was followed in 1802 by the fi rst com-
plete translation of the Gītā into German (albeit from the English edition of Charles
Wilkins rather than from Sanskrit 4 ) by his student, Friederich Majer.5 Majer’s trans-
lation included an introduction in which he pointed out the affi nities between the
Gītā’s doctrines and Platonic and Spinozistic philosophy. Th is tradition of philosoph-
ical appreciation was continued by F. Schlegel, who appended an excerpted transla-
tion of the Gītā to his 1808 study, Die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier .6 In a brief
introduction to the poem, Schlegel noted that the poem was part of the epic, but
3 . J. G. Herder, “Gedanken einiger Brahmanen,” in Johann Gottfried Herder, Sämtliche
Werke , ed. Bernhard Suphan, vol. 26: Poetische Werke , ed. Carl Redlich (Hildesheim: G. Olms,
1968), 408–10. Herder produced six collections of the Zerstreute Blätter in all (in 1785,
1786, 1787, 1792, 1793, and 1797), these are published under the title “Nachdichtungen
aus der morgenländischen Litteratur” in his complete works. Th e verses from the Gītā are
all in the fourth collection.
4 . Charles Wilkins, Th e Bhâgvât-Gêêtâ, or Dialogues of Krêêshnâ and Ârjôôn (London:
C. Nourse, 1785).
5 . Friedrich Majer, trans., “Der Bhaguat-Geeta, oder Gespräche zwischen Kreeshna und
Arjoon,” A siatisches Magazin 1 (1802): 406–53 and 2 (1802): 105–32, 229–55, 273–93,
454–71, and 477–90.
6 . Friedrich Schlegel, Die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier (Heidelberg: Mohr und Zimmer,
1808) (Schlegel’s translation of the Gītā can be found from pp. 284–307). Th e complete
text has been reprinted in Kritische Friedrich Schlegel Ausgabe , ed. Ernst Behler et al., vol.
8: Studien zur Philosophie und Th eologie , ed. Ernst Behler and Ursula Struc-Oppenberg
(Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1975). All references are to the 1975
edition.
32 Chapter 01
Table 1.1 GROWTH IN GERMAN KNOWLEDGE OF THE BHAGAVADGĪTĀ
J . G. Herder F . Majer F . W. Schlegel W . von Humboldt G . W. F Hegel
(1792) (1802) (1808) (1825 and 1826) (1827)
Outline of poem,
Complete Individual translation
Poetic (from verses within a from secondary
renditions English) S elections commentary sources? a
1.20–35, 37–39,
— 45–47 — Summary of chapter
2.12, 16–17, 26–30,
2.11–15, 27 2.1–8, 11–38 2.12, 18, 21, 26–27
47–48, 58, 69–70
3.10–14, 16 — 3.22–24 3.22
— 4.1–10 4.5–9, 13–14, 18, 35 —
5.3–4, 19–21,
— — —
23–25
6.10, 15, 18–22,
— 6.29-32 —
25–31
— 7.1–28 7.4–7, 11–12 —
— 8.15–16 8.13, 17–22 —
— — 9.4, 6–8, 10, 19 9.16
— — 10.39 —
11.7, 12–13, 16,
— — —
33–34, 36, 43
— — —
— — 13.12, 26, 31–33 —
— — 14.3–4 —
— — 15.4b, 6, 7–9 —
— — —
— — —
— — 18.46, 53b–55 —
a Hegel includes translations of a few verses, but does not clarify the source. As he did not know Sanskrit, the
verses are likely translations or paraphrases of existing translations, most probably of A. W. Schlegel (from
Latin) or F. Schlegel or W. von Humboldt (from German).
argued that, “since the occasion for the war and the history of the war has no fur-
ther infl uence on the understanding of the philosophical episode [i.e., the Gītā] from
which we present some of the most important sections here, we shall overlook it.” 7
Th is prejudice was also refl ected in his translation of the Gītā’s fi rst chapter. Schlegel
left out the fi rst nineteen verses of the chapter, which describe the muster for battle. He
also left out verses forty to forty-four, which relate to the evils of violating kuladharma
(the duty to family). (Both aspects would be considered central by a later generation
7 . Schlegel, Die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier , 393.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 33
of Indologists.) Indeed, the introduction makes clear that, for him, the Gītā’s central
concern was not the legitimation of war or the maintenance of a code of heroic eth-
ics, but the problem of death in general. Schlegel emphasized that Kṛṣn ̣ a “consoles him
[Arjuna] by explicating the doctrine of the unchanging eternal unity and the nonreality
of all other manifestations”8 and saw an organic unity between the poem, thus begun
or thus introduced, and the larger epic of which it is a part. “So begins the philosophical
dialogue, which is the content of the famous episode of the Mohabharot [Mahābhārata],
the Bhogovotgita [Bhagavadgītā], that is, the song of Bhogovan [Bhagavān].”9
Although Schlegel’s translation was overshadowed by his conversion to
Catholicism in the same year,1 0 his interest in the Gītā probably occasioned his
brother A. W. Schlegel to produce his own edition as well as the fi rst complete
translation of the Sanskrit text, 11 albeit into Latin rather than German. 12 Schlegel’s
edition of the Gītā was not the fi rst to appear in Germany, 13 but it was respon-
sible to a signifi cant extent for popularizing the Bhagavadgītā in Germany. For
example, it directly triggered Humboldt’s essay defending Schlegel’s translation
8 . Ibid., 393.
9 . Ibid.
10 . Contemporaries such as Goethe and Heine, though they praised the quality of his
translation, were scathing in their criticisms of his work. Both insinuated that D ie
Sprache und Weisheit der Indier had somehow been implicated in his decision to convert
to Catholicism. To Heine, it seemed as though “the scent of frankincense streamed out
of this book.” Schlegel, he complained, “surveys the entire literature from an elevated
standpoint, but this elevated standpoint is nonetheless the bell tower of a Catholic church.
And in everything Schlegel says, one hears the church bells ringing; sometimes one even
hears the croaking of the tower ravens, as they fl utter around the tower.” H einrich Heines
Sämtliche Werke , vol. 5, ed. Ernst Elster (Leipzig and Vienna: Bibliographisches Institut,
1893), 270–71. For a discussion, see Ursula Struc-Oppenberg, “Einleitung,” in Kritische
Friedrich Schlegel Ausgabe , ed. Ernst Behler et al., vol. 8: S tudien zur Philosophie und
Th eologie , ed. Ernst Behler and Ursula Struc-Oppenberg (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft, 1975), ccxxvii and ccxxviii.
11 . August Wilhelm Schlegel, Bhagavad-gita, d est Th espesion melos, sive, Almi Krishnae et
Arjunae colloquium de rebus divinis, Bharateae episodium (Bonn: E. Weber, 1823). Schlegel’s
edition was based on the Calcutta edition of 1809 and four Paris manuscripts and served as
the e ditio princeps for a later generation of scholars in Germany. A second, revised edition
was produced by his student Christian Lassen in 1846 ( Bhagavad-Gita, id est, Th espesion
melos, sive, Almi Crischnae et Arjunae colloquium de rebus divinis [Bonn: E. Weber, 1846]);
Lassen prefaced his edition with an essay in Latin in which he discussed the history and
reception of the fi rst edition.
12 . Th at honor would go to C. R. S. Peiper, who in 1834 fi nally produced the fi rst complete
translation of the Bhagavadgītā from Sanskrit into German: Carl Rudolph Samuel Peiper,
Bhagavad-Gíta, das hohe Lied der Indus, aus der Sanskrit-Sprache metrisch und möglichst treu
in's Deutsche übersetzt (Leipzig: Friedrich Fleischer, 1834).
13 . Before Schlegel, Othmar Frank had produced a partial edition (also with a Latin
translation) under the title “Bhagavadgītae: loca selecta cum versione” in his Chrestomathia
Sanskṛita , vol. 2 (Munich: printed by author, 1821). Frank included a translation of verses
1.40–45, 2.11–72, 3.1–43, 4.1–28, 30–42; after c hapter 4, he reproduced only the Devanāgarī
text of chapter 5-18, seemingly without omission; this section was titled “Bhagavadgītae
lectione V–XVIII.” (According to Windisch, Frank originally produced a lithographic version
of his chrestomathy in 1817 in one volume, before publishing it in two volumes in 1820
and 1821; see Windisch, Geschichte Der Sanskrit-Philologie , vol. 1, 64). Frank’s edition never
seems to have acquired the popularity Schlegel’s did, perhaps because of its inferior type.
34 Chapter 01
against Langlois’ criticisms of it in his review in the French Journal Asiatique . 14
Titled “Ueber die Bhagavad-Gîtâ. Mit Bezug auf die Beurtheilung der Schlegelschen
Ausgabe im Pariser Asiatischen Journal,” Humboldt’s essay was sent to Schlegel
on June 17, 1825 but was fi rst published in Schlegel’s I ndische Bibliothek in 1826.1 5
Humboldt’s enthusiasm for the Gītā is recorded in his publications over the next
two years. On June 30, 1825 he presented a lecture on the poem at the Berlin
Akademie der Wissenschaften under the title “Ueber die unter dem Namen
Bhagavad-Gîtâ bekannte Episode des Mahâ-Bhârata,” in which he described the
poem as “a work rich in philosophical ideas.”1 6 Almost exactly a year later, on June
15, 1826 he again lectured on the Gītā at the Berlin Akademie. 17 Th is time he
described the poem as “liv[ing] up, more than any other work of this kind, come
down to us from any other nation, to the true and genuine concept of a philosophi-
cal poem.” 18 Humboldt also recorded his enthusiasm for the Gītā in a letter sent to
Friedrich von Gentz in which he called it “the most profound and sublime [work]
which the world has to off er.” 19 “My constant feeling when reading [this poem]
is one of gratitude to destiny that it let me live long enough in order to become
acquainted with this work.” 20
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, the Gītā thus appeared set for
a spectacular career in Germany. Th e greatest intellects of Weimar classicism had
14 . A. S. Langlois, “Bhagavad Gītā id est thespesion melois . . . traduit par M. A. G. de
Schlegel,” Journal Asiatique 4 (1824): 105–16, 236–52.
15 . Wilhelm von Humboldt, “Ueber die Bhagavad-Gîtâ. Mit Bezug auf die Beurtheilung
der Schlegelschen Ausgabe im Pariser Asiatischen Journal. Aus einem Briefe von Herrn
Staatsminister von Humboldt.” Indische Bibliothek 2, no. 2 (1826): 218–58 and 2, no. 3
(1826): 328–72; reprinted in W ilhelm von Humboldts Gesammelte Schriften , vol. 5: Werke,
1823–1826 , ed. Albert Leitzmann (Berlin: B. Behr’s Verlag, 1906), 158–89.
16 . Wilhelm von Humboldt, “Ueber die unter dem Namen Bhagavad-Gîtâ bekannte
Episode des Mahâ-Bhârata I,” in Wilhelm von Humboldts Gesammelte Schriften , vol. 5: Werke,
1823–1826 , ed. Albert Leitzmann (Berlin: B. Behr’s Verlag, 1906), 190, n. 1.
17 . Both parts were published together in the Abhandlungen der historisch-philologischen
Klasse der könglichen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin in 1828 (pp. 1–44 and 45–64)
(but in the volume for the year 1825 and with a date of 1825) and then again as a sepa-
rate volume in 1826, which is why one often fi nds confusing references to the date as
being either 1825, or 1826, or 1828. All three of Humboldt’s articles on the Gītā have
been reprinted in W ilhelm von Humboldts Gesammelte Schriften , vol. 5: Werke, 1823–1826 ,
ed. Albert Leitzmann (Berlin: B. Behr’s Verlag, 1906), 158–89, 190–232, and 325–44. (All
references in this work are to the G esammelte Schriften , but the 1826 book is widely avail-
able online.)
18 . Wilhelm von Humboldt, “Ueber die unter dem Namen Bhagavad-Gîtâ bekannte
Episode des Mahâ-Bhârata II,” in W ilhelm von Humboldts Gesammelte Schriften , vol.
5: Werke, 1823–1826 , ed. Albert Leitzmann (Berlin: B. Behr’s Verlag, 1906), 334.
19 . Wilhelm von Humboldt, “Letter from 21 May 1827 to Friedrich von Gentz,” in
Friedrich von Gentz, S chriften , vol. 5: Ungedruckte Denkschriften, Tagebücher und Briefe , ed.
Gustav Schlesier (Mannheim: Verlag von Heinrich Hoff , 1840), 291.
20 . Wilhelm von Humboldt, “Letter from 1 March 1828 to Friedrich von Gentz,” in
Friedrich von Gentz, S chriften , vol. 5: Ungedruckte Denkschriften, Tagebücher und Briefe , ed.
Gustav Schlesier (Mannheim: Verlag von Heinrich Hoff , 1840), 300. See also Wilhelm von
Humboldt, “Letter from 21 June 1823 to A. W. Schlegel,” in Briefwechsel zwischen Wilhelm
von Humboldt und August Wilhelm Schlegel , ed. Albert Leitzmann (Halle a.S.: Max Niemeyer,
1906), 158.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 35
appropriated the text and Wilhelm von Humboldt, architect of the Prussian edu-
cational system, had given it his offi cial sanction. Yet 1826 marked the zenith of
acclaim for the Gītā as celebrated by Humboldt, and its cultural infl uence would
only decline thereafter. For with the publication of Hegel’s review of Humboldt’s
Gītā article in 1827, 21 a review in which, as Herling says, Hegel “shut[s] the door” on
Indian thought,2 2 the Gītā entered a long period of eclipse in Germany. 23 Following
the initial phase of the German preoccupation with the Gītā, when in the space of
twenty nine years no less than four partial translations or editions and two complete
translations (one also an edition) had appeared, the Gītā practically ceased to exist
as an object of German literary and philosophical interest. Except for Lassen’s 1846
edition (a revised version of Schlegel’s 1823 edition), no philologist or philosopher
would tackle the translation of the Gītā until Richard Garbe in 1905.2 4 Indeed, the
Gītā as an object of philosophical preoccupation would only reemerge in 1906 with
the publication of Paul Deussen’s translation and commentary,2 5 followed in 1912 by
Leopold von Schroeder’s.2 6 Th e tradition, however, would always remain tenuous: in
the entire twentieth century, not a single German philosopher of the rank of von
Humboldt would take up the Gīta for consideration. Even more striking is the fact
that precisely at the moment that the Gītā, under the impulse of Hegel’s attacks upon
Indian philosophy, wandered off of the stage, it found a new home in the work of the
theosophists, where it led a kind of half-life. Between 1827, the year Hegel published
his criticism of Humboldt’s Gītā, and 1905, the year Garbe fi nally reintroduced the
Gītā to public consciousness, no less than seven translations or commentaries of the
Gītā were published, almost all by those sympathetic to theosophic ideals.
21 . G. W. F. Hegel, “Ueber die unter dem Nahmen Bhagavad-Gita bekannte Episode des
Mahabharata; von Wilhelm von Humboldt,” J ahrbücher für wissenschaftliche Kritik 7/8
(January 1827): 51–63 and 181–88 (October 1827): 1441–92; reprinted in Georg Wilhelm
Friedrich Hegel, Gesammelte Werke , vol. 16: Schriften und Entwürfe II (1826–1831) , ed.
Friedrich Hoegemann with the assistance of Christoph Jamme (Hamburg: Felix Meiner,
2001), 19–75. All citations refer to the 2001 reprint.
22 . Herling, Th e German Gītā , 247.
23 . Hegel’s review is not considered here, because as Herling has noted, this review,
at twice the length of Humboldt’s original article, is strictly speaking not a review of
Humboldt’s Gītā, but a highly idiosyncratic engagement with Indian thought in the con-
text of Hegel’s own systematic philosophy. Hegel makes Humboldt’s enthusiastic recep-
tion of the Gītā the pretext for an extensive critique of Indian thought, which had clearly
begun to threaten his own system especially through Humboldt’s suggestion of proximity
between the Gītā’s ethics of karma yoga and a Protestant work ethic. Th e Gītā plays only a
very marginal role in this critique.
24 . Richard Garbe, Die Bhagavadgîtâ. Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt und mit einer Einleitung über
ihre ursprüngliche Gestalt, ihre Lehren und ihr Alter versehen (Leipzig: H. Haessel, 1905), 2nd
revised ed. (Leipzig: H. Haessel, 1921). All citations refer to the 1921 edition, but are cited
from the facsimile edition of 1988 (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1988).
25 . Paul Deussen and Otto Strauss, Vier philosophische Texte aus dem Mahābhārata
(Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1906). Th e translation of the Bhagavadgītā was later published
separately by Deussen as Der Gesang des Heiligen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1911).
26 . Leopold von Schroeder, B hagavadgita. Des Erhabenen Sang (Jena: Eugen Diederichs
Verlag, 1912).
36 Chapter 01
Th e concerns of this new group of Gītā commentators/translators were very dif-
ferent from those of an earlier generation. Although not mentioned by any of them,
Hegel’s review clearly cast a long shadow over their editions. Surprisingly, even
authors who referred to Humboldt’s essay on the Gītā avoided any discussion of
Hegel’s 1827 review (chart 1.1 shows the relationship of the diff erent Gītā editions
to each other). (Indeed Humboldt himself, though aware of Hegel’s review, chose
tactfully to ignore his criticisms.) Clearly, no scholar felt confi dent enough to go head
to head with the offi cial court philosopher of the Prussian state. Instead, the new
generation of Gītā admirers sidestepped the question of the Gītā’s philosophical rel-
evance by looking at it as a literary work—an expression of the sublime spirit of the
Orient, and one that attested to the universality of certain human ideals. Th us C. R.
S. Peiper, who published the fi rst complete German translation (from Sanskrit) of
the Gītā in 1834, saw in it “many beautiful and sublime and truly philosophical and
religious thoughts” and argued that these “could serve as parallels to the doctrines
of Christianity.”2 7 Following in a long tradition of scholars to consider the Orient the
home of human culture, Peiper argued for seeing “the philosophy contained in [the
Gītā]” as “the original source from which the Chinese, Persians, Egyptians, Greeks,
Romans and even in early and late ages the Germans drew [both] directly and indi-
rectly.” 28 Peiper’s successor, F. Lorinser wrote that “to his disconcertment and amaze-
ment” he had found “that the composer of the Bhagavad-Gita had not only been
familiar with and frequently used the scriptures of the New Testament , but had also
woven C hristian ideas and views into his system.” 29 Describing the Gītā as “this widely
admired monument of the ancient Indian spirit, this most beautiful and most sub-
lime didactic poem, which can be considered as one of the most beautiful blossoms of
heathen worldly wisdom,” Lorinser argued that the text nonetheless “owed its purest
and most praised doctrines” to “a large extent” to Christianity. 30 Although he found
“resemblances” to Christianity scattered throughout the poem, he argued that “the
revelation of Krishna’s divine form [i.e., the theophany of chapter 11]” in particular
exhibited “an astonishing correspondence to the apotheosis of Christ on [Mount]
Tabor.”3 1 In pursuit of this thesis of a Christian source to the Gītā (as well as in sup-
port of an evangelical agenda of the “glorifi cation of the doctrine of Christianity,
which alone is [truly] divine, even if it be at the price of a destruction of illusions
about the value and the excellence of Indian wisdom”3 2 ) Lorinser also appended a
twenty-two page postscript to his translation in which he sought to demonstrate
traces of Christian scriptures and ideas in the Gītā. 33 Robert Boxberger, the next to
27 . Peiper, Bhagavad-Gíta , iii.
28 . Ibid., iv.
29 . Franz Lorinser, Die Bhagavad-Gita (Breslau: G. P. Aderholz’ Buchhandlung, 1869), v
(Lorinser’s emphasis).
30 . Ibid.
31 . Ibid., vi.
32 . Ibid., x.
33 . Franz Lorinser, “Anhang. Ueber die in der Bhagavad-Gita vorhandenzen Spuren einer
Benützung christlicher Spuren und Ideen,” in Die Bhagavad-Gita (Breslau: G. P. Aderholz’
Buchhandlung, 1869), 267–89.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 37
Chart 1.1 Types of German Gītā
Notes:
Herder’s translation was a Nachdichtung (poetic recreation).
Frank’s edition was only a partial one.
Peiper mentions a letter from W. v. Humboldt in Schlegel’s Indische Bibliothek, but not his commentary or review.
Lorinser was also aware of Lassen’s 1846 edition.
Boxberger was also aware of Lassen’s 1846 edition.
Hartmann refers to W. v. Humboldt’s letter to Lenz, but not his articles; it is however likely that he had read them.
Böhtlingk was also aware of Lassen’s 1846 edition, which he incorrectly refers to as Schlegel’s edition.
Stray remarks on the Bhagavadgītā are also to be found in Holtzmann 1892.
Garbe also produced numerous articles and encyclopedic entries on the Gītā; they are not listed here.
Malinar 2007 is a modifi ed English translation of Malinar 1996.
38 Chapter 01
consider in this list of theosophic Gītās, was more critical of the Gītā. According to
him, Indian philosophy was the “morning dream of the philosophical spirit that is
gradually awakening,”3 4 but not as yet true (i.e., rational) philosophy. Citing Kuno
Fischer, he argued that the Gītā was “not a philosophical system, not a work of refl ec-
tive reason [räsonnirenden Verstandes], but a child of the poetic fantasy that does
not grasp the divine but intuits [it] in faith, that is to say, a philosophical poem in
the truest sense of the world which was only possible at a stage when philosophy was
still poetry [and] not a science so that in it [i.e., in the Gītā] neither could philosophy
impede poetry nor could poetry impede philosophy.” 35 Although critical of the Gītā,
Boxberger was nonetheless capable of acknowledging its charms. As he put it toward
the end of his preface, “what is interesting about this poem . . . is not the specifi cally
Indian [element] but the universal human [element]” and he concluded, “for me too,
as I read the poem for the fi rst time, it was as it was for Wilhelm von Humboldt, who
wrote to Gentz that he thanks God for having permitted him to live so long so as to
become acquainted with this poem.” 36 Th e fi nal chapter in the theosophic Gītā before
the rediscovery of the Gītā by the Indologists was penned by Franz Hartmann. An
associate of Colonel Olcott’s and Mme. Blavatsky’s, Hartmann was the only one of
the theosophic Gītā authors to be offi cially associated with the Th eosophic Society.3 7
In all, he wrote three books on the Gītā: D ie Erkenntnislehre der Bhagavad Gita im
Lichte der Geheimlehre betrachtet (a commentary or synthesis that attempted in six
chapters to explain the salient points of the Gītā in light of the secret doctrine), 38 a
poetic translation titled Die Bhagavad Gita oder das Hohe Lied enthaltend der Lehre der
Unsterblichkeit (a translation of Edwin Arnold’s 1885 edition Th e Song Celestial 39 ),4 0
and, fi nally, Die Bhagavad Gita. Das Lied von der Gottheit oder die Lehre vom göttlichen
Sein und von der Unsterblichkeit (a prose version of his translation furnished with
“explanatory comments and selected and appropriate citations from preeminent
mystics” 41 ). Couched in the language of mystical experience and of the awakening of
the soul, Hartmann’s interpretation of the Gītā shows clear evidence of the infl uence
of theosophic doctrines. Hartmann read the Gītā allegorically, as “describ[ing]the
34 . Robert Boxberger, Bhagavad-Gîtâ oder das Lied der Gottheit (Berlin: Gustav Hempel,
1870), 6.
35 . Ibid., 8.
36 . Ibid., 12 (the reference is to the second of the two letters to Gentz cited earlier).
37 . For a good account of Hartmann’s signifi cance for the theosophic movement, see
Helmut Zander, A nthrosophie in Deutschland , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Vandenhoek und Ruprecht,
2007) (with a brief biography on pp., 281–84).
38 . Franz Hartmann, Die Erkenntnislehre der Bhagavad Gita im Lichte der Geheimlehre
betrachtet. Ein Beitrag zum Studium derselben (Leipzig: W. Friedrich, 1897).
39 . Edwin Arnold, Th e Song Celestial or Bhagavad-Gîtâ (London: Trübner, 1885).
40 . Franz Hartmann, Die Bhagavad Gita oder das Hohe Lied enthaltend der Lehre der
Unsterblichkeit (Leipzig: W. Friedrich, 1899), reprint: Munich: Schatzkammer Verlag, n.d.
All citations refer to the reprint.
41 . Franz Hartmann, Die Bhagavad Gita. Das Lied von der Gottheit oder die Lehre vom göt-
tlichen Sein und von der Unsterblichkeit (Leipzig: Altmann, 1907) (the phrase is from the
title page).
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 39
battle between the immortal and the mortal parts of the human and depict[ing] the
triumph of the divine [element] over the animal [element] in man” 4 2 and as propagat-
ing a science (Yoga) of “the union of man with God.” 43
To be sure, we cannot always clearly isolate the theosophic Gītā from wider
currents in German intellectual life. Peiper refers to the work of A. W. Schlegel,
Franz Bopp, Othmar Frank, and Christian Lassen. Especially in the later editions
(Hartmann is the notable exception) we fi nd extensive references to the historical
context of the poem. Lorinser included a twenty-fi ve page historical introduction
in his edition; Lassen’s infl uence upon this introduction is unmistakable. And yet
as a whole the concerns of this group of authors diff ers unmistakably from both
the earlier generation of scholars (Herder, F. Schlegel, and von Humboldt) and from
the later (R. Garbe, H. Oldenberg, H. Jacobi, et al.). First, the editions or transla-
tions of the Gītā to appear in this period (between 1827 and 1905) were produced
exclusively by nonspecialists. In spite of their knowledge of Sanskrit and their
considerable awareness of Sanskrit scholarship in Europe (Peiper cites the work of
Antoine-Léonard de Chézy and William Jones; Lorinser of Émile-Louis Burnouf and
John Cockburn Th omas; almost all scholars were aware of Wilkins) none of these
scholars were able to stake a claim to a professorship in Indology. Second, although
some scholars take a more historical perspective (e.g., Lorinser who sought to show
the infl uence of Christian doctrines on certain doctrines of the Gītā), we nonethe-
less do not fi nd the historicizing approach that becomes canonical in the wake of
Holtzmann’s historicist interpretation of the Mahābhārata. Hegel’s review essay only
interrupted the philosophical reception of the Gītā in Germany: it was not able to
completely erase the poem’s appeal. As Boxberger’s comment about the Gītā’s uni-
versal signifi cance illustrates, scholars were still interested in reading the Gītā from
a philosophical perspective, although at the same time (and in the work of the same
author) there was a conscious eff ort to avoid a head-to-head confrontation between
the Gītā and contemporary Western philosophy. Boxberger clearly acknowledges that
the poem belongs to a past stage of the spirit; Peiper thanks divine providence for
permitting the spirit in Europe (through the Gospel) to advance much further than
it had in India.4 4 Although we cannot demonstrate the infl uence of Hegel here (as we
noted, no scholar explicitly refers to his essay), it seems clear that these authors were
in some way reacting to his philosophical views, but trying, nonetheless, to keep
open a space for the Gītā in Germany. Th us, although historicism is looming on the
horizon, the authors of the theosophic Gītā were still able to ward off the historical
perspective (and its attendant danger, relativism). It was left to the authors of the
Indological Gītā to take the fateful step that would fi nally derail the German experi-
ment with the Gītā.
In spite of the eff orts of Peiper and and others, however, German interest in the
Indian poem took a sharp downturn after 1827. Following Hegel’s attacks on Indian
42 . Hartmann, Die Bhagavad Gita oder das Hohe Lied enthaltend der Lehre der Unsterblich-
keit , 6.
43 . Ibid., 7.
44 . Peiper, Bhagavad-Gíta , iii.
40 Chapter 01
thought, the Gītā underwent a long period of eclipse in German intellectual life—an
eclipse from which it was to only emerge toward the end of the nineteenth century,
when the Romantic and philosophical Gītā of Herder, Schlegel, and von Humboldt
was reconstituted as the Indological Gītā of Holtzmann, Garbe, and Jacobi. And
when the Gītā fi nally reemerged as an object specialist preoccupation in the twenti-
eth century, it was not as a philosophical work, but as a historical document. In this
story, the names Christian Lassen, Adolf Holtzmann Jr., Edward Washburn Hopkins,
and Hermann Oldenberg will have a major role to play.
THE BIRTH OF GERMAN MAHĀBHĀRATA STUDIES
Th e German reception of the Mahābhārata began with the translation of excerpts
from the text. Besides the Bhagavadgītā, Schlegel also translated sections from the
Śakuntalā narrative in his Die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier (1808) and Bopp included
a translation of the Hiḍ imba episode of the Ādiparvan (under the title “Der Kampf
mit dem Riesen” or “the Battle with the Giant”) in his Über das Conjugationssystem
der Sanskritsprache (1816). 45 Further episodes by Bopp followed: Arjuna’s journey
to Indra’s heaven, Hiḍ i mba’s death, the Brahman’s lament, Suṇ ḍ a and Upasuṇ ḍ a,
an excerpt from Nala and Damayanti in 1824 46 ; the fl ood, Sāvitrī, the abduction of
Draupadī, Arjuna’s return (from Indra’s heaven) in 18294 7 ; and the complete Nala
and Damayanti in 1838. 48 All these works were prefaced by brief comments introduc-
ing the Mahābhārata.4 9 However, Bopp’s works were mainly intended as anthologies
(for reading practice) of Sanskrit literature; his introductions were not meant to be
systematic contributions to the study of the epic.5 0 Th e fi rst systematic engagement
with the epic was left to Christian Lassen in 1837 with the publication of the fi rst part
of his “Beiträge zur Kunde des Altindischen Alterthums aus dem Mahâbhârata.” 51 It
is thus no exaggeration to call Lassen the founder of German Mahābhārata studies.
45 . Franz Bopp, Über das Conjugationssystem der Sanskritsprache in Vergleichung mit
jenem der griechischen, lateinischen, persischen und germanischen Sprache (Frankfurt
a.M.: Andreäischen Buchhandlung, 1816), 239–69.
46 . Franz Bopp, Ardschuna’s Reise zu Indra’s Himmel, nebst anderen Episoden des
Maha-Bharata (Berlin: Königliche Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1824).
47 . Franz Bopp, Die Sündfl ut nebst drei anderen der wichtigsten Episoden des Mahâ-Bhârata
(Berlin: Königliche Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1829).
48 . Franz Bopp, Nalas und Damajanti. Eine indische Dichtung (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen
Buchhandlung, 1838).
49 . A twenty-three page “Vorrede” in the 1824 text, a twenty-fi ve page “Einleitung” in
the 1829 text, and a seven page “Vorwort” in the 1838 text.
50 . In his 1824 text, for example, the actual translation was followed by copious notes
and grammatical clarifi cations and then by the printed text of the Mahābhārata itself (in
Devanāgarī). Bopp’s editions were thus intended as a contribution to the genre of “Sanskrit
Chrestomathies” popular in Germany at the time.
51 . Cited earlier in the introduction. Th is was the most signifi cant part of the two-part
essay, continued in volumes 2 and 3 of the journal. Th e remaining volume, however, are
more interesting from the perspective of Lassen’s ethnographic/racial theories.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 41
After Bopp there were a few more such exoticizing translations (Rückert’s poetic
translation of the Sāvitrī narrative in his B rahmanische Erzählungen of 1839 is a nota-
ble example5 2 ), but on the whole the German reception of the Mahābhārata took a
diff erent direction after Lassen.
Christian Lassen was born in Bergen, Norway in 1800, but, after the death of his
father in 1818, moved to Germany with his mother, where he was to remain for the
rest of his life. After studying with A. W. Schlegel in Bonn (1821–24), he went to Paris
and London for further studies, fi nally receiving his venia legendi from Bonn in 1827
(for a dissertation on the geography and history of ancient Panjab reconstructed
mainly on the basis of travelers’ tales and the Mahābhārata).5 3 Further studies on
the Mahābhārata followed in 1837, 1839, and 1840, followed by wider researches
into ancient Indian history (although the Indian epic again played the central role)
in 1843, 1847, 1849, 1852, 1857, 1858, and 1861. (Whatever else one could accuse
Lassen of, it was not reticence in expressing his views.) In spite of his copious stud-
ies on the Mahābhārata, however, Lassen’s work was not especially innovative: once
laid down, his basic views on the epic remained unchanged for nearly a quarter cen-
tury. Later studies amplifi ed and provided additional “ethnographic” evidence for
views he had already articulated in his 1837 article, but they did not in any way ques-
tion or otherwise critically illuminate the basis for these views. Regardless, Lassen’s
pedantic, self-assured tone and the confi dence with which he put forth speculative
assertions about ancient India as established fact greatly impressed a generation of
scholars. Albrecht Weber, Th eodor Goldstücker, and Adolf Holtzmann Jr. all accepted
his reconstructions of ancient Indian history and ethnography.
Lassen’s central tenet in these reconstructions was that there had been two
races in ancient India: the light-skinned Āryans invading from the north and the
dark-skinned Dravidians native to the land.5 4 Early on, the two groups fought for
control of the subcontinent; in this confl ict, the Āryans, being physically and mili-
tarily superior to the Dravidians, were able to subjugate the latter. Th ose of them
52 . Friedrich Rückert, B rahmanische Erzählungen (Leipzig: C. Beyer, 1839). (Winternitz in
his G eschichte der indischen Literatur has it as B rahmanische Legenden of 1836, but we have
been unable to discover this title in any of the standard catalogues.)
53 . Karttunen has it as “his Ph.D.” (Karttunen, “Christian Lassen (1800–76),” 109),
but this is incorrect: Commentatio geogr. atque hist. de Pentapotamia Indica was Lassen’s
Habilitationsschrift and he was thereafter conferred the title of Privatdozent (see Johannes
Klatt, “Lassen, Christian,“ in Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie , vol. 17 [Leipzig: Duncker und
Humblot, 1883], 784).
54 . Arvidsson credits Lassen, alongside Schlegel, with popularizing the terms Arier (Āryan)
and arische (the adjectival form) in Germany; Stefan Arvidsson, Aryan Idols: Indo-European
Mythology as Ideology and Science , trans. Sonia Wichmann (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2006), 44. He also includes Lassen in a list of fi gures responsible for “chisel[ing]
out” an “ ‘Indo-European’ race,” among them Joseph Arthur de Gobineau, Friedrich Max
Müller, Adolphe Pictet, H. S. Chamberlain, Paul Broca, Karl Penka, and Hans F. K. Günther.
Th ere is little doubt that Lassen was one of the foremost theoreticians of race of the nine-
teenth century, responsible in large part for supplying the “historical” data that led to the
creation of the “Āryan” race concept. Th is makes the present-day enthusiasm for him (see
the entries for Albach, Karttunen, and Tsuchida in the bibliography) even more puzzling.
42 Chapter 01
who did not fl ee into remote mountain areas (where they endured as the Ādivāsis or
tribals) were reduced to forming the lower castes of Indian society. 55 Lassen’s main
source for these assertions was the Mahābhārata, which he read as a record of this
historical confl ict in Indian prehistory. Although later overlaid with copious philo-
sophical and didactic materials, according to him, in its core the epic still preserved
the recollection of this primordial confl ict.
Lassen also overlaid this central (racial) principle with a second one: possi-
bly drawing on popular views of the Āryans as a warlike race, he assumed that the
Mahābhārata had originally been the property of the warrior caste, the Kṣ atriyas.
Only in the course of centuries were the Brahmans able to take over the text, adding
materials of a ritual and theosophic nature. Th ough not as rabidly anti-Brahmanic
as later scholars, Lassen did impute a whole host of negative characteristics to the
Brahmans.5 6
Let us look more closely at Lassen’s views of the epic, focusing on his 1837 arti-
cle, which already contains in a nutshell all the views that are later repeated and
expanded in his I ndische Alterthumskunde .
Lassen’s interest in the epic, from the very beginning, was historical.5 7 As he
wrote in the fi rst part of his “Beiträge,” “the publication of the entire Mahâbhârata is
an important event for the advancement of Indian studies; hereby one of the richest
repositories for knowledge of the most ancient conditions of India has been opened
to us. It [i.e., the Mahābhārata] towers over the R âmâjana as much in terms of the
diversity and detail of its tidings about the ancient geographic and political circum-
stances of the land, about the traditions and customs of the inhabitants, as it does
55 . Arvidsson regards Lassen as one of the key architects of the “biracial” theory of
Indian history (i.e., the view that Indian civilization is comprised of two distinct racial
groups; the higher castes of the Brahmans, Kṣatriyas, and Vaiśyas, which pushing into the
Indian subcontinent, found a primitive aboriginal population whom they subjugated and
integrated into their social hierarchy as the Śūdra caste). He considers Lassen’s Indische
Alterthumskunde , “the standard work about India’s history for many generations” (ibid.,
45), to be one of the key works of the nineteenth century that popularized the view of
northern India as still being home to isolated groups of racially pure Āryans. For key pas-
sages, see Christian Lassen, I ndische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1: Geographe und die älteste
Geschichte (Bonn: H. B. Koenig, 1847), 406–08 (for the role played by race in the forma-
tion of caste), 408 (for the classifi cation of Āryan Indians as “Caucasians” in virtue of
their “physical type”); 408–10 (for racial mixing with the “Negros” as the reason for their
decline); and 410 (for the Āryans as the genuine “cultural people” of India).
56 . Th ough critical of the Brahmans, Lassen still regarded them as Āryans. Th us he noted
that “they were the whitest in terms of color” and that “we may assume that they have
retained their original color most faithfully.” Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1, 407.
It is only later that we begin to see a change in attitudes toward the Brahmans as their faith
comes to symbolize everything that is wrong with modern Indians. In this shift, the names
Goldstücker and Holtzmann Jr. will have a major role to play.
57 . Th is needs to be qualifi ed, of course, since Lassen’s “history” was actually a form
of racial theory. It is more correct to say that he was interested in the epic as a historical
work in order to bear out certain a priori ideas about the distinction between the two
branches of the Caucasian race, the Indo-European, and the Semitic peoples. In this quest,
the Mahābhārata played a major role, since he regarded the ability to develop “epic” as one
of the hallmarks of the Indo-European race.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 43
in terms of its extent.” Th e Mahābhārata, he further claimed, “is that Indian work
that contains the maximum [number of] fragments of ancient history; the outlines
of a universal history of ancient India, which are to be created in the future, can only
be sketched out with the help of the M ahâbhârata .” Lassen to be sure conceded that
the Mahābhārata “could also be contemplated from the perspective of poetry.” But
he wrote that he “touch[ed] upon this aspect only to exclude it from his following
investigations.”5 8
Regarding the literary or poetic approach to the epic, Lassen considered it
“unavoidable” that the Mahābhārata was to be regarded “as a collection of old epic
poems.” 59 Th ese poems, he argued, “had accumulated around the epic of the battle
between the Kurus and P ândavas , as though about a fi xed central point.” 60 Setting out
from these premises, “diff erent shorter and longer poetic narratives then present
themselves in their self-contained form for an individual evaluation.” And fi nally, “a
much more extensive dissection of the poem [into its constituent parts] would result
automatically from the investigation into the plan and relationship of the whole.”6 1
When it came to understanding the “plan and relationship of the whole,” Lassen was
similarly dogmatic: he noted that the two Indian epics themselves recount details of
“the fi rst composition and dissemination of each poem, to be sure in a legendary mode,
but nonetheless in a way that certain historical statements may be gained from them.” 62
He set aside the question of the commentators’ views as “insignifi cant” because “the old-
est commentators, even if they should still be available, [were] not accessible to [him]” 63
and went over to a discussion of the historical insights that can still be gained from the
epics’ self-presentation. Regarding the circumstance that the Mahābhārata refers to a
doubled narration of the epic (once to Janamejaya and once to Śaunaka), Lassen argued
that “it does not require any justifi cation if I take this embedding [Einkleidung] for a real
fact, namely, that one knew of two versions of the same material: an o lder [version], that
related to the time of G ’anamêg’aja [Janamejaya], which is placed two generations after
the great war (I. v. 3836); and a l ater [version].”6 4 He also claimed that “a great portion
of the introduction of the text at present is related to this later version, since everything
that is found until page 80 of the printed edition, up to the Âdivançaparva or the book
of the fi rst generations, is only there to acquaint the listeners of S aûti with the things
they must know in order to understand the occasion and purpose of the snake sacrifi ce
of G’anamêg’aja [Janamejaya] at which the M ahâbh . was fi rst narrated,” and from this he
concluded, “ all this does not belong to the actual story of the great battle in any way at all .” 65
Lassen also made three other claims that were to be decisive for the future course
of Mahābhārata studies in the West. First, he argued that there had been an expan-
sion in the poem “over and above the ambit of the battle between the sons of Kuru
58 . Lassen, “Beiträge,” 61.
59 . Ibid.
60 . Ibid., 61–62.
61 . Ibid., 62.
62 . Ibid., 63.
63 . Ibid., 64.
64 . Ibid., 67 (italics in original).
65 . Ibid., 68 (italics added).
44 Chapter 01
[i.e., Dhṛ tarāṣt ̣ ra] and P ându ” and, in this expansion, “the entire early history of India
had been added on to [the story of] this battle.”6 6 Lassen backed up this theory with
the observation that “in I. v. 101 the message has been preserved that the B hârata
itself consists of only 24,000 Ç lôka’s without the episodes: ‘he made the Sanhitâ
(compilation) of the Bhârata of 24,000 Çlôka’s ; this much is said to be the Bhârata
without the episodes by the wise’.” 67 Second, he argued that “neither during the reci-
tation of Vaiçampâjana nor during that of S auti is there any reference at all to a w rit-
ten Mahâbhârata [ schriftlich aufgezeichnetes Mahâbhârata ].”6 8 Lassen conceded that the
lists of contents “presupposed written exemplars.” “Only this is no reason to suppose
that earlier, before the epic was written down, the individual narratives that are con-
tained in the Mahâbhârata did not pass on mouth to mouth, as is narrated of them
in the poem itself.” 69 Here he presented his triumphant conclusion: “Th e mass and
the complicated sequence of the parts of the M ahâbh. rule out the thought that the
whole, in t he form in which we now possess it, could ever have been present except in
written form. Th e fi rst compilers of the present text may in fact have been the fi rst to
write down the poem.”7 0 To underscore the point, he also added: “the industry that is
ascribed to a single individual here is of such monstrous extent that criticism hardly
has need of reminding us that the works that are attributed to Vjâsa derive from very
diff erent periods.” 71 Th ird, Lassen claimed that the “transmission [of the poem]” (but
not the original poem itself) was “in the hands of the priestly caste.” Th is had obvi-
ous consequences for the form and contents of the original historical narratives,
which underwent a “transformation through the legend [i.e., through being repeat-
edly handed down, elaborated upon, and made more legendary].” But, Lassen argued,
to this circumstance “came a further one: the dominant priestly element among the
Indians, whitewashing and permeating all recollections of the ancient period with its
colors.” Th us, “an investigation shows us quite rapidly that the priestly doctrines of
the periodic human manifestation of the gods and of the world ages had taken posses-
sion of all historical lore and integrated it into its system.” 72
How to begin with a reconstruction of the original epic in service of the wider aim
of compiling a history of ancient India? According to Lassen, “as a rule it was not diffi -
cult to recognize the transformation [the epic had undergone]; [but] what was diffi cult,
often impossible, was to once again fi nd the original form.” 73 Here, his two principles,
mentioned above, came to his aid. Th e epic was to be read demythologically, as an alle-
gorized version of a historical confl ict between Āryans and Dravidians. Writes Lassen:
For reasons of length, I omit an investigation of the names Pându and K r˘ıs‘na, white
and b lack , and merely throw out the conjecture that they are to be interpreted as
66 . Ibid., 68.
67 . Ibid., 77.
68 . Ibid., 69 (italics in original).
69 . Ibid., 69–70.
70 . Ibid., 70 (italics in original).
71 . Ibid., 74.
72 . Ibid., 72.
73 . Ibid., 74–75.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 45
references to the two races that fought each other in Indian prehistory: the origi-
nally native black [race] and the Sanskrit-speaking, light-skinned [race] that had
immigrated from the north, whose western racial relatives are, even now, success-
fully fi ghting a similar battle with similar superiority over the red races of America. 74
Once this basic principle was in place, Lassen found it quite easy to explain the form
of the Mahābhārata. As he wrote, “it is doubtless an important hint when it is said
that the original B hârata only comprises a fourth of the entire work that has been
expanded with episodes. Th is detail directs our attention to additions of narratives,
which did not originally belong to the epic of the Kurus and P ândavas .”7 5 “What the
original Bhârata is cannot be doubted: it is the dispute between the two ancient royal
lineages; everything is related to this center and in many passages brief overviews
are repeated with the aim of presenting the basic thread of the whole in the most
encompassing version.”7 6 To this core, which so admirably met his own interests in a
universal history of ancient India, Lassen proposed that additional materials would
have been added in three main phases:
First: narratives from older history, mostly concerning earlier kings, partly of a
more mythic-historical nature, partly with a dominant poetic interest such as the
episodes of Nala , of Çakuntalâ , and many others.
Th e second category, to which I ascribe the stories of the gods is, at times, hardly
to be distinguished from the fi rst; I, however, include primarily the narratives with
cosmogonic and theogonic content such as the creation of all beings by P rag’ âpatis
that is narrated in the fi rst book.
Th ird and fi nal: didactic and cosmogonic materials. Th e sections that are called
dharma are doubtless of this nature; the B hagavadgîtâ is another well-known exam-
ple. Th e description of the earth, of divine worlds and other similar [descriptions]
too evidence a doctrinal intent. 77
Lassen also proposed that the “central books of the war narrative [Kriegsgeschichte]
(from the 6th to the 10th book),” since they contained the fewest episodes, were
truer to the original plan of the epic (indeed, they contained the core of the origi-
nal epic). 7 8 According to him, there were two motivations at work in this transfor-
mation of the epic: fi rst, the intent “to turn the heroic book [Heldenbuch] into an
instrument of indoctrination concerning the gods, laws and duties,” and, second,
“to turn the B hârata into a collection of old lore of Indian antiquity.” 79 “In the com-
position of the Mahâbhârata ,” he argued, “one had set oneself the goal of combining
the most or the most important of what was present of the old epic narrative to a
74 . Ibid., 75 (italics in original).
75 . Ibid., 79.
76 . Ibid., 80.
77 . Ibid., 82.
78 . Ibid., 82.
79 . Ibid., 83.
46 Chapter 01
whole.” 80 Th is (pseudo)historical reconstruction of the epic’s genesis led him to the
observation that,
Th e Mahâbhârata is thus a collection of old epic poems, which have been intention-
ally added on to the poem of the battle of the Pândavas , [and] not a single old heroic
legend [Heldensage], which in the course of oral transmission unconsciously fused
other legends into itself. It is not a collection of historical songs in the genuine
sense; the historical in the narratives has been preserved, so to speak, without the
knowledge of the compilers [themselves]. 81
Th ereafter he introduced his thesis of the epic as originally a Kṣ atriya text—a thesis
that was to dominate two centuries of the Western reception of the epic:
Th e collection was primarily intended for the warrior caste; their ancestors are the
ones who are mainly praised therein; the epic poem was recited most solemnly at
the royal sacrifi ces and although the lower castes were not excluded from hearing
these poems, nonetheless no particular consideration was shown them [in the text].
Th e R âmâjana and M ahâbhârata actually constitute the literature of the ks‘atrija
and the doctrine of the gods and religious view presented therein is not the purely
priestly, which is contained more primordially, more symbolically, more physically
and less anthropomorphically in the V êda , but rather, the form that the religious
doctrine had taken in the mind of the warrior caste.8 2
Lassen also had an explanation to hand for the epic’s present form; he assumed that
the Mahābhārata, though originally the property of the warrior caste, would have
been taken over by the Brahmans at a later date, leading to the kinds of transforma-
tions he had already identifi ed in the fi rst part of his article. His precise words are as
follows:
It is in the nature of their position [in society] and can also be read off from vari-
ous provisions of their legal code that the Indian priestly caste had a clear aware-
ness of the means . . . suitable for securing it lasting dominance over the minds of
the remaining folk. It therefore cannot surprise us that we fi nd epic poetry being
used as an instrument of an addiction to spiritual domination. . . . Th ere was no
more suitable means of raising the warrior caste in the priestly spirit than linking
the instruction concerning religious and social laws to the narratives that already
enjoyed general approval. Th at such an intention was realized in the diaskeusis of
the M ahâbhârata is clear to me from the large number and the extent of the didactic
portions. In this sense, the â khjâna , the epic poetry, can with full justifi cation be
called a fi fth Vêda and the M ahâbhârata a didactic book, a çâstra .8 3
80 . Ibid., 84.
81 . Ibid., 85.
82 . Ibid.
83 . Ibid., 86.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 47
In his later studies, Lassen turned increasingly to a reconstruction of ancient Indian
history, geography, and ethnography. Th ese studies are unrelated to our inquiries
insofar as we are only interested in pursuing the question of the origin of specifi c
Western dogmas about the Mahābhārata. Nonetheless, it is important to empha-
size that even as Lassen in later years expanded the scope of his investigations mas-
sively beyond the Indian epic (in the process creating the fi rst thoroughgoingly racial
reconstruction of Indian history), the Mahābhārata remained central to his work. It
was the key text that allowed him to anchor his theory of a racial confl ict between
white and black races within Indian history. Th us, in the fi rst volume of his Indische
Alterthumskunde , he repeats his conviction that the Mahābhārata is to be interpreted
as an allegorical reference to political events in northern India. He once again empha-
sizes that the names of the epic characters hold the key to this allegorical interpreta-
tion. “Pându signifi es white and this characterization is repeated in the name of his son
Arg’una , from whom the following Pândava kings are descended.” 84 A few pages down,
he clarifi es,
Once it is established that in the story of the Pândavas names are present that do not
signify individuals, but conditions and events, then we may also extend this princi-
ple to the remaining names of this sort. As such, the names black and w hite are espe-
cially prominent in the story of the sons of Pâṇ ḍ u. As was already mentioned, A rguṇ a ,
the ancestor of the later Pândava kings and the foremost hero of the ancient Indian
heroic epic, signifi es white; their most loyal friend, [and] their counselor in all their
plans and the leader of all their initiatives is Krishṇ a , that is, t he black one ; the daughter
of Drupada, the king of the Panḳ âla, the common wife of the fi ve brothers, is called
Krishṇ â or t he black one .8 5
In spite of the language of white and black, however, Lassen did not have in mind a
union between the two races, as might be thought to be implied by the fact of the alli-
ance between the fair Pānḍ avas and the dark daughter of Drupada. Rather, what he had
in mind was a process of acclimatization or naturalization of the northern races to their
new found home, leading to a relative darkening of the earliest invaders vis-à-vis later
entrants into India. Th us, he argued that, “since the Pâṇ kâla defi nitely belonged to the
Aryan peoples, we may not interpret the relationship between them and the Pândava in
such a way that the former, through the black color ascribed to Krishṇ â [i.e., Draupadī]
should be understood as being described as belonging to the black natives of India, the
latter as the white Aryans.” “Nonetheless,” he continued, “the distinction in terms of
color must have a meaning, and this can only be that the Pâṇ kâla, as well as the Jâdava
who are represented by Krishṇ a [Vāsudeva], both belonged to the Aryan peoples who
had immigrated [into India] earlier, [that they] had become darker through the infl u-
ence of the climate than the more recent immigrants from the north and, in contrast to
these, were called the black ones.”8 6
84 . Christian Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1, 634.
85 . Ibid., 641 (emphasis in original).
86 . Ibid., 643.
48 Chapter 01
Lassen’s views concerning the racial identity of the epic characters need not interest
us further here. Th e task of tracing the Rezeptionsgeschichte of his racially grounded recon-
struction of Indian history among a further generation of historiographers must be left
to the historians of race. 87 For our purpose, it is suffi cient to note that his racial theory
constitutes a mainstay of his reconstruction of ancient Indian history in the fi rst volume
of his I ndische Alterthumskunde (the same claims are repeated verbatim in the second
revised edition 88 ) as well as playing an occasional role in his reconstruction of the middle
and late periods in the successive volumes of the work. Th ence, they would become the
central tenet of all Western interpretations of the epic, including those of the twentieth
and twenty-fi rst centuries (e.g., the work of James L. Fitzgerald). By proposing a pseudo-
historical approach to the Indian epic, Lassen had laid the grounds for a thoroughgoing
historicization of the Mahābhārata. Indirectly, he had also made it possible for Western
Indologists to reengage with the Gītā in light of Hegel’s critique. But before this step could
be undertaken, a further step was required: a historicist interpretation of the epic itself.
Th at step would be taken by Adolf Holtzmann Jr., who, combining Lassen’s hypothesis of
an original Bhārata with his own interests in Indo-Germanic antiquity, would in 1892 cre-
ate the myth of an Indo-Germanic original epic, the so-called “Urepos.” Before we can look
at this step in Holtzmann’s work, however, we fi rst need to look at the work of his uncle
Adolf Holtzmann Sr., as his ideas of a heroic epic or “Heldensage” were to be decisive for
Holtzmann Jr.—and, beyond him, for an entire generation of Western scholars.
IDEAS OF HEROIC EPIC
Th e term Heldensage had already been introduced into epic studies by Lassen, who
in his 1837 article had used the term to characterize the Indian epic. Lassen judged
the Mahābhārata negatively against the standard of a true Heldensage like the
Nibelungenlied, but did not provide a positive characterization of a true Heldensage.
Th at task was left to Adolf Holtzmann Sr., who in his I ndische Sagen of 1845 (second
edition 1854) subtitled his “Nachbildung” or poetic rendition of the Kuru confl ict a
“Heldengedicht” (heroic poem).8 9 (Holtzmann Sr. also used the term Heldengesänge
to refer to the Indian legends.9 0 ) Th e term Heldengedicht was then taken up and
87 . See Tuska Benes, “From Indo-Germans to Aryans: Philology and the Racialization of
Salvationist National Rhetoric, 1806–30,” in Th e German Invention of Race , ed. Sara Eigen
and Mark Larrimore (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2006), 167–81. See also
Dorothy M. Figueira, Aryans, Jews, Brahmins: Th eorizing Authority through Myths of Identity
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 2002). Both authors make Lassen the key fi g-
ure in the development of European theories of the superiority of the “Āryan” race—Benes
directly and Figueira indirectly via Gobineau. According to Brustein, Lassen was the fi rst
person to introduce the contrast between “Āryan” and “Semite”; see William I. Brustein,
Roots of Hate: Anti-Semitism in Europe before the Holocaust (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2003), 118 and 130.
88 . Christian Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1: Geographie, Ethnographie und
älteste Geschichte , 2nd. rev. and expanded ed. (Leipzig: L. A. Kittler, 1867), 789 and 791
(hereafter cited as Indische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1, 2nd ed.).
89 . Holtzmann Sr., Indische Sagen , 1.
90 . Ibid., vii and passim.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 49
popularized by his nephew Adolf Holtzmann Jr. in his Zur Geschichte und Kritik des
Mahābhārata of 1892 and thence entered into common usage in Mahābhārata stud-
ies. Before we look at the further history of the term in the younger Holtzmann, let
us consider its uses in the work of Holtzmann Sr.
Holtzmann Sr. studied theology in Halle and Berlin, before passing his theologi-
cal Examen (state licensing qualifi cation) and taking up the post of vicar in Kandern.
However, with state support he embarked upon a second career as a linguist. He
studied Sanskrit in Munich under Othmar Frank, but was also especially interested
in Germanic languages.9 1 Although from a scientifi c perspective of marginal value (in
the words of his biographer, his work was characterized by “a passion for arbitrary
combinations and an addiction to paradoxes, a great faith in his own intelligence and
his reliance on unexamined prejudices” 92 ), his ideas are nonetheless important to us,
as they crucially shaped Holtzmann Jr.’s views of the Indo-Germanic epic tradition
and of the Mahābhārata.
Two of Holtzmann Sr.’s ideas were especially formative for the younger
Holtzmann’s views: the fi rst concerns his belief in the existence of a single com-
mon Indo-Germanic epic tradition; the second his belief in a revision of the ancient
Indian epic in which the Kauravas, the heroes of the original epic, were protrayed
as the aggressors of the story. Holtzmann Sr. articulated the fi rst thesis in a work
on the German epic the Nibelungenlied,9 3 in which he claimed that, “just as the
three epic peoples we know of, the Indians, the Greeks, and the Germans were origi-
nally one people and the Indian, Greek, and German languages were originally one
language, so . . . also . . . the Indian, Greek, and German mythology were one and so
too were the Indian, Greek, and German epic one.”9 4 He also looked for concrete
parallels between the two traditions, even at the price of violent alterations to the
underlying texts. Setting out from his ideas of a common Indo-Germanic heroic tra-
dition, in 1845 Holtzmann Sr. turned his attention to the Indian epic. His fi rst pub-
lication, I ndische Sagen , included translated excerpts from the Mahābhārata, above
all an abridged version of the Kaurava confl ict titled “Die Kuruinge.” 9 5 Holtzmann
91 . See Wilhelm Scherer, “Holtzmann, Adolf,” in Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie , vol. 13
(Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1881), 16–18.
92 . Ibid., 17.
93 . Th is was Holtzmann’s main area of research; in all he published fi ve works on the
subject: an edition titled Das Nibelungenlied in der ältesten Gestalt mit den Veränderungen des
gemeinen Textes herausgeben und mit einem Wörterbuch versehen (Stuttgart: J. Metzler’sche
Buchhandlung, 1857), reprinted in 1858 as a smaller “school edition” (poor schoolchil-
dren!) as S chulausgabe des Nibelungenlieds in der ältesten Gestalt herausgegeben und mit
einem Wörterbuch versehen (Stuttgart: J. Metzler’sche Buchhandlung, 1858), an edition of
the “Nibelung’s Lament” titled Die Klage in der ältesten Gestalt mit den Veränderungen des
gemeinen Textes, als Anhang zum Nibelungenlied herausgegeben und mit einem Wörterbuch und
einer Einleitung versehen (Stuttgart: J. Metzler’sche Buchhandlung, 1859), and two inter-
pretive works, Untersuchungen über das Nibelungenlied (Stuttgart: Adolf Krabbe, 1854) and
Kampf um der Nibelunge Hort gegen Lachmanns Nachtreter (Stuttgart: Adolf Krabbe, 1855).
94 . Holtzmann Sr., Untersuchungen über das Nibelunglied , 162–63.
95 . I ndische Sagen was initially published in 3 volumes: Indische Sagen. Erster Th eil. Savitri,
nebst andern kleineren indischen Sagen (Karlsruhe: Georg Holtzmann, 1845), Indische Sagen.
Zweiter Th eil. Die Kuruinge. Ein indisches Heldengedicht (Karlsruhe: Georg Holtzmann, 1846),
50 Chapter 01
Sr. acknowledged that his translation was rather in the nature of a “Nachbildung”
or poetic rendition, but he nonetheless claimed that his “Nachbildung” was truer
to the spirit of the original. 96 Arguing that “the basic material [Grundstoff ] of the
epic was the downfall of the heroic lineage of the Kurus and hence the end of the
heroic period,” he declared that “the ancient epic lore of the Indians is, to be sure,
contained in the Mahābhārata, a not very old composition, but not in its complete
extent, not in its pure form, but rather it has been repeatedly revised, mutilated,
expanded, [and] distorted.” 97 His task as he saw it was “to purify the original itself
of later defi lement and to reconstruct it in its original form. 98
Th e crux of Holtzmann Sr.’s reconstruction was the idea of the Mahābhārata as
refl ecting Indo-Germanic ideas of heroism and divinity. Th us he argued that the
action in the original epic would have revolved around the drama of Bhīṣ ma’s fall
from heaven, his exile and, following a great apocalyptic battle on earth, his return
to heaven. As he put it,
Fischma, the Indian Zeus, ought not become the founder of a lineage during his
exile among humans; he does not marry. But, subject to the fate of men, he must
nonetheless beget sons. His descendants, however, are soon liberated from [their]
exile. Th e downfall of a great heroic lineage, from the human standpoint a shocking
catastrophe, is nothing other than the salvation of the children of the gods from
their earthly exile. Th us, the heathens [Heidenthum] knew how to fi nd consolation
in sorrow itself. 99
Further, he argued that the Mahābhārata in the course of centuries had undergone
a complete transformation in its outlook. Whereas the ancient bards had looked
favorably upon Duryodhana, the great hero of the Kaurava side, later redactors, act-
ing on political impulses, had changed the text to a paean in honor of the eventual
victors of the war, the Pāṇ d ̣ avas. In his opinion, “anyone who even partially works
his way through the surface of the Mahabharata toward its core, must recognize,
that according to the original plan, right and virtue were on the side of Durjozana
[Duryodhana].” In contrast, he claimed that “the later version” (i.e., the Mahābhārata
epic as it currently exists) aimed to “purify the sons of Pandu and above all Krischna
[Kr ̣ ṣ ṇ a], the advisor and inventor of all evil intrigues; to glorify them as paragons of
and I ndische Sagen. Dritter Th eil (Karlsruhe: Georg Holtzmann, 1847). “Die Kuruinge”
was contained in the second volume. All three volumes were republished in two parts in
1854 ( Indische Sagen. Zweite verbesserte Aufl age in zwei Bänden , vols. 1–2 [Stuttgart: Adolf
Krabbe, 1854]), with “Die Kuruinge” being the fi rst of the episodes in the fi rst volume. All
references in this book are to the 1854 edition.
96 . “I frankly admit that not all traits in my recreation [Nachbildung] of the Indian epic
will correspond with the original [Urbilde] once [Mahābhārata] criticism has succeeded in
reconstructing it [the original] in its genuine beauty; I nonetheless believe that, initially at
least, my re-creation provides a more correct idea of the original than a literal translation
of the text as we now have it would do.” Holtzmann Sr., I ndische Sagen , x.
97 . Ibid., vii.
98 . Ibid., x.
99 . Ibid., xi–xii.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 51
all virtue and, in contrast, to heap reproach on Durjozana and his friends.”1 00 Fully
convinced that the original poem was an elegy for a heroic world on the verge of
collapse (or for a heroic age gone by), Holtzmann Sr. also changed the epic’s conclu-
sion to resonate with his Romantic ideas. In the original, the Pāṇd ̣ avas triumph over
the Kauravas in battle and establish a righteous kingdom. However, Holtzmann Sr.
argued that it was more appropriate that in the conclusion “even Krischna [Kṛṣṇ a]
and the sons of Pandu meet [their] death in the fi nal blood-bath. . . .” Th is not only
had the eff ect of restoring the balance of good and evil to the original but it also
had the eff ect of concluding the narrative with the war books prior to the exten-
sive philosophical and theological tracts of the Śānti- and Anuśāsana parvans, sec-
tions characterized by him as “unending edifying contemplations.” Justifying his
changes, Holtzmann Sr. wrote, “it cannot be doubted that the genuine heroic poem
ends there, where I conclude. Everything that follows breathes a completely dif-
ferent spirit. But, in order to attain a real conclusion, I had to let the Panduinge
[Pāṇḍ avas] themselves, not just their sons who take their place in the Mahabharata,
fall before Aswatthaman’s [Aśvatthāman] sword of vengeance. Here, too, I believe
that I have not changed, but, rather, restored the original.”1 01 A few lines down,
he again emphasized the necessity of infringing upon the epic: citing the “multiple
changes and expansions” the epic had undergone he declared that “there was need,
both in small and large details, of long-winded critical work before the Sanskrit text
would attain a form in which it deserved to be translated.” “Th is critical work,” he
further continued, “would have to be left to a future editor of the text, but, for my
purpose, the most important results of the same [process] must be, so to speak,
guessed at in advance; and it is self-evident that I may thereby be much bolder than
an editor would otherwise be permitted to be.” 102
But there was a second reason for Holtzmann’s advocacy of changes to the epic: a
deep-seated antipathy toward the Brahmans, whom he saw as being responsible for
the loss and destruction of the Indo-Germanic epic (indeed, with the loss and destruc-
tion of the Indo-Germanic world itself). Th us, he proposed that “the transformation
of [the Kauravas’] downfall into a return” was “impossible, as long as the heroic story
[was] robbed of its mythological background by the interference of Wiasa [Vyāsa].” In
the current epic, the Brahman Vyāsa—not Bhīs ṃ a—is the father of Dhr ṭ arāṣt ṛ a and
Pānḍ ụ , whom he begets on the widows of his half brother Vicitravīyra. Holtzmann Sr.,
however, proposed that this story was a fabrication, undertaken by the Brahmans with
“no other goal than to make clear to the minds of the devout kings of India through
an example of their ancient history, that they can encounter no greater joy than
100 . Ibid., viii.
101 . Ibid., xii; cf. also the equally nonsensical claim, “For example, toward the end of the
poem, Durjozana [Duryodhana] is found lying in a pond. It must be clarifi ed, how he came
to be there. Th e Mahabharata in its present version fi nds the explanation in the coward-
ice of the king; he has run away from the battle and has hidden himself in the pond. But
according to the original tendency of the poem the brave and fearless Durjozana cannot
possibly show such an impulse of cowardice: for, the Homeric heroes may, of course, fl ee in
fright without damage to their honor, but not the Indian [heroes].” Ibid., xi.
102 . Ibid., xiv–xv.
52 Chapter 01
when holy Brahmans are attracted to their wives and most kindly want to preoccupy
themselves with ennobling their lineage.”1 03 Elsewhere Holtzmann Sr. also lamented
the “losses” that the “ancient national hymns” had suff ered in the wake of “the later
philosophical enlightenment.” “Everything miraculous, all direct involvement of the
gods was . . . eliminated and clarifi ed in terms of natural causes . . . the entire ancient
Olympus of India had to fall before a rationalistic orientation and only a few traces
of the genuine epic mixture of the divine and human worlds remain[ed] . . . .”1 04 But
even more detrimental to the spirit of the old poem than this loss of ancient ideas of
divinity was the introduction of new gods into the pantheon. Writes Holtzmann Sr.:
If this exit of the old gods is an irreplaceable loss, the interference of the younger
gods, in contrast, of Wischnu [Viṣṇu], of Siwa [Śiva], of Dewi [Devī] led to the
almost total destruction of the poem. In place of the poetic-miraculous, which let
fantasy perform the work of the understanding, entered the degenerate-miraculous
that resists the representing [faculty of] fantasy just as much as it does the think-
ing reason. Th e passages in which the cult of Siwa and of Dewi predominates can be
easily eliminated; but the worship of Wischnu has penetrated everywhere and has
transformed the magnifi cent epic almost into one of those boring and absurd works
that one calls the Puranas.1 05
Holtzmann’s views of heroic epic, especially his suspicion of the so-called
Brahmanic changes to the text, were to have a long reception in the West. His com-
ments about the tastelessness of the “Purāṣic” aspects of the Mahābhārata, for
instance, were to be echoed by almost every Mahābhārata scholar of the nineteenth
century. As late as 1978, it was possible for J. A. B van Buitenen, the translator of the
Chicago edition, to claim, “not all scholars are interested in Purāṇic Hinduism. Some
are interested in the text as one of the few world epics. . . . For them the sixth-century
text as the earliest one recoverable is an invaluable source of information, and its
homogenization with later Purāṇic text is completely detrimental to, if not destruc-
tive of, what little evidence is left.”1 06 With the exception of a few scholars such as
the French Sanskritist Madeleine Biardeau, scholars simply did not consider it neces-
sary to either take the text in its extant form or its philosophical doctrines seriously.
Th e fi ction of an Ur-text, lying hidden behind or beneath the text as it was known
in India and awaiting the tools of Western critical scholarship for its excavation and
proper understanding, made it possible for scholars to ignore the Indian reception of
the text entirely. Instead, they could now embark on the search for an epic that only
existed for them, an epic postulated by them. It became possible to “do” Mahābhārata
studies as a form of identity politics. Th e epic as received, read, and transmitted in
India only existed to serve as a foil for German ideas of the heroic ancient Germanic
103 . Ibid., xii.
104 . Ibid., ix.
105 . Ibid.
106 . J. A. B. van Buitenen, “Introduction,” in Th e Mahābhārata , 4. Th e Book of Virāṭa ,
5. Th e Book of the Eff ort (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978), 152.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 53
race, and the task of scholarship was identifi ed with the recovery of the hypothetical
original on the basis of spurious “text critical” criteria. Nowhere would this be truer
than in the work of Holtzmann’s nephew, Adolf Holtzmann Jr.
THE INDOGERMANIC EPIC
Although mostly forgotten by Indologists today (the one exception is James
L. Fitzgerald, who advocates a neo-Holtzmannian position), Adolf Holtzmann Jr. is
one of the key fi gures in the history of Western Mahābhārata studies. Holtzmann
was the fi rst to import the methods of biblical criticism discussed in the last chap-
ter into Mahābhārata studies and also the fi rst to make the task of reconstruction
of the original the central ambition of scholarship. Partly by combining Lassen’s
account of Indian prehistory and partly by combining his Adolf Holtzmann Sr.’s
equally idiosyncratic views of a heroic age, Holtzmann created a potent myth about
the so-called “Indogermanic original epic” (“Indogermanisches Urepos”) at the
origin and center of the Indian epic.1 07 He was the fi rst to systematically use the
expressions “redaction,” “inversion,” and “interpolation” to explain the transforma-
tions this original epic would have undergone to produce the Mahābhārata as we
have it. In doing so, he established the dominant tenor and direction of German
Mahābhārata studies and, via his great champion Hopkins,1 08 was also able to export
his ideas to the English-speaking world. 109 In the late nineteenth century, following
107 . Th is myth continues until the present day. Besides the works by Fitzgerald and
Brockington cited later, see also the work of Georg von Simson, especially his recent Das
Mahābhārata: Die Große Erzählung von den Bhāratas (Berlin: Verlag der Weltreligionen,
2011). Th is book tries to resurrect German mythology about the epic for a new generation
of readers in a more popular format, including the thesis of a Brahmanic takeover of the
text; see ibid., 590–92 (and see esp. 592 for Simson’s use of the language of the rivalry
“between the temporal and the spiritual/intellectual power, between the sword and the
word . . . .” to give precision to the Kṣatriya-Brahman confl ict).
108 . Hopkins negatively reviewed Holtzmann’s book in Th e American Journal of
Philology (13, no. 4 [1892]: 499–501). But he nonetheless cited and popularized certain
of Holtzmann’s ideas (e.g., in his “Th e Social and Military Position of the Ruling Caste
in Ancient India, as Represented by the Sanskrit Epic,” Journal of the American Oriental
Society 13 [1889]: 57, n., and see also 60–65). It is safe to say that without Hopkins’ active
involvement, Holtzmann’s name would not have reached American shores.
109 . A concise summary of Hopkins’ views, as they were received and became canonical
among twentieth-century Mahābhārata scholars can be found in John L. Brockington, Th e
Sanskrit Epics (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1998) and see also the various attempts by Fitzgerald
to cast himself as Hopkins’ successor: James L. Fitzgerald, “Th e Great Epic of India as
Religious Rhetoric: A Fresh Look at the M ahābhārata ,” J ournal of the American Academy
of Religion 51 (1983): 611–39 (see esp. 624: on “the authors’ loathing for the old Kṣatriya
culture”; 625: on Kṛṣṇa’s encouragement of the Pāṇḍavās to use “perfi dious” tactics—
“perfi dious, that is, from the perspective of the accepted Kṣatriya conventions of “chivalry”;
and ibid: on Kṛṣṇa “deep” “animus against the conventions of Kṣatriya society . . . .”); James
L. Fitzgerald, “India’s Fifth Veda: Th e M ahābhārata’s Presentation of Itself,” in E ssays on the
Mahābhārata , ed. Arvind Sharma (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991), 150–71 (Fitzgerald “suspect[s] ”
that the Mahābhārata was “as imagined most simply, an elaborate fabrication (basically
54 Chapter 01
Holtzmann’s postulation of the “Urepos,” many scholars (key among them being the
Tübingen scholar Richard Garbe) transposed Holtzmann’s methods to the study of
the Bhagavadgītā. Like Holtzmann, they began to see the Gītā as a historical docu-
ment and, again like him, made it the central aim of scholarship to reconstruct an
“Urgītā.” 110 Rather than the philosophical poem that had aroused the admiration of
von Humboldt, the Gītā now appeared as a composite text comprised of many con-
fl icting and contradictory views. Th e stage was thus set for its “historical” analysis
and reconstruction in the laboratories of the Indologists.
Published between 1892 and 1895, Holtzmann’s Das Mahābhārata und seine
Th eile ,1 11 a four-volume study of the Mahābhārata, was one of the fi rst works to take
a comprehensive look at the Indian epic. Of these four volumes, the most signifi cant
was the fi rst volume, Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahābhārata , cited earlier. While
Holtzmann drew on the views of predecessors such as Lassen and the British his-
torians John Muir and J. Talboys Wheeler, he was also signifi cantly infl uenced by
the work of the senior Holtzmann and in his 1892 work declared right up front his
allegiance to his predecessor’s views. 112 He not only borrowed his uncle’s thesis of a
“revision” of the original poem, 113 but expanded on it signifi cantly to accommodate
an entire theory of the “redactions” of the Mahābhārata (he proposed at least three)
as well as of the evolution of religions in India (again, classifi ed by him into three
major stages):
According to the older poem, right and virtue is on the side of Karṇa and his party,
according to the younger [poem] on that of A rjuna; Duryodhana is the lawful king,
Arjuna and his brothers rebels, Karṇa is the embodiment of the knightly battle-code,
simultaneous with the invention of the B hagavadgītā , which is the center and heart of our
text)”; ibid., 154); James L. Fitzgerald, “M ahābhārata ,” in Th e Hindu World , ed. Sushil Mittal
and Gene Th ursby (New York and London: Routledge, 2004), 52–74 (see esp. 72, speak-
ing of a “Brāhmaṇ counter-revolution”); and “Negotiating the Shape of ‘Scripture’: New
Perspectives on the Development and Growth of the Epic Between the Empires,” in
Between the Empires , ed. Patrick Olivelle (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 257–87
(see esp. 277: the Mahābhārata is “a vigorous counter-attack” by the Brahmans “to take
matters into their own hands and negotiate the terms of their status and position with the
armed forces within society in the presence of the rest of society around them”).
110 . Although that term would not be used until the early twentieth century when it was
fi rst introduced by the Marburg Indologist and historian of religion Rudolf Otto.
111 . Adolf Holtzmann Jr., Das Mahābhārata und seine Th eile , 4 vols. (Kiel: C. F. Haessler,
1892–95).
112 . “Th e most important principle for the inner criticism of the Mahābhārata is the one
established by Adolf Holtzmann in 1846, that the old poem’s sympathies lay just as much
on the side of Duryodhana as the current one valorizes Y udhishṭhira and his brothers and
friends.” Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 11.
113 . Although Holtzmann Sr. is considered the author of the “inversion hypothesis,” he
does not use the term Umkehrung (inversion). Th ere is only one passage in his I ndische
Sagen where he uses the term, but even then it is only in the form of the participle umkeh-
rend (“Much more damaging and completely inverting [umkehrend] the original plan
of the epic were changes of a polemical or apologetic nature.” Holtzmann Sr., Indische
Sagen , vol. 1, viii). Holtzmann Sr. does, however, use related terms such as Umgestaltung
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 55
Krshṇa always advises trickery and deception: this is the stand-point of the old
poem. Yudhishtḥ ira and A rjuna are paragons of every virtue, D uryodhana and K arṇa
sinful criminals; K rshṇa , however, the embodiment of the highest god: this is the
stand-point of the new poem. How one, however, came to leave the old interpreta-
tion and to take up the new, opposed [interpretation] is a puzzle whose solution must
be sought there where Indian history has its genuine ground, the fi eld of history of
religion. It was Vishnuism that demanded and enforced this transformation.1 14
Th e central sections of Holtzmann’s book were dedicated to working out how this
change in religious and ethical ideals would have impacted the Indian epic. Here he
focused on two main themes: the contrast between the ancient Indo-Germanic out-
look and the Brahmanic outlook, and, partly overlapping with the fi rst, the contrast
between the Buddhist and the Brahmanic outlooks. Curiously, in this concatenation
of revisions, Holtzmann saw real complementarity between the Indo-Germanic and
Buddhist outlooks. According to him, Buddhism would have been sympathetic to the
martial Indo-Germanic epic, in fact preserving its heroic oral poetry in the form of a
written composition. He argued that later Brahmanic redactors, being just as hostile
to Buddhist pacifi c ideals as to Germanic warrior ethics, undertook a thoroughgoing
revision of the text—one indeed that went far beyond the boundaries of anything his
uncle could have imagined.
Before we look at Holtzmann’s theory of epic redaction (in the next chapter), let
us look more closely at his understanding of the epic. We shall focus here on four
areas: Holtzmann’s view of the epic’s origins, his view of its character, its composi-
tion, and its eventual decline.
1 . Origins of the Epic
Like Adolf Holtzmann Sr., Holtzmann Jr. considered the Indian epic to be the out-
growth of a broader epic tradition, one extending from Germany to India. He quoted
the earlier writer’s work in support of his view of a common epic tradition rooted in
a common ethnic identity. 115 Like his predecessor, he attached great signifi cance to
(transformation). In contrast Holtzmann Jr. appears to have truly popularized the the-
ory with the use of terms such as Umarbeitung, Umgestaltung , and U eberarbeitung (all of
which mean roughly the same: revision). Occasionally, he also uses Umwandlung instead
(roughly, transformation).
114 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 14.
115 . “Th e epic is ancient ; the beginnings of the same lie far beyond history, just as the
beginnings of nations, the beginnings of religions, the beginnings of languages. But just
as comparative grammar has led to the insight that the three epic peoples, which we
know of, the Indians, the Greeks, and the Germans were originally o ne people , and that
the Indian, Greek, and German languages were originally only o ne language, so also one
can already assert with certainty that the Indian, Greek, and German mythology is only
one , and just as much that the Indian, Greek, and German epics were originally just o ne ,
Adolf Holtzmann Untersuchungen über das Nibelungenlied p. 162.” Holtzmann Jr., Z ur
56 Chapter 01
the fact that “the Indians, together with the Germanic tribes and other peoples” at a
certain stage in their development “constituted o ne people .”1 16 Th is thesis was his pri-
mary motivation for turning (in 1879) to the Mahābhārata in the hope of recovering
the basic traits of this ancient Indo-Germanic folk. 117
In essential respects, Holtzmann Jr. also followed Holtzmann Sr. in arguing
that all three epic traditions (i.e., the Greek with the Iliad, the German with the
Nibelungenlied, and the Indian with the Mahābhārata) would have been off shoots
of a common tradition. Holtzmann identifi ed this common tradition with the
“Indo-Germanic Urepos” and argued (again, in an echo of Holtzmann Sr.) that “after
their separation each people would naturally have refashioned its epic inheritance in
its own manner.” Holtzmann considered it only possible to address the question of the
nature of this ancestral epic once “the oldest attainable form of the epic among each
of the individual epic peoples” had been attained.1 18 He regarded his reconstruction
of the Mahābhārata as a necessary if initial step toward this ultimate goal and in this
reconstruction (this too was a thesis of his uncle’s) he saw the addition of religious
elements to the Mahābhārata as the main obstacle. Holtzmann Sr. had earlier argued
that “in India it was primarily the religious movements that damaged the epic” and
had blamed this damage upon “the younger religions, especially the worship of Siwa
and the service of Wischnu [Viṣṇu].” In his opinion these newer movements “wanted
to adapt and subjugate the old poetic national treasure to their interests; in the pro-
cess this treasure had to suff er great losses and was defaced almost to the point of
nonrecognition.” 1 19 Like Holtzmann Sr., Holtzmann Jr. too regarded the original epic
as being in tension with later doctrines. However, whereas his uncle was more circum-
spect about the possibility of being able to retrieve this original, Holtzmann was more
optimistic about the possibility of identifying older sections of the epic. According to
him, the great gulf in outlook between the Indo-Germanic tradition (heroic, honor-
able and warlike) and the Brahmanic tradition (passive, corrupt and philosophic and/
or ritualistic) made it relatively easy to distinguish between original and nonoriginal
sections of the epic. In this quest, he would focus especially on identifying a common
“heroic” attitude—one he considered characteristic of the Indo-Germanic warriors of
the ancient epic and the warriors of the German Nibelungenlied alike.
2 . Characteristic Traits of Indo-Germanic Epic
Holtzmann considered the original epic to breathe a completely diff erent spirit than
the Mahābhārata as we have it today. In his words, the “old portions of the epic” were
Geschichte und Kritik , 42 (the quotation is from Holtzmann Sr.’s U ntersuchungen über das
Nibelungenlied and is the same one as cited earlier).
116 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 42.
117 . Holtzmann’s fi rst work on the Mahābhārata was A rjuna. Ein Beitrag zur Reconstruction
des Mahâbhârata (Leipzig: K. J. Trübner, 1879). Th e work attracted little attention, but in
1892 he absorbed its central theses into his Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahābhārata .
118 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 43.
119 . Holtzmann Sr., Untersuchungen über das Nibelungenlied , 165.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 57
characterized by a “thoroughly w arlike worldview .” He argued that “instead of the
elegiac wisdom, the resignation, being tired of life, of later Indian literature . . . the
raw warrior-like air of the old Germanic North blows against us here.”1 20 Indeed, he
proposed,
If we were ever to succeed in determining the oldest cultural stage of the Indian
race . . . and to dissolve away almost by means of a chemical process all infl uences
of . . . Brahmanism . . . we would fi nd conditions before us only a little diff erent from
those described by Tacitus as unique to the ancient Germans. But even in its con-
temporary ruined form the Mahābhārata often delivers us the best commentary
on Germania. Here we read of the passion for gambling of the Germans, of how
they wagered possessions and property, wife and child, [and] fi nally even them-
selves: extremo ac novissimo iactu de liberate contendunt [sic] .1 21
Holtzmann also proposed a number of specifi c parallels in support of this thesis. For
instance, he wrote, “loyalty unto death is the highest duty of the warrior in relation
to his leader: infame in omnem vitam ac probrosum superstitem principi suo ex acie
recessisse. Th is statement holds literally for the heroes of the M ahābhārata .” “Th e
same view that instilled contempt of death in the German warriors and made them
unconquerable, namely, the fi rm belief that death on the battlefi eld opens the gates
of heaven, also inspired the Indian heroes.” 122 Holtzmann also wrote that “it is not
fi tting for the warrior to die at home of an illness, since ancient times his destiny is
to fall by the sword,” an idea he, citing Holtzmann Sr.’s Deutsche Mythologie ,1 23 called
“a completely ancient German thought.” 124 He argued that “the life of the gods” as
“the faithful image of human life in the epic age” too was “a war-like one consecrated
to battle.” “Like the Indian I ndra [and] the Greek Zeus, the Germanic Odin too had
to gain and assert his rule through battle.” He suggested that “the same indiff erence
in the face of death as had so greatly impressed the Greeks . . . and Persians . . . about
the Indians” could also be found among “the Germans and the Celts” (where it had
similarly impressed the Romans) and he argued that this common indiff erence was
“grounded in the same way in the fi rm belief that bliss awaits the brave warrior in
heaven.” “Indian and German antiquity,” he thus reasoned, “simultaneously comple-
ment each other.” In the same passage, he also noted that “both races . . . hold the
duty of blood-vengeance to be holy . . . , and then he argued, “one would rather pre-
sume to be reading an ancient German legend than a poem from the land of the
tender-nerved Indians, when one comes across the narrative in which the revenge of
Açvatthāman for the treasonous murder of his father D roṇa is described.” 125 Summing
up the results of his analysis, he wrote:
120 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 45.
121 . Ibid., 45–46.
122 . Ibid., 47.
123 . Adolf Holtzmann Sr., Deutsche Mythologie. Vorlesungen von Adolf Holtzmann , ed.
Alfred Holder (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1874) (the reference is to pp. 197–99).
124 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 48.
125 . Ibid., 49.
58 Chapter 01
We thus fi nd some similarities in the conditions of the most ancient Indian and the
most ancient Germanic periods; here and there we encounter a battle-lusty warrior
race with all the seeds of culture alongside a cruel crudeness of passion. Whether
here one must suppose [that the epic is] a recollection of a primordial age during
which they lived together or a further development that ran parallel under similar
existential conditions, I cannot decide here. [But] it is certain that the M ahâbhârata
has preserved traces for us that reach back to a very early period of Indian antiquity;
that therein recollections of an Indo-Germanic primordial age have been preserved,
is, at least so far, at best plausible.1 26
In addition to these parallels, Holtzmann also cited a number of passages as evidence of
direct borrowing between the two traditions. Th e Nibelungenlied served him as a basis
for comparison. Th us, of the Apsaras, or celestial maidens of the Mahābhārata, he noted:
Th e A psaras . . . are women who live freely, who dance at the court of I ndra but also travel
around the earth in the shape of birds—comparable to our swan-maidens; 127 . . . But
they also have a warlike side. In the middle of the description of the battle it is
narrated (8, 49, 76 = 2373) that the Apsaras raise the heroes who have fallen with
wounds on their [i.e., on the warriors’] breasts onto their wagon and accompanied
by the sound of trumpets carry them to heaven; in this moment, it is added, the war-
riors had fought truly valiantly. During the fi nal decisive encounter between Arjuna
and K arṇa both heroes are tired (8, 90, 18, 4640); they take a break from the battle
[and] there appear the A psaras [who] fan them with fans made of horse-hair and
sprinkle sandalwood-water on them. Is one here not reminded of the Valkyries? 128
Holtzmann preferentially cast about in the war books of the epic for evidence of
Indo-Germanic parallels. In general, the more cruel or more brutal the passage, the
more likely he considered it to be borrowed from a German source. For instance, he
cited the blood-drinking scene of the Indian epic as evidence of a connection between
the Mahābhārata and the Nibelungenlied, but criticized the Indian account for hav-
ing toned down “with lamentable sophistry” the horror of the original. As he put it,
[A] sign of ancient brutality . . . common to both the Mahābhārata and the
Nibelungenliede [is that] the blood of the slain foe is drunk. As he had already sworn
at the game, B hīmasena drinks 8, 83, 28 = 4235 the blood of D uḥçāsana who is slain
by him and calls out: never did I drink so sweet (this is even better than wine, it is
said in the Nibelungenlied). Th is trait was too horrifi c to the later redactors; with
lamentable sophistry they present the state of aff airs 11, 15, 16 = 396 as though
126 . Ibid., 51.
127 . Th e word is “Schwanenjungfrauen,” which literally means “swan virgins.” Th e
Nibelungenlied briefl y mentions two Schwanenjungfrauen as Hagen von Tronje sinks the
Nibelungs’ treasure in the Rhein; they were later the model for Wagner’s Rheintöchter , or
the “Rhein-maidens.”
128 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 40.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 59
Bhīmasena never really drank the blood, it reached his lips and not his throat and
then he spat it out again.1 29
To his mind, “the poet of the Nibelungenlied” “excuse[d] the drinking of blood” “much
more elegantly” by referring to “the heat and the thirst under which his heroes have
to suff er . . . .” 130 Karṇa, the antihero of the Mahābhārata off ered him a third point of
comparison with the myth of the Nibelungenlied. Karṇa is the unrecognized eldest
son of Kuntī and thus the eldest of the Pāṇḍavas. Due to a twist of fate, he ends
up fi ghting on the opposing side—against his own brothers. Holtzmann, who had
explicitly borrowed his uncle’s thesis of the revision of the original epic, found Karṇa
irresistible. As the greatest warrior on the Kaurava side and a confi dant of prince
Duryodhana, Holtzmann considered Karṇa to especially incarnate the tragedy of the
downfall of the heroic age. Th e fact that Karṇa is cursed to lose his knowledge of arms
at a dire moment and tricked into giving up his invincible armor especially appealed to
him. Apart from stirring Romantic ideas of the tragic hero undone by the treachery of
those he trusted, Holtzmann found the entire narrative suggestive of Siegfried’s fate
(in the Nibelungenlied, Siegfried is betrayed by his wife Kriemhild when she unwit-
tingly betrays his weak spot to Hagen). As he wrote, “in the comparison of the Indian
epic with the German [epic], the fi gure of Karṇa especially steps into the foreground.
Th is unconquerable hero, the son of the sun god, defi nitely played the main role in
the old poem. A foundling, he had to, although of divine descent, serve as a servant in
the military retinue of a king; he wins a bride for his master, he kills an evil monster
( Jarāsandha ), he falls through treason and deceit. Th ese traits clearly recall the legends
of Siegfried; that is why recently the attempt has been made to prove the identity of
the two.”1 31 Holtzmann returned repeatedly to Karṇa, emphasizing his greatness and
the tragedy of his fall. He saw the story of Kṛṣṇa’s pressing of an unfair advantage
(Karṇa’s chariot wheel is stuck in the earth; he begs a truce to free it, but Kṛṣṇa urges
Arjuna to press home his advantage and the latter cuts off Karṇa’s head) as emblematic
of how a later, less ethical age had done in the noble Indo-Germanic people. Whereas
the latter, according to him, had adhered scrupulously to the “knightly” code at all
times, Kṛṣna, who represented the new, rising ideology of Brahmanism, had exploited
the Indo-Germans’ trusting nature leading to their eventual defeat.
3 . Bardic Origins of the Epic
Concerning the epic’s origins, Holtzmann proposed that the earliest beginnings of the
epic were to be sought in heroic poems sung by bards. He argued that although “the
129 . Ibid., 50.
130 . Ibid., 50–51.
131 . Ibid., 44. Holtzmann cites four references: Heinrich Leo’s Vorlesungen über die
Geschichte des Deutschen Volkes und Reiches , vol. 1 (Halle: Anton, 1854); Adolf Holtzmann
Sr.’s U ntersuchungen über das Nibelungenlied , cited earlier; Johann Heinrich Becker’s
Mahābhārata: Der grosse Krieg (Berlin: printed by author, 1888) and Z ur Deutung urzeitli-
cher Überlieferung (Berlin: printed by author, 1889).
60 Chapter 01
narrator of the Mahābhārata in our redaction is a learned Brahman,” this feature was
not characteristic of “the older period.” Citing the fact that “next to V aiçampāyana ,
the Brahman, appear as narrators two warriors, S anjaya and U graçravas ,” 132 he argued
in favor of the existence of “a s pecifi c bardic class at the courts of the kings, which was
charged with the care of preserving of the epic . . . . ” 133 “Th e means of preserving and
expanding this courtly poetry [would have been] . . . the oral tradition .” 134
Positively, Holtzmann characterized the epic as a form of heroic speech closely
associated with (indeed, the possession of) the warrior caste. “Th e care of this
mythology,” he wrote, “is a matter for the warriors; it is not in the huts of the her-
mits but in the courts of the kings that we have to seek the blosssom of this epic
and of epic mythology . . . . ”1 35 And again: “For the old epic poetry is the property of the
warrior caste .”1 36 Holtzmann also argued that the epic would have been composed by
bards in real time as they witnessed the unfolding events on the battlefi eld. Playing
on the homonymy of s ūta (which can mean both “bard” and “charioteer”) he argued
that “originally, a s ūta was a charioteer; he thus belongs to the warrior-class. . . . ” 137
Citing “the belief of the Indians themselves” regarding the antiquity of the epic, he
claimed that “alongside the fi rst king stood the fi rst bards, who sang of his virtues
and deeds.” 138 Further he argued:
Th ese bards are also not missing in war, as we fi nd them during the great battle
in the camps of the two enemy kings. Th ey themselves enter the battle in order to
be able to observe the heroic deeds of the warriors themselves and to then sing of
them; thus S anjaya , the charioteer ( sūta ) of Dhṛtarāshtṛa narrates the entire battle
to the latter, which he is present at as an eye-witness . . . . 139
Holtzmann considered Saṃjaya’s relationship to king Dhṛtarāsṭ ṛa, although atypical
in the context of the epic since king Dhṛtarāsṭ ṛa is blind and therefore needs a narra-
tor, to be paradigmatic of the relationship of the sūta to the king, since it off ered him
an example of an onsite charioteer who also takes on the role of narrator. He argued
that, “one must remind oneself that in the main portion of our epic, in the description
of the great battle, Vaiçampāyana hands over to S anjaya , the friend of D hṛtarāshtṛa .
Every evening, after he has returned from the battle, Sanjaya narrates the events of
the day to the blind king, at fi rst briefl y and then in detail. . . . We thus have three narra-
tors: Sanjaya, Vaiçampāyana, Ugraçravas and three listeners: D hṛtarāshtṛa, Janamejaya,
Çaunaka , which would agree with our assumption of an original poem and two revi-
sions.”1 40 He also cited the Mahābhārata itself as evidence of the close link between the
132 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 52.
133 . Ibid., 54 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
134 . Ibid., 59 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
135 . Ibid., 41.
136 . Ibid., 57 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
137 . Ibid., 54.
138 . Ibid., 56.
139 . Ibid., 54.
140 . Ibid., 157.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 61
bard and the king: “In the description of the households of the kings these bards are
constantly mentioned, for example, at the court of D uryodhana 6, 97, 30 = 4433 (s ūta
and m agadha ); king Yudhishtḥ ira employed according to 4, 70, 20 = 2279 eight hundred
such bards and poets; also in the precise image of earthly life, in heaven, they are not
missing, there it is the G andharvas , who sing the praise of Indra 3, 41, 16 = 1678.”1 41
(Th e circularity of his reasoning manifestly escaped him.)
Negatively, Holtzmann contrasted the epic with “the religious literature of the
Brahmans,” of which he wrote that it “ran alongside the epic literature, [although]
both [were] completely independent of each other, only occasionally mutually using
each other.” Citing Max Müller, he argued for two fundamental and opposed tradi-
tions “E pic and V eda .” According to him, though both were “equally ancient,” “no
bridge leads from the V eda to the Mahābhārata .”1 42 Indeed, the contrast between the
heroic Indo-Germanic outlook and the passive Indian outlook fi rst gained its explana-
tory edge from this contrast between the epic and the Veda, which is why Holtzmann
returned repeatedly to the thesis. He emphasized that “the epic had nothing to do with
the religious literature of the Brahmans as it is represented in the V eda ; it was the prop-
erty of the warrior caste.”1 43 He further made it clear that he saw them not only as polar
opposites but also in some sense as antithetical to each other. He also repeated his
comment that the “the two literatures, the Brahmanic and the warlike, are completely
independent of each other,” this time replacing the Veda and the Mahābhārata by their
surrogates Brahmanic and warlike. 144 With this substitution of the nouns by their met-
onyms, Holtzmann made it explicit that he considered the Veda and the Mahābhārata
to be irrevocably tied to their respective social groups, while the juxtaposition of the
two adjectives made it clear that their relationship was one of implacable opposition.
Holtzmann considered the Mahābhārata a composite work. It lay in the nature of
the bardic and oral origins of epic poetry that the Mahābhārata could not originally
have been a single work. Rather, Holtzmann appears to have had in mind a cycle of
poems, some perhaps rather loosely connected to others, but the whole was nonethe-
less held together by the fact that these poems all centered on the intimate relationship
between the king and his bard. Th is loosely connected collection of heroic poems, he
argued, would have at some stage accumulated around a single central and dominant
event or theme. Th ereafter, he proposed, further elements would have been added
to this nucleus. As evidence for the composite nature of the epic, Holtzmann cited
three arguments. First, all “European scholars” recognized that “the Mahābhārata is
not uniform ; all agreed that the components of the work stem from diff erent historical
periods.” 145 Second, “there is no lack of indications in the poem itself . . . that the epic was
not always present in the form it is at present.” In support, Holtzmann cited the fi rst
chapter of the fi rst book, which he argued “declares quite forthrightly and clearly: the
Mahābhārata was narrated at diff erent times and by diff erent poets . . . . Th e poem is
141 . Ibid., 54.
142 . Ibid., 61.
143 . Ibid., 51.
144 . Ibid., 62.
145 . Ibid., 5–6 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
62 Chapter 01
present in detailed and abridged versions . . . . ” 146 Th ird, Holtzmann also argued that
“the individual components of the poem diff er in terms of their c ontent and style .”1 47
From this, he concluded that the epic, already in its inception a collection of bardic
narratives and/or heroic songs, was not a unitary work. As he put it, “warlike heroic
legend and priestly revision, true poesy and mystical blather, crude customs and later
refi nements, noble sentiment and dulled superstition” were united in the epic “in the
most amazing variety and interpenetration.”1 48 In particular, Holtzmann argued that
what he called the “Brahmanic revision” would have been responsible for the pres-
ence of two clearly distinct ideologies or outlooks in the epic. According to him, “the
Brahmans reworked the poem to their own ends and opposed a new, orthodox [recht-
gläubige] redaction [of the epic] to the old epic. Th e latter was distinguished from
the former by its glorifi cation of the Pāṇḍava and the debasement of the Kaurava , by
the inclusion of Vishṇu and the divinization of K ṛshṇa , by the emphasis on orthodox
[orthodoxen] Brahmanism.”1 49 As motivation for this revision, he cited the fact that
the Brahmans, facing a challenge to their demand for absolute authority, “could not
simply brush aside the popular epic poetry.” In light of this fact, he argued that “it is
quite conceivable that with the assistance of a devout and talented poet, an attempt
was undertaken to replace the M ahābhārata with a new, purely Brahmanic heroic
poem, albeit one based on the old epic lore.”1 50 Th is project, according to him, led to
the combination (and accidental preservation) of the old bardic poems with the new
philosophico-religious outlook of the Brahmans, leading to the present epic.
4 . Decline of the Epic
Even though Holtzmann’s main interest was the retrieval of the characteristics of the
ancient Indo-Germanic people, his work also placed a great deal of emphasis on their
decline. For instance, he repeatedly returned to the theme of the doomed heroism of
the Indo-Germanic peoples, a heroism that tinged all their actions with a tragic cast.
He wrote of the epic’s composer, “He [the poet] shows us the tragic struggle of two
principles; of knighthood, whose time is over; and of the newly arising politics, and
presents the former to us in all the glory of a setting sun.” He further characterized
the confl ict between these two worlds in terms of an ethical contrast: “With rising
interest, we see how the old honest battle-ethics of the knights after a brave defense
succumbs to treason and deceit.” 151 As though there could be any doubt about his
interpretation of this confl ict, he explicitly clarifi ed:
Th e contrast of the forces which collide with each other here is tragic: on the one side
stands the old bold heroic order which only knows an open, honest battle, whose
146 . Ibid., 7 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
147 . Ibid., 8 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
148 . Ibid., 9.
149 . Ibid., 128.
150 . Ibid., 136.
151 . Ibid., 89.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 63
sole pole-star is the fame that is praised in enthusiastic verses, which in proud con-
fi dence in its own power scorns all calculations of pragmatic reason . . . . In lively
contrast, we see on the other side the clever and scheming art of a K ṛshṇa , who,
himself no warrior, knows how to arm the arms of brave heroes for his own pur-
poses through sophistic eloquence. His enterprise is victorious, victrix causa diis
placuit sed victa poëtae [sic].1 52
Among the many changes Holtzmann lamented was the loss of the heroic outlook
which he characterized in terms of the contrast between the knightly code of war and
its “modern” counterpart:
Th e heroes saw war more as a knightly sport, as an honest duel, than as genocide
and as little as they spared their opponent’s life in a regular duel, so little did they
resolve to ambush him when he was already being attacked by others, or to kill him
when he had begged for pardon, or indeed to take him by surprise at night in [his]
sleep . . . . Th ese rules the Kauravas follow till the end of the battle; the P āṇḍavas
in contrast, on the advice of the sly K ṛshṇa , leave them out of consideration in all
important cases: this is the judgment of the old poem . . . 153
Holtzmann also cited the contrast between the values espoused by Duryodhana and
the Kauravas (the heroes of the old epic according to him) and those espoused by
Kṛṣṇa and the Pāṇḍavas as evidence of a decline in values from the old epic to the
new. Of prince Duryodhana, the leader of the Kauravas, he wrote: “D uryodhana is a
thoroughly worthy fi gure. . . . Of course, in the complete expansion of the poem, as
it is now present to us, Duryodhana is to be presented as a coward; but no narrative,
which is necessary and indispensable for the plan of the work [Holtzmann means the
original plan as hypothesized by him], confi rms this unfair judgment; the old traits
cannot be completely obscured.” 154 In contrast, he regarded Kṛṣṇa as the epitome of
the new Brahmanic outlook. Of his principles, he noted that, “they stand in glaring
contrast to the knightly outlook and way of acting of Karṇa and his comrades, to
whom nothing is more hateful than falsehood and breach of promise; they represent
the old principle of honest battle, [while] they [the Pāṇḍavas] are representatives of a
new principle, of a faithless politics.” 155 According to him Kṛṣṇa’s adventures did not
“bear the imprint of the old heroic legend; he [was] not a knightly champion; [and]
he demonstrate[d] more cunning and deceit than actual bravery . . . ” 156 Further, he
argued that
the diffi culty Kṛshṇa has in teaching A rjuna [to accept] his principles, the sharp
rebuke A rjuna receives from the other warriors due to his actions, who accuse him
152 . Ibid., 90.
153 . Ibid., 79–80.
154 . Ibid., 72.
155 . Ibid., 87.
156 . Ibid., 131.
64 Chapter 01
of consorting with the low-minded Kṛshṇa (“who can act thus if he is not a friend of
Kṛshṇa ?” 7, 142, 86 = 5964), the condemnation R āma the son of V āsudeva expresses,
[and], on the other hand, the emphasis Duryodhana places on the fact that he has
gone the path of the fathers clearly shows that, at least in the poet’s representation
of the d harmayuddha , the honest battle is the custom of the ancient knightly age,
while the faithless politics of Kṛshṇa appears as a newly emergent principle. 157
Holtzmann attributed this loss of ethics primarily to the rise of Brahmanism. Here
he suggested that “the victory of the Brahmanic system [over the Indo-Germanic
outlook] forced epic poetry ever further back; to the Brahmans every view that was
in some way historical was questionable.” 158 Citing Max Müller, he argued that “the
heroes of the poem . . . breathe a completely diff erent intellectual and religious atmo-
sphere than the poets, who collected and concluded the work.” Of the latter, he wrote
that they had “changed and obscured the epic character of the work through their
didactic tendencies; they were clearly Brahmans brought up in the strict school of
the Laws of Manu.” 159 Summing up, he asserted in his conclusion that the Brahmans
“have transformed the ancient heroic poem, the greatest spiritual treasure of their
people into a tedious Purana that only preaches worship of V ishṇu , reverence before
the Brahmans, and thoughtless good works.” 160
In addition to underpinning his ideas of the Indo-Germanic peoples, the narrative
of decline also played a central role in Holtzmann’s reconstruction. In pursuit of his
ideal of a pure warrior epic, he used this narrative to explain why the Indo-Germanic
epic postulated by him could not be found except in fragmentary form. Further, it
allowed him to make the old epic into a kind of legendary work, a mystic object com-
parable to the lost Holy Grail sought by the knight Percival. (As much ingenuity he
expended on recovering this original, one suspects that he would have been much
less excited to discover a complete, intact specimen.) Th e appeal of the old epic lay
precisely in its ruined, fragmentary, and elusive character. Th e narrative of decline
simultaneously permitted him to portray his pursuit as a kind of knight-errant
quest. It colored his own researches with an air of wistfulness and, ultimately, futil-
ity. Paradoxically, it was precisely this quixotic nature of the quest that endowed it
with signifi cance. (Before him, Holtzmann Sr. too had taken up arms against the
conclusions of the Lachmannian school. In his Kampf um der Nibelunge Hort gegen
Lachmanns Nachtreter , he attacked Karl Müllenhoff [1818–84] and Moriz Haupt
[1808–74], the main proponents of the Lachmannian view at the time, for what he
saw as their prepossession against the old epic.) Holtzmann Jr. saw himself as taking
up arms on behalf of a lost antiquity. As was typical of the Romantic age, he valued
the old merely because it was old. His thesis of a pure warrior epic fi rst acquired its
157 . Ibid., 87–88.
158 . Ibid., 66.
159 . Ibid., 16 (the reference is to Max Müller’s H istory of Ancient Sanskrit Literature
So Far as it Illustrates the Primitive Religion of the Brahmans [London: Williams and
Norgate, 1859], 46).
160 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 194.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 65
explanatory edge from the (alleged) contrast with the values of the Brahmanic age.
It was thus, paradoxical as it may seem, not directed against the past but against the
present. As was true of Romanticism in general, Holtzmann activated an ideal of the
past as an element of a critique of modernity itself. Th is made his work, for all its
restorative tendencies, thoroughly modern. If Lassen was the founder of German
Mahābhārata studies, Holtzmann Jr. can, with justifi cation, be called the father of
modern Mahābhārata studies.
THE BIRTH OF MODERN MAHĀBHĀRATA STUDIES
Lassen had originally analyzed the Indian epic as the record of a historical con-
fl ict between white Āryans and black indigenes, where both the Kauravas and the
Pāṇḍavas, though partially fi ctionalized, nonetheless represented historical groups.
(Lassen did not fully clarify how, if the names Arjuna and Pāṇdu were references to
the white skin color of the protagonists and the Pāñcālas, as he argued, were also an
Āryan tribe, the confl ict between the Kauravas and the Pāṇḍavas could be mapped
onto a confl ict between white Āryans and black indigenes.) To be sure, the theory of
a Brahmanic takeover of the text was already present in incipient form in the back-
ground. Nonetheless, Lassen was careful to distinguish between what he believed the
epic to have originally been—an explicit record of the Āryan/Dravidian confl ict—
and what he believed it became as the Brahmans tried to take over the epic: an inad-
vertent record of a Brahman/Kṣatriya confl ict. While there are elements in his work
that might suggest a mapping of the latter on to the former (Āryans being most typi-
cally associated with Kṣatriyas),1 61 this was ruled out by the fact that he considered
the original epic to be purely about a martial confl ict (the conquered black indigenes
were warriors no less than the conquering white Āryans) and by the fact that he
placed the two events (Āryan/Dravidian battle and Brahmanic/Kṣatriya confl ict) far
apart in time.
After Lassen, Holtzmann Sr. interpreted the Mahābhārata battle in terms of a con-
fl ict between legendary, semidivine heroes. Bhīṣma and the other heroes, he argued,
were divine beings fallen to earth; following an apocalyptic battle, “the children of
the gods” would return to heaven. Holtzmann Sr. thus interpreted the Mahābhārata
in terms of a dualistic eschatological framework. Holtzmann Jr., in articulating his
ideas of the epic as the record of a struggle between the old Indo-Germanic outlook
and the new Brahmanic outlook, drew on the work of both these predecessors. From
Lassen, he acquired his ideas of the Indo-Germans as a fair-skinned northern race.
From Holtzmann Sr., he acquired his ideas of a pan-Asian Germanic race spanning
the Eurasian continent from Germany in the west, via Greece and Persia, to India in
the east. However, he disregarded Holtzmann Sr.’s idea of the epic as a mythological
161 . Lassen was an exception here. He regarded the Brahmans as being of Āryan ori-
gin; in fact, they represented the pinnacle of the color-based caste system for him. See
his I ndische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1, 407; the relevant passages are quoted earlier in this
chapter.
66 Chapter 01
or literary confl ict and instead advocated the epic as the record of an actual con-
fl ict. Th is confl ict, according to him, would have taken place alternatively between
Indo-Germanic peoples and Brahmanic protagonists and between Buddhist and
Brahmanic protagonists. (As little as Lassen was Holtzmann Jr. able to explain
how if the Mahābhārata had originally been a collection of bardic poems recording
the heroic deeds of Indo-Germanic warriors before they entered into India it could
then be a record of their confl ict with indigenous elements.) But whereas the elder
Holtzmann had been careful to keep his ideas of Indo-Germanic peoples (articu-
lated primarily in his works on the Germanic and Norse epics) separate from his
ideas of the heroic epic (articulated primarily in his work on the Indian epic), the
younger Holtzmann confl ated the two. Not realizing that his uncle had been speak-
ing about two diff erent things—on the one hand, about a common Indo-Germanic
(and Greek) oral tradition and on the other, about a common heroic epic that was
the content or the preferred object of exegesis of this tradition—Holtzmann Jr.
combined the two in his image of the heroic Indo-Germanic warrior. Holtzmann
Sr.’s fi ctional semidivine heroes now became the prototype of Holtzmann Jr.’s
Indo-Germanic warriors (see chart 1.2 for Holtzmann’s confl ation of these several
diff erent theories of the epic).
To this tripartite confusion (confusion of Lassen’s pseudohistorical researches
with Holtzmann Sr.’s literary researches and confusion of Holtzmann Sr.’s epic
researches with his literary researches), Holtzmann Jr. added a third, fatal one: he
confused Lassen’s and Holtzmann Sr.’s theories of a Brahmanic revision of the
text with the epic narrative itself. Lassen in 1837 had already postulated that the
Brahmans would have taken over the original warrior epic, centering on the rivalry of
the Kaurava princes for the throne of Hāstinapura. However, beyond pointing to the
theosophic elements of the epic as likely candidates for Brahmanic additions, he had
not further specifi ed how this takeover might have occurred. Lassen’s central con-
cern remained the confl ict between the two races he had postulated; the Brahmanic
hypothesis remained marginal to his concerns.
After Lassen, the fi rst to expand on the mechanics of the Brahmanic takeover had
been Holtzmann Sr. In his 1845 work, he asserted a revision of the text in which the
Kauravas, originally the heroes of the epic, were portrayed as the aggressors, while
the Pāṇḍavas, originally the villains of the epic, were portrayed as righteous fi gures.
He attributed this revision to Brahmanic redactors, interested in glorifying (and thus
aligning) themselves with the eventual victors of the war. Holtzmann Sr., however,
also extended this theory beyond the political arena to the text itself. Specifi cally, he
cited a number of changes in the text that would have been made by the Brahmans.
Chief among these was the introduction of Vyāsa as the progenitor of the Kauravas.
Holtzmann Sr. argued that this fact was an innovation of the Brahmans, who wished
to impress upon the kings the advantage of allying themselves with these power-
ful men. However, Holtzmann Sr. considered these changes not to have aff ected the
basic plan of the poem, which was still organized around the theme of a heroic con-
fl ict. As he wrote, “here [i.e., regarding Vyāsa’s genitorship] there can be no doubt
that my change is a re-creation of the original. In point of fact, the heroes everywhere
refer to Fischma as their grandfather and the passages in which Wiasa enters into
nnamztloH
fo
krow
eht
ni
noitafl
noc
rieht
dna
cipe
fo
seiroeht
namreG
fo
tnecseD
2.1
trahC
fo
krow
eht
aiv
seiroeht
eseht
fo
tnecsed
eht
dna
atarāhbāhaM
eht
fo
stnatabmoc
eht
fo
sgnidnatsrednu
tnereff
id
dah
srohtua
tnereff
id
woh
gniwohs
,pihsralohcs
atarāhbāhaM
namreG
fo
trahC
.detafl
noc
yllanfi
erew
yeht
hcihw
ni
,.rJ
nnamztloH
flodA
68 Chapter 01
and aff ects the action are all easily recognizable as later additions.” 162 Holtzmann Sr.
thus placed the Brahmanic revision anterior to the prototypical confl ict itself, which
he continued to see as heroic in origin. Th ough the Brahmans revised the text, they
simply reversed the polarity of the epic without implicating themselves, apart from
these minor and easily removable changes, in the narrative.
Finally, Th eodor Goldstücker, building on the work of Lassen, in 1864 proposed
that the “groundwork of the poem” would have been “the great war between two rival
families of the same kin; it occupies the contents of about 24,000 verses.” He further
opined that the Mahābhārata, as “a record of the greatest martial event of ancient
India,” could not have failed to attract the attention of the Brahmans, from whose
perspective “such an exaltation of kingly splendour and of the importance of the mil-
itary caste” would have “threaten[ed] to depress that of . . . [their own] Brahmanical
caste” in equal measure. For this reason, he argued, the Brahmans would conspire to
become “the arrangers of the national epos; and as the keepers of the ancestral lore,
as the spiritual teachers and guides, as priestly diplomatists, too, they would eas-
ily succeed in subjecting it to their censorship.”1 63 Th en, confl ating Lassen’s theory
of Brahmanic expansion with Holtzmann Sr.’s theory of Brahmanic revision (in the
mean time, Lassen himself had veered around to a theory of Brahmanic revision so
it is not necessary that Goldstücker read Holtzmann Sr.1 64 ), he argued that this “aim”
would have been “eff ected not only by the manner in which the chief story was told,
but also by adding to the narrative all such matter as would show that the position
and might of a Kshattriya depends on the divine nature and favour of the Brâhmana
162 . Holtzmann Sr. Indische Sagen , xi.
163 . Goldstücker, “Hindu Epic Poetry: Th e Mahābhārata,” 388.
164 . Lassen argued that “the form in which the lore about their [the Pāṇḍavas’] history
has been preserved to us is not the genuine and original; rather, it has been distorted in
certain respects; the portrayal has been consistently revised to the advantage of the win-
ning dynasty, [and] to the disadvantage of the defeated predecessors and it is only pos-
sible through this revision [Umarbeitung] to discover and reconstruct their true story.”
Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1, 2nd ed., 774. He also claimed that “in order to
glean historical pickings from the Pândava legend, as it is now present to us, the fi rst task
of criticism [Kritik] must be to determine the meaning of these names [i.e., Kaurava and
Pāṇḍava] and to reduce it back to its validity [i.e., whether real or invented], to trace out
the older version of the narrative and to purify it from the additions and distortions of a
later age; only once this has been done, can the second part of its business [i.e., of criticism]
begin: collection of the remains of old, real history.” Ibid., 775 and see also 783 (“from
which [i.e., that Duryodhana is also often referred to as Suyodhana] one may assume that
there originally existed narratives in which he [Duryodhana] appeared in a diff erent light
than in the current portrayal which has been revised in the interests of the Pândava”), 827
(“Since the entire legend has been reversed to the advantage of the Pândava, it is plau-
sible to suppose that in an earlier form of the narrative he [Duryodhana] did not attain
power through deception [in the dice game], but drove the Pândavas out of their kingdom
through honorable victories”), and 828 (“revision of the old legend to the advantage of the
Pândava”). Although Lassen did not cite Holtzmann Sr., it is quite clear that his source for
these ideas was the Freiburg scholar. Holtzmann Jr. criticizes Lassen for not acknowledg-
ing his uncle as his source; see Adolf Holtzmann Jr., Das Mahābhārata im Osten und im
Westen (Kiel: C. F. Haessler, 1895), 180–81.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 69
caste.”1 65 While “here and there an old legend or myth might be found in the epos,
apparently not betraying such a set purpose,” Goldstücker considered it beyond
question that the Brahmans’ “object” would have been “to make the Mahâbhârata a
Brahmanical encyclopedia for the military caste, and a powerful means in the hands
of the Brahmans of swaying the Kshattriya mind . . . ” 166
Holtzmann Jr. borrowed elements from each of these three authors’ theories,
but reworked them in his own way. For instance, while he borrowed the “inversion
hypothesis” of Holtzmann Sr., he overlooked the latter’s distinction between epic
characters and epic composers (or epic redactors). Whereas his uncle had retained
the epic’s character as a kind of Ragnarök scenario (with the Brahmanic characters
merely having a marginal role and being supplemental to the original text), Holtzmann
Jr. made the thesis of a Brahmanic revision central to the text. He interpreted the
epic characters t hemselves as Brahmanic protagonists or partisans . Kṛṣṇa, according to
him, was not only the archetype of the Brahmanic outlook, but he was also a histori-
cal fi gure associated with or implicated in the rise of Brahmanism. Th us, what had
originated as a theory of extra-textual political changes with some blowback on the
epic was now fi rmly anchored as an architectonic principle of the text itself. Further,
citing Goldstücker as evidence, Holtzmann Jr. argued that the Mahābhārata epic was
itself the record of these religious confl icts. Kṛṣṇa represented the rising ideology
of Brahmanism and the key confl ict at the center of the epic was not (as one might
expect given Holtzmann’s theory of bardic composition) between heroic warriors
versus other heroic warriors, but between heroic warriors and cowardly priests.1 67
According to him, the poet of the epic undertook to show “the tragic struggle of
two principles; of knighthood, whose time is over; and of the newly arising politics,
and presents the former to us in all the glory of a setting sun.” 168 (Holtzmann did
not clarify how, if the Brahmanic element fi rst entered the epic with the redaction
of the Brahmans, the old epic could already have been concerned with the tension
between these two outlooks. Nor was he able to clarify how, if the poet already under-
stood the struggle between the two princples as “tragic” and that the “time . . . of
165 . Goldstücker, “Hindu Epic Poetry: Th e Mahābhārata,” 388–89.
166 . Ibid., 389.
167 . Th e signifi cance of this shift should not be underestimated. Before Holtzmann, the
general consensus was that the Brahmans were an Āryan group; in fact, they stood at the
apex of the Āryan social order. Th us, writing in 1852, Weber could still declare that “One
thing, however, can be confi dently stated of the Mahâ-Bhârata, namely, that it is based
upon a battle that was fought in Hindustan between the Âryan peoples, and hence [the
epic] belongs to an age when their settlement and the subjugation and Brahmanization
of the aboriginals was already complete.” Albrecht Weber, Akademische Vorlesungen über
indische Literaturgeschichte (Berlin: Ferd. Dümmler’s Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1852), 177.
Weber thus followed a long line of scholars in treating the Āryan invasion or conquest as
synonymous with the Brahmanization of India. It is only after Holtzmann that we fi nd
Brahmanization treated as a form of reverse colonization, in which the Āryans, having
defeated the native inhabitants of India, nonetheless succumb to their inferior culture.
168 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 89.
70 Chapter 01
knighthood . . . [was] over,” the Brahmans could have or, indeed, would have needed
to reverse the polarity of the epic.)
Clearly Holtzmann, though hugely infl uenced by Goldstücker, had not fully
understood him. Goldstücker, to be sure, had shifted the balance of epic studies from
Lassen’s white Āryans versus black indigenes theory to a Kṣatriya versus Brahmans
theory—a change likely motivated by his sympathies with the colonial adminstra-
tion.1 69 Whereas Lassen had been speaking of a confl ict rooted in ancient history,
Goldstücker was more concerned with what he saw as the continuing eff ects of a reli-
gious subservience (to the Brahmans) he traced back to the medieval period. Lassen’s
theory held that a historical confl ict between foreign intruders and native tribes had
been laid down in the epic, which was thus anterior to the historical circumstances it
depicted. Goldstücker, in contrast, was speaking of a confl ict that had been (through
the Brahmanic take over of the text) o verlaid over the epic; the epic was thus posterior
to the historical circumstances it depicted. It was only accidental to the plan of the
epic that it came to refl ect a Kṣatriya versus Brahman confl ict. Th us, even though he
focused more on the Kṣatriya-Brahman confl ict, Goldstücker was nonetheless still in
agreement with Lassen that the original epic, which he like Lassen considered to be
the epic of 24,000 verses, centered around a Kṣatriya-Kṣatriya confl ict.
Holtzmann Jr., however, misunderstood Goldstücker’s divergence from Lassen.
Goldstücker was shifting focus from the original epic to the secondary epic but he
was not simply replacing Lassen’s protagonists with his own; rather, he was placing
a second set of protagonists alongside Lassen’s original protagonists. Holtzmann,
however, took him to be speaking of the same epic and the same confl ict, which is
why he ended up confl ating not only Lassen’s white Āryans with Holtzmann Sr.’s
Indo-Germans (and the latter’s Indo-Germans with his mythic heroes), but also
Holtzmann Sr.’s Indo-Germans with Goldstücker’s Kṣatriyas. In all, he ended up con-
fl ating four diff erent theories to produce his Indo-Germans (this is shown on the
left-hand side of the chart). On the right-hand side of the chart, he again confl ated
three diff erent theories of the priests and their role in the history of the Indian
epic: from Lassen he acquired the idea of a Brahmanic takeover of the text; from
Holtzmann Sr., the idea of a Brahmanic revision of the text; and from Goldstücker,
the idea of placing the Kṣatriyas and Brahmans in direct opposition. In this way,
he was now able to anchor the Kṣatriya-Brahman confl ict within the text itself by
confl ating the historical dimension (identifi ed with Lassen) with the narrative and
textual dimensions (identifi ed with Holtzmann Sr. and Goldstücker, respectively).
Th e Brahmans, through no fault of theirs, had become the counterconcept to
Indo-Germanic Āryans. Th e theory could now emerge of the Mahābhārata as a record
of a confl ict between Indo-Germanic and Brahmanic partisans—a theory that was to
have a long and powerful W irkungsgeschichte in modern Mahābhārata studies.
169 . See August Leskien, “Goldstücker, Th eodor,” in Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie , vol.
9 (Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1879), 341; see also N. J. Allen, “Th eodor Goldstücker,”
Oxford Dictionary of National Biography 22 (2004): 699–700.
THE SEARCH FOR AN UREPOS 71
Beyond Holtzmann Jr., Mahābhārata scholars continued to seek (and to defend
the normative ideal of) the old epic. Th ey did so without knowing the source of their
ideal of epic. Further, they frequently invoked concepts such as “Brahmanic redac-
tion,” “Kṣatriya epic,” and so on, without being aware of the genesis of these con-
cepts, that is, their history in the work of Lassen, Holtzmann Sr., Holtzmann Jr., and
Goldstücker as we have traced it here. For the most part, these works were essen-
tially derivative (though they did not hesitate to describe themselves as off ering
original, exciting new research on an old question). Th ey would exchange or switch
around a few elements (was it the Nandas who had off ended against Brahman ideas
of privilege? Or the Mauryas? or perhaps the Śākas?), but essentially the story they
recounted was the same one as that recounted by the two Holtzmanns over a century
ago. In spite of what they conceded was “the essentially speculative nature of this
interpretive enterprise,”1 70 they did not hesitate to cast the Mahābhārata as refl ecting
Brahmanic ideas of proper kingship.1 71 In eff ect, they were reprising all of Holtzmann’s
anti-Catholic, anti clerical prejudices, while pretending to off er independent, objective
evaluations of the epic. Yet, once we become aware of the history of this scholarship,
it also becomes impossible to use terms such as “bardic, oral epic,” “Kṣatriya epic,” or
“Brahmanic redaction” with the same naïveté. Nowhere will this be more true than of
Holtzmann’s views of the Gītā as a pantheistic text that underwent a theistic revision.
HOLTZMANN’S LEGACY TO GĪTĀ STUDIES
It was important for us to trace the genesis and outlines of Holtzmann Jr.’s views
of the Indo-Germanic epic, because these ideas would, via their reception among
a broad spectrum of Indologists in the nineteenth century, crucially infl uence
twentieth-century views of the Bhagavadgītā. For instance, almost all of the authors
of the Indological Gītā would draw in some way on his thesis of the Mahābhārata
as originally a war narrative with later Brahmanic “interpolations.” To be sure, this
thesis had already been broached by Lassen in 1837. But it was Holtzmann who, by
expanding Lassen’s idea into a comprehensive theory of multiple “redactions” (he
traced at least three: a Buddhist poetic composition around second century BCE, 172
a Vaiṣṇavaite-Kṛṣṇaite revision around the third century CE, 173 and a fi nal Śaivaite
and/or Purāṇic redaction around tenth century CE1 74 ), fi rst created a matrix broad
enough to accommodate the Gītā scholars’ variform analyses of the poem’s diff erent
“layers.” Th us scholars could now debate whether a verse in the poem belonged to its
original epic substratum, to its Vaiṣṇavaite theological revision, or to its absorption
170 . James L. Fitzgerald, “No Contest between Memory and Invention: Th e Invention of
the Pāṇḍava Heroes of the Mahābhārata,” in E pic and History, ed. David Konstan and Kurt
A. Raafl aub (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010), 108.
171 . Ibid., 113–14 and 116.
172 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 106 and 126.
173 . Ibid., 151.
174 . Ibid., 172 and see also 97–98.
72 Chapter 01
of a popular Kṛṣṇa cult. Further, by confl ating the literary and historical planes,
Holtzmann enabled a peculiar fl exibility in their interpretations. Scholars could now
spring back and forth between the two. Th ey could take literary eff ects or references
as evidence of historical conditions, and vice versa. For all his unsubstantiated theo-
ries about white Āryans and black indigenes, Christian Lassen had still been con-
cerned with a degree of historical objectivity in his researches. Admittedly, he was a
second-rate historian. He had absolutely no historical training and, in his work, we
can already see traces of the basic tendency of German Indologists to confl ate tex-
tual sources with historical data. Lassen also lacked objectivity, since he considered
research into Indian antiquity primarily as a means to sharpen the contrast between
the “Indo-Germanic” and “Semitic” peoples. 175
But what Holtzmann did went far beyond the bounds of Lassen’s meager attempts.
By eff ectively freeing Mahābhārata studies from textual strictures, he turned them
into an aesthetic venture. Th e task of textual reconstruction, henceforth, would be
based purely upon the individual scholar’s aesthetic evaluation (in this context it
is signfi cant that Holtzmann’s uses the words “aesthetic evaluation” or “aesthetic
appreciation”1 76 ( ästhetische Würdigung ) to describe his reconstruction of the text,
and the scholar himself was liberated to give free expression to an aesthetic encoun-
ter with the text, including both positive (appreciative) and negative (distasteful)
aspects. As Holtzmann noted of the epic,
even in its present form [and] in spite of all distortions it is able to captivate not
only the Indian listener but also the European reader; I do not doubt that the old
poem, should its recreation be possible, could be placed boldly alongside the Iliad. 177
Th us it now became possible for scholars to reconstruct (in the name of historical-
critical reconstruction to be sure) their own normative ideal of the Gītā based on a
priori subjective ideas of philosophy, rationality, theism, mysticism, and so forth.
In doing so, scholars would not only draw on Holtzmann’s confl ation of literary and
historical planes, but also, and more specifi cally, on his peculiar confusion of literary
characters or themes with historical references and both these again with the pre-
sumptive religious sectarian confl icts that we traced in the preceding section.
Finally, Holtzmann also left a very specifi c legacy to Bhagavadgītā studies through
his assertion (made in his 1893 text D ie neunzehen Bücher des Mahābhārata ) that the
Bhagavadgītā had originally been a pantheistic text refl ective of Indo-Germanic
views of heroism in battle and fearlessness in the face of death before it underwent
a revision at the hands of Brahmans. But since this thesis is best discussed in the
context of other German Indological Gītās, we defer a discussion of it to the third
chapter. In the next chapter, we continue with a look at the broader intellectual and
historical currents underlying Holtzmann’s prejudices.
175 . See Lassen, I ndische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1, 414–17, possibly the fi rst comprehen-
sive “scientifi c” account of the distinctive features of a Semitic “race.”
176 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 69.
177 . Ibid.
CHAPTER 2
"
Th e Search for German Identity
Believing in that promise the German Protestants . . . entered upon the struggle.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Reden an die deutsche Nation
INTRODUCTION
In the preceding chapter, we looked at the German reception of the Mahābhārata and
found that reception to be based on several unwarranted and illegitimate assump-
tions, chief among them the presumption that the Mahābhārata, being “epic,” must
have originated among Kṣatriya circles. Th e chapter further demonstrated how,
beginning with the racial and historicist prejudices of Lassen and Holtzmann, a spe-
cious branch of science had developed, dedicated to explaining how the Mahābhārata,
whose hypothetical origins were among Kṣatriya warriors, could have evolved into
the work of Brahmanic lore we possess today.
Building on our survey of the origins of German Mahābhārata studies in these unsci-
entifi c, irrational and Romantic arguments, this chapter undertakes a detailed recon-
struction of the most important German Mahābhārata interpretation of the day: Adolf
Holtzmann Jr.’s Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahābhārata from 1892. As we saw in the
preceding chapter, Holtzmann’s Mahābhārata stands at the center of German scholar-
ship on the epic. Not only does it combine in some way almost every theory of every
major Mahābhārata interpreter who went before, but these confl ations (e.g., between
Lassen’s “white Āryans” and Goldstücker’s “K ṣatriyas,” etc.) crucially shaped the course
of future Mahābhārata studies everywhere. In light of this, the bulk of this chapter is
dedicated to a reconstruction of Holtzmann’s views of the epic.
In the fi rst twelve sections of this chapter, we focus on Holtzmann’s Mahābhārata.
Sections 1 and 2 outline Holtzmann’s work and his polemics against Brahmans.
Sections 3 and 4 discuss his ideas of critical reconstruction and epic composition.
Section 5 to 7 explore his ideas of religious confl ict, textual corruption and historical
distortion, in that order. Sections 8 and 9 discuss his identifi cation of Buddhism with
Protestantism, while section 10 discusses his identifi cation of Brahmanism with
Catholicism. Section 11 explores his ideas of racial contamination. Section 12 then
( 73 )
74 Chapter 02
turns to Holtzmann’s ideas of textual reconstruction and shows how, in Holtzmann’s
hands, the reading of the epic was transformed into a reading of Germany’s history,
especially its struggle for religious and national self-determination. In particular, we
demonstrate how Holtzmann was motivated by a desire to recover an ancient, glorious
Indo-Germanic past for Germany, as well as to valorize the Buddhist period in India as
a foil for German scientifi c consciousness. In section 13, we then turn to Oldenberg’s
Mahābhārata, showing how, by the early twentieth century, Holtzmann’s prejudices
regarding the epic had become established dogma. Although Oldenberg entered the
Mahābhārata debate relatively late in 1922 with his D as Mahābhārata: Sein Inhalt,
seine Entstehung, seine Form , this work is nonetheless important for understanding
how Holtzmann’s views were given a veneer of scientifi c legitimacy by later scholars.
As our main concern in this chapter is to present a representative cross-section of
German views of the Indian epic, most sections consist mainly of longer quotations
from the two scholars. Commentary is kept to a minimum. A concluding section then
examines the consequences of this model of textual criticism for the Mahābhārata
in general and the Bhagavadgītā in particular. Specifi cally, we focus on the reasons
why, in spite of the role played by the oral epic hypothesis in German anti-Semitic
rhetoric,1 a section of contemporary Mahābhārata scholarship continues to defend
1 . Th e theory of the Mahābhārata as originally an oral epic was initially proposed by
Lassen in 1837. In later years, it played a crucial role in his ideas of Indo-Germanic superi-
ority. For instance, distinguishing between the “Semitic” and the “Indo-Germanic” races in
1847, he argued that “the latter, however, are without doubt the most talented.” Although
he acknowledged that the Semitic peoples also made contributions to culture, science, and
the arts, he claimed that “they [i.e., the Semitic and Indo-Germanic peoples] are not equal
regarding these achievements and, among the Caucasian peoples, we must decisively grant
the laurels to the Indo-Germans.” Crucially, he regarded the ability to develop “epic” as the
hallmark of the superior intellectual powers of the Indo-Germans. Th us, he wrote that “his-
tory is evidence that that the Semites did not possess that harmonious balance of all psychic
powers through which the Indo-Germans became preeminent.” Specifi cally, he charged that
the Semite “cannot separate the relationship of the world to man in general from that [i.e.,
the relationship of the world] to his own ‘I’; he cannot represent ideas in the mind in pure
objectivity; his way of looking at things is subjective and egotistical. His poetry is lyrical
[and] therefore subjective; his spirit expresses its joy and its pain, its love and its hatred,
its admiration and its scorn.” According to Lassen, even if the Semitic poet “expand[ed] his
horizon,” it was “only in order to represent his tribe as an individual over against others
[i.e., other tribes].” Here he raised his key objection: “He [i.e., the Semite as a type] is unsuc-
cessful at [creating] epic [Epos] because here the ‘I’ of the poet steps back before the object
[and] even less at drama, which demands that the poet cast off his personality even more
completely [than is the case in epic]. [But] the Indo-Germans possess, alongside the lyrical
also the other genres of poetry; they alone have brought forth a national drama; they alone
have brought forth the great heroic poems [Heldengedichte] that refl ect the great deeds of
antiquity handed down in the legend in glorifi ed form, that present the entire worldview of
the spirit of a people [Volksgeistes] to us and that stand there as the result of the poetic eff ort
of an entire people.” “Th e Semites,” he concluded, “are lacking in the material [Stoff ] of the
epic,” and even though they possess legends, they have shown themselves to be incapable
of “compil[ing]” these legends “into larger cycles.” Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde , vol., 1,
414–15. Th is obsession with identifying “epic” or “heroic epic” with the Indo-Germanic peo-
ples largely drove German eff orts to demonstrate a heroic epic at the heart of the Indian text.
It also mislead later scholars into thinking that the Indian epic (or at least some portion of it)
had to conform to their expectations of “epic.”
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 75
the hypothesis even in the face of the evidence of the Critical Edition. 2 Chapter 3
then resumes our look at the German Gītā.
THE GENESIS OF HOLTZMANN’S MAHĀBHĀRATA
Published in 1892, Adolf Holtzmann’s Z ur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahābhārata is
the key text for understanding modern Mahābhārata scholarship, especially in some
of its more toxic manifestations such as its virulent anti-Brahmanism. Even though
elements of anti-Brahmanism were already present in the work of earlier scholars
such as Lassen, Holtzmann’s Zur Geschichte und Kritik outdid all these earlier works
in its violent attacks upon Brahmans. Let us see how Holtzmann builds up to his
critique of Brahmanism. We begin, in this section, with an overview of his critical
project.
Zur Geschichte und Kritik is divided into 16 chapters. Its two central chapters are
chapter 6 (“Th e Indo-Germanic Original Epic”) and chapter 12 (“Buddhism and the
Mahābhārata”); these two divide the entire work into roughly three parts. Chapters 1
through 5 lead up to the central hypothesis of the Indo-Germanic original epic, while
chapters 7 through 11 develop this thesis. Chapters 13 through 16 then develop the
Buddhist hypothesis: the fi rst two focus on the epic as a poetic composition written in
the period of the Buddhist “Aufklärung” (Enlightenment) and chapters 15 (“Th e First
Brahmanic Revision”) and 16 (“Th e Second Purā ṇic Redaction”) argue for a confl ict
between Buddhism and Brahmanism in which the epic was fashioned into a potent tool
of Brahmanic propaganda. Th e weight of Holtzmann’s revisionistic tendencies falls on
chapters 6 and 12, which are thus the key to understanding his interpretation.
Broadly speaking, Holtzmann made nine central arguments in the book, arranged
as follows:
1. Th e epic is not a uniform work ( chapter 2).
2. It bears the imprint of two distinct religious, theological, and political outlooks
( chapters 3, 4).
2 . With the completion of the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata in 1966, the scope
for oral epic theory was further reduced. Completed on the basis of the rigorous prin-
ciples of textual criticism, the Critical Edition off ered conclusive evidence that all extant
Mahābhārata manuscripts were descendants of a single written exemplar, and that this
archetype contained elements such as the narration of the epic at a sacrifi ce, the entire
Bhagavadgītā, the Śāntiparvan including the highly theological Mok ṣadharmaparvan—
precisely the elements considered by the defendants of oral epic theory to be “late” and
“Brahmanic.” Th e Critical Edition thus blew a hole not only in their theory of the epic’s gen-
esis, but also in their theory of its transfer in authority from K ṣatriya warriors to Brahman
priests. Since then, their eff orts have shifted to highly complex theories dedicated to
explaining how the archetype might have existed and still need not rule out the existence
of an older oral epic tradition such as Andreas Bigger’s nonsensical “normative redac-
tion” hypothesis (which, however, we deconstruct in a separate work; see Vishwa Adluri
and Joydeep Bagchee, Philology and Criticism: A Guide to Mahābhārata Textual Criticism
[London: Anthem Press, forthcoming]).
76 Chapter 02
3. It also bears traces of an “inversion,” in which the originally heroic side is por-
trayed as the evil side ( chapters 4, 5).
4. Th e oldest epic “layer” is that of the “Indo-Germanic epic” ( chapter 6).3
5. Th e older epic was the property of the “warrior caste” and gave expression to a
“warlike worldview” ( chapter 7).4
6. Th e second stage of the epic was that of a poetic composition ( chapter 8).
7. Two worldviews collide in the epic: the old heroic outlook and the new Brahmanic
outlook ( chapters 9, 10).
8 . Th e poetic composition of the epic can be located in the Buddhist period, a period
of economic and scientifi c progress and cultural blossoming ( chapters 12, 13, 14).
9. Th e fi nal stages of the epic are represented by two Brahmanic redactions, the fi rst
of which introduces Viṣṇu into the text, the second Śiva ( chapter 15, 16).
Th ese considerations of aesthetic and apologetic changes, however, were only prelimi-
nary to Holtzmann’s real goal: to use the epic to recover the outlines of a “Germanic”
culture. Like his uncle before him, Holtzmann considered the epic to be “ancient,” its
“beginnings” to lie “far beyond history.” Its roots, according to him, lay in a common oral
epic tradition shared between the “three epic peoples . . . the Indians, the Greeks, and the
Germans.”5 Following their dispersal from their original homeland, he argued that “each
of the individual races naturally refashioned and developed its epic inheritance in its
[own] way . . .” However, he considered that “individual traces of their original belonging
together [Zusammengehörigkeit]” could still be detected in their successor epics (i.e., the
Iliad, the Nibelungenlied and the Mahābhārata).6 Even though he focused outwardly on a
recovery of the oral archetypes of each of these epics (“[the] theory of the Indo-Germanic
original epic,” he wrote, “has . . . found little resonance until now” and it “will be time to
address this question more closely . . . only when we fi rst are completely clear about the
oldest reachable form of the epic among all the individual Indo-Germanic peoples”7 ), his
real concern was the recovery of this Indo-Germanic original epic. Th is quest, however,
was not restricted merely to the search for a text, oral or otherwise. Rather, his primary
aim was to instantiate his image of the ancient Germanic peoples as a pure Āryan race.
According to Holtzmann, the ancient Indo-Germans were a fair-skinned northern race;
they embodied a heroic warrior culture; they were courageous, loyal unto death, and they
considered the duty of blood-revenge to be holy. In this quest for Āryan origins, polemics
against the Brahmans would be especially useful for distinguishing between Germanic
and non-Germanic sections of the epic.
3 . Th e word “layer” (S chicht ) is not used by Holtzmann himself, who speaks rather of
“redactions” ( Redactionen ). However, as it has become popular in German scholarship, we
will use it sometimes as shorthand.
4 . K riegerisch may be translated both as “warrior-like” or “martial” ( Krieger , warrior) and
as “warlike” (K rieg , war). We use both, depending upon the meaning appropriate to con-
text. K riegerisch and derivatives are the adjectives most commonly used by Holtzmann to
characterize the (old Indo-Germanic) epic.
5 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahābhārata , 42
6 . Ibid., 43.
7 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 77
POLEMICS AGAINST THE BRAHMANS
Building on his uncle’s theories that later Brahmans would have made a whole host
of apologetic and polemical changes to the epic, Holtzmann undertook to demon-
strate how these Brahmans corrupted and destroyed the Indo-Germanic way of life.
In particular, he charged that the Brahmans introduced an entirely new set of values
into the poem, even writing themselves into the epic as the sires of the heroes of the
Kaurava dynasty:
Th e heroes of the poem, says Max Müller (anc. Sanscr. lit. p. 46), breathe a com-
pletely diff erent intellectual and religious atmosphere than the poets who collected
and concluded the work. Th e latter changed and obscured the epic character of the
work through their didactic tendencies; they were clearly Brahmans brought up in
the strict school of the Laws of Manu. And Goldstücker (Hindu epic poetry p. 35)
says: we take it for granted that the M ahābhārata is a traditional record of an early
period of Hindu history, compiled, however, by eminent men of the Brahmanical
caste—the chief object of these editors, arrangers, and modellers, always remained
the same, to demonstrate the necessity and the sanctity of the Brahmanical law. 8
In the old poem, as the lineage died out with the death of Vicitravīrya , it was
manifestly his older brother Bhīshma who had declined the kingship and marriage,
who begat sons with the widows of V icitravīrya: Dhrtarāsh tṛa with [the widow]
Ambikā and P ā ṇḍu with [the widow] Ambālikā . In the current poem, he is requested
to do so by Satyavatī , the mother of Vicitravīrya . He should, she says, not permit his
ancestors to fall into hell through losing the sacrifi cial cake. But he refuses and so in
his place enters Vyāsat he son of Parāçara , namely, the man who is supposed to have
composed the entire poem, a Brahman from the lineage of V asish tḥ a . Now the intent
behind the change becomes clear. In place of the levirate marriage, which was found
to be objectionable, an even more off ensive means of propaganda should enter: rep-
resentation by a Brahman . . . . Here the sublime wickedness of the Brahmans reaches
its highest degree; the kings should be made aware that already in ancient times the
ennoblement of the warrior-class through Brahmans was regarded positively. Th e
levirate marriage, which began to be considered objectionable, provided the occa-
sion for such narrations and was replaced by an even more off ensive relationship.9
Aside from this criticism of the Brahmans as illegitimate intruders into the text,
Holtzmann also charged that the Brahmans (in particular in the form of their pro-
tagonists, the Pāṇḍavas), were not an Āryan race. In his words,
Th e P ā ṇḍavas likely signify a not purely Aryan race, [but] a thieving hill-folk [räu-
berisches Gebirgsvolk], as they are called among the Buddhists, [a hill-folk] who
advanced victorious from the North; in the Himālaya polyandry can be found even
today (Stulpnagel in Indian Antiquary Band VII 1878, cf. also Julius Jolly “zur
8 . Ibid., 16–17.
9 . Ibid., 29–30.
78 Chapter 02
Indischen Rechtsgeschichte” ZDMG 34, 341) and among the P ā ṇḍavas it was prob-
ably ancient, so that Y udhish ṭhira could invoke the custom of his ancestors. Th en of
course, the Pā ṇḍavas cannot originally have been blood-relatives of the Kaurava .1 0
Holtzmann also accused the Brahmans of introducing new gods (and a new faith) in
place of Indo-Germanic ideas of the soul’s afterlife and of heaven. In his opinion, gods
such as Śiva and Viṣṇu were of Brahmanic origin. Th us, whereas the ancient Indo-
Germans had mainly worshipped the warlike Indra, he argued that the Brahmans
imposed the worship of these later deities upon the people. He further claimed that
the Brahmans also instituted a highly ceremonialized religion in place of the nature
worship of the ancient Indo-Germans:
But besides that, the genuine e pic mythology shows through in many luckily pre-
served traces. Th e old poem was, as the relatively well-preserved episodes such as
those of Nala and S āvitrī show especially clearly, free of Çiva and V ish ṇu and did
not know the system of incarnation. Just as little as this mythology knew of the
later folk-gods and, on the other hand, as little as the speculative-theological system
knew of the pantheistic ātman , so little did the epic know of the old mythology of
nature symbolism; rather, this epic created its own anthropomorphic mythology
and represented the conditions of human society in it in an idealizing fashion. 11
Th e king [of the gods] is Indra , because he, the hurler of lightning-bolts, among
all the gods most demonstrates a warlike side.1 2
Against these Brahmanic or, perhaps, neo-Brahmanic intrusions, Holtzmann argued
that the mythology of the ancient Indo-Germans had originally been linked to that
of the Greeks.
Th e epic mythology of the Indians has a great similarity with that of the Greeks. On
[the banks of] the Ganges, both views of mythology, the speculative-theological and
the anthropomorphic, ran unmediated and unbalanced next to each other; [whereas]
among the Hellenes, the mythology of the epic poets, especially since it found a
powerful ally in the plastic arts, suppressed the old nature religion completely. 13
Th e epic mythology of the Indians is as richly developed to think as the Greek, only
it is less well preserved; it is as ancient as the Persian; precisely in the mythological
views of the M ahābhārata H. H. Wilson fi nds traits, “which may be derivable from an
old, [if] not from a primitive, era” (Vis. Pur. Einl. S. 5). 14
In time, however, Holtzmann argued, the rising power of Brahmanism succeeded in
suppressing the ancient epic tradition. He speculated that although the Brahmans
found the epic useful as a vehicle for their ideology, they also discriminated against it.
10 . Ibid., 33.
11 . Ibid., 36 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
12 . Ibid., 37.
13 . Ibid., 40.
14 . Ibid., 40–41 (insertion the authors’).
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 79
“Th e religious literature gradually pushed back the old gods among the Brahmans
and later, through their growing infl uence, among the warriors too, and placed
little value on the entire epic poetry; the itihāsa and p urā ṇa are ascribed in the
Çatapathabrāhman ̣a to the fi shers and fowlers Weber L. G. 137.”1 5 In its place, the
Brahmans instituted an alternative mythology. Th is new mythology allegedly con-
sisted of accounts of things divine and cosmological, but paid little attention to the
human and historical. Holtzmann writes:
Furthermore, one must note that one must defi nitely distinguish between divine
legend and heroic legend. In the explanation of the former, the cosmogonic side
and its anthropomorphic application is decisive; in the second, the historical side
[is decisive]. Th e Indian heroic legend had, till now, made an impression on every
impartial reader that it is historical and not symbolic in origin . . . . Th e immediate
impression that the heroic legend in the M ahābhārata makes upon us is undeniably
that here real history [Geschichte] wants to be presented.1 6
Holtzmann’s anti-Brahmanism cannot be understood without reference to his pro-
ject of identifying a heroic Germanic tradition. Th e Brahmans were essentially the
counterconcept to his Germans. Brahmanism off ered him a way to explain why the
pure Indo-Germanic epic postulated by him could not be found. Moreover, it off ered
him a framework for distinguishing between older and more recent sections of the
epic. In particular, it allowed him to undertake a so-called critical reading of the epic
based on four assumptions we call the “bardic hypothesis,” the “Kṣatriya hypothesis,”
the “war narrative hypothesis,” and the “Brahmanic hypothesis.”
IDEAS OF CRITICAL RECONSTRUCTION
As we have seen, Holtzmann’s ideas of critical scholarship were signifi cantly infl u-
enced by Adolf Holtzmann Sr. Like his uncle before him, the younger Holtzmann had
little formal training in textual criticism. Instead, he relied on what he called “inter-
nal criticism” (i nnere Kritik ) of the epic to reconstruct its older form. Th is inner criti-
cism relied mainly on his assumption of a change in perspective in the epic, which he,
along with his uncle, attributed to the Brahmanic revision of a heroic original. Th us
15 . Ibid., 41.
16 . Ibid., 41–42. Holtzmann appears not to make any distinction between Geschichte
(which can also mean “narrative,” “story,” the root meaning of Greek (cid:20)(cid:8)τ ο ε(cid:14) (cid:23) (cid:13)) and
Historie . Grimm’s etymological dictionary (D eutsches Wörterbuch von Jacob Grimm und
Wilhelm Grimm , 16 vols. [Leipzig: Verlag von S. Hirzel, 1854–1961] records of Historie that
it is “s chon im mhd. aus dem lat. historia, i n dem sinne von geschichtserzählung, bericht herü-
bergenommen .” D eutsches Wörterbuch , s.v. “Historie.” Of Geschichte , Grimm’s records: “ ahd.
und mhd. gesciht, f. schickung, zufall, ereignis, verstärktes schiht, d as eine ableitung von ahd.
scehan ‘d urch höhere schickung sich ereignen ’, dem stammverb von geschehen (s . d. ), und noch
im mhd. und md. erhalten ist, ahd. nur in den zusammensetzungen anaskiht eventus, miss-
eskiht f ortunae asperitas, niuskiht prodigium .” Deutsches Wörterbuch , s.v. “Geschichte.”
80 Chapter 02
he wrote, “the most important sentence for the internal criticism [innere Kritik] of
the Mahābhārata was the one presented in 1846 by Adolf Holtzmann, that the old
poem stood with its sympathies as much on the side of D uryodhana as the present
one highlights Y udhish ṭhira and his brothers and friends.”1 7 Based on this assump-
tion of an inversion in the epic’s outlook and plan, Holtzmann proposed certain char-
acteristic distinctions between the Germanic and Brahmanic outlooks:
1 . Whereas the old epic was essentially a “warlike heroic legend,” the newer epic
would have been the product of “priestly revision.” 18
2 . Th e old epic embodied “simple, crude ethics,” but these ethics underwent a “later
refi nement” in the course of its transition from a heroic epic to a Brahmanic philo-
sophical and ritual text. 19
3 . In contrast to the “true poetry” of the former, the latter was characterized by
“mystical babbling.” 20
4 . Finally, in contrast to the “noble temperament” of the Indo-Germanic warriors,
Holtzmann found “dulled superstition” to be the defi ning characteristic of the
later, Brahman-dominated period. 21
As we saw in the preceding chapter, Holtzmann frequently invoked comparisons
between the Germanic warriors described by Tacitus and the Mahābhārata warriors,
often embellishing them with Latin quotes. He took literary descriptions of violence
or cruelty to be evidence of a common epic tradition. In a number of cases, he also
identifi ed these archaic customs or values with Āryan origins. For instance, he noted
that when the “princes of the S aindhava ” attacked Arjuna in battle they “praise[d] their
names, their lineage, and their manifold deeds 14, 77. 6 = 2226.” From this, he con-
cluded that “it is the Saindhava who, as compared to the other Aryans, have preserved
the old customs.” 22 In his concrete analyses of the epic, Holtzmann relied especially
on four hypotheses: (1) the hypothesis of bardic composition; (2) the hypothesis of
the Mahābhārata as a Kṣatriya text; (3) the hypothesis of a tension between the epic’s
historical elements (pertaining to an actual war) and its later mythic and/or didactic
additions; and (4) the hypothesis of a Brahmanic takeover of the text in the course
of which the Brahmans introduced their ritual, philosophy and religion into the text.
As these hypotheses become a mainstay of Western Mahābhārata scholarship after
Holtzmann, it is as well to take a look at their origins in the work of Holtzmann. We
fi rst summarize his main statements regarding each hypothesis:
17 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 11.
18 . Ibid., 9.
19 . Ibid.
20 . Ibid.
21 . Ibid.
22 . Ibid., 51.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 81
1 . Bardic hypothesis
Epic poetry among the Indians is as old as every other [poetry]; its preservation and
development took place at the court of the kings through the activity of a specifi c
bardic class; it [i.e., the epic tradition] propagated itself through the oral tradition. 23
Insofar as the M ahābhārata and the R āmāya ṇa indisputably demonstrate a great
confi dence in narration and a fi rmly developed technique of presentation, this per-
ception resonates completely with our supposition that already long before the
fi rst composition of these poems, warlike heroic poetry was being developed at the
courts of the kings. 24
Th e narrator of the Mahābhārata in our redaction is a scholarly Brahman, but
this feature does not belong to the older period, and next to Vaiçampāyana , the
Brahman, appear as narrators two warriors, S anjaya and U graçravas .2 5
A ccordingly, there must have existed a specifi c bardic class at the courts of the
kings, which was charged with the care of preserving of the epic. . . . 26
Th e means of preserving and expanding this courtly poetry was the oral
tradition . 27
2 . Ks.atriya hypothesis
Th e o rigin of epic poetry is, as was noted above, located by the Indians themselves
in the earliest antiquity; alongside the fi rst king stood the fi rst bards, who sang of
his virtues and deeds. Th us, the epic is rooted, according to the belief of the Indians
themselves, not in allegory but in history.2 8
Th e care of this mythology, however, is a matter for the warriors; it is not in
the huts of the hermits but in the courts of the kings that we have to seek the
blosssom of this epic and of epic mythology; the gods of the the warriors, says the
Vāsisht ̣hasmrti (Max Müller anc. litt. S. 55), are S oma, Sūrya , and the others, thus,
precisely the old gods, whereas Nārāya ṇa is ascribed to the Brahmans and R udra
declared to be the god of the Çudras . 29
Th e epic had nothing to do with the religious literature of the Brahmans, as it is
represented in the Veda ; it was the property of the warrior caste. 30
For the old epic poetry is the property of the warrior caste .3 1
23 . Ibid.
24 . Ibid., 58.
25 . Ibid., 52.
26 . Ibid., 54 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
27 . Ibid., 59 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
28 . Ibid., 56.
29 . Ibid., 41.
30 . Ibid., 51.
31 . Ibid., 57 (emphasis in original).
82 Chapter 02
3 . War narrative hypothesis
He [the poet] shows us the tragic struggle of two principles—of knighthood, whose
time is over, and of the newly arising politics—and presents the former to us in all
the glory of a setting sun. 32
With rising interest, we see how the old honest battle-ethics of the knights after
a brave defense succumb to treason and deceit. 33
Th e contrast of the forces that collide with each other here is tragic: on the one
side stands the old, bold heroic order, which only knows an open, honest battle,
and whose sole pole-star is the fame that is praised in enthusiastic verses, which in
proud confi dence of its own power scorns all calculations of pragmatic reason. . . .
In lively contrast, we see on the other side the clever and scheming art of a K ṛsh ṇa ,
who, himself no warrior, knows how to arm brave heroes for his own purposes
through sophistic eloquence. His enterprise is victorious, victrix causa diis placuit
sed victa poëtae [sic]. 34
4 . Brahmanic hypothesis
However every change in religious outlook brought about the greatest upheaval in
the old legendary materials; the old legends were altered even more fundamentally
in favor of a new, rising god than in favor of a new dynasty; we can still follow such
an example step-for-step in the M ahābhārata , the transformation of the old epic by
the servants and worshippers of Vish ṇu .3 5
Th e victory of the Brahmanic system forced epic poetry ever further back; to the
Brahmans every view that was in some way historical was questionable.3 6
Vishnuism corrupted the entire poem, especially through the monstrous identi-
fi cation of V ish ṇu with K ṛsh ṇa .3 7
Each of these four principles provided Holtzmann an element of his argument.
Working in concert, they allowed him to defend the idea of an Indo-Germanic epic
even against all available evidence. For instance, he used the bardic hypothesis to
defend the idea of a heroic epic tradition. But since the Mahābhārata did not actually
conform to the canons of heroic epic postulated by him, he invoked the Brahmanic
hypothesis to explain why it deviated from these canons. Likewise, he invoked the
war narrative hypothesis to claim that the original epic revolved around the confl ict
between the Kauravas and the Pānḍ ̣avas and that everything outside of the central
war books was a Brahmanic interpolation. Th e Brahmanic hypothesis in turn allowed
32 . Ibid., 89.
33 . Ibid.
34 . Ibid., 90.
35 . Ibid., 57.
36 . Ibid., 66.
37 . Ibid., 10.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 83
him to justify his interventions in the text, as it had also for his uncle before him,
Adolf Holtzmann Sr. Even though the bardic hypothesis implied an epic tradition
rather than a single composition, vitiating his claim that the Brahmans had cor-
rupted the epic, by invoking the Kṣatriya hypothesis he could claim that in spite of
the variation between individual bardic compositions there was suffi cient homoge-
neity among them to justify speaking of a single epic. Th us, while individual poets
might have innovated (for instance, adapting older materials to praise their respec-
tive patrons), Holtzmann thought their common origins in a heroic culture would
have imposed a certain continuity on these various compositions. Bards and kings, as
he reminds us, shared a certain way of life. Th e bards were “not even missing in war”;
we “fi nd them during the great battle in the army camp of the two hostile kings.”
Indeed Holtzmann claimed that “they themselves enter[ed] battle in order to be able
to see for themselves the heroic deeds of the warriors and to then be able to sing of
them . . . . ” 38 In eff ect, the bardic tradition held together because it was rooted in the
same world. In contrast, when the Brahmans entered upon the scene, they destroyed
the heroic culture of the Germans. Th us, when Holtzmann spoke of the Brahmans
corrupting the epic, he meant this in a literal sense: not only did they introduce new
materials into the epic but they also corrupted the values that made up the old epic
tradition.
IDEAS OF EPIC COMPOSITION
As we have seen, even though Holtzmann spoke of an Indo-Germanic epic, he had
in mind not one epic, but an epic tradition comprising manifold narratives. As he
used the expression “Indo-Germanic original epic [Indo-Germanisches Urepos],” he
seems, rather, to refer to a shared Indo-Germanic culture. Indeed, after chapter 6
(where he fi rst introduced the hypothesis of an Indo-Germanic epic), Holtzmann
abandoned the search for a textual archetype, focusing instead on the characteristic
features that would defi ne Indo-Germanic culture. Among the terms that played a
major role in his discussion were “Lebensanschauung” (view of life), “Sitten” (cus-
toms), and “gesellschaftlich[e] Einrichtungen” (social structures). 39 Holtzmann used
all these to try to defi ne the culture or tradition of the “Germans.” In contrast, he
never took up the search for a textual archetype again in the remainder of the book. 40
Rather, his main interest thereafter was in bringing to life again his hypothetical
Indo-Germans.
However, this focus on an epic tradition rather than an epic text created certain
problems for his narrative. Even if we grant his argument that the Brahmans were
38 . Ibid., 54.
39 . Ibid., 45.
40 . In his words: “we shall set aside the question of whether there is a relationship between
the Indian and the German epic in terms of the contents, the legendary materials them-
selves. Instead, w e shall only ask whether in the oldest parts of the Mahābhārata w e fi nd char-
acteristic traits in worldview, customs, and social structures, which we also encounter in the oldest
reports about the Germans .” Ibid. (italics ours).
84 Chapter 02
responsible for the decline of the heroic tradition, this is not the same as a revision of
the epic. It remains unclear what the relation of social changes to textual corruption
is: did the Brahmans fi rst seize political control over the warriors and so bring about
changes in their narratives? Or did they fi rst seize control of the epic and use it as
an instrument of social control? Further, since he held that “bardic poetry was not
held together by an intellectual band; [rather,] the thread that ran through its trans-
mission was only a chronological [one], the narrative followed the genealogy of the
princely houses,” 41 it is unclear how the Brahmans could have corrupted the old epic
when it did not exist as a unifi ed work. Holtzmann also noted: “from father to son
and to grandson and then many generations further down was narrated the fate of
the dynasty, whereby naturally depending upon the sympathies and the antipathies
of the ruling lineages the standpoint of the poets too repeatedly changed.” 42 But in
that case, it makes little sense to claim that the Brahmans made changes to an oral
epic tradition, since this tradition itself was constantly changing.
Holtzmann was clearly aware of the problem. As he noted, “the further and fur-
ther expanded and altered legend could not take on a fi rm poetic form [Gestalt];
we can hence for the time of the prehistory of the Mahābhārata at most count on
fi nding occasional references to unordered legendary materials of our poem in the
contemporaneous Vedic literature, without the form [now] present to us being rec-
ognizable there [i.e., in the Vedic literature].”4 3 But if the original epic had neither a
textual archetype nor written records, how could any reliable claims be made of it?
According to Holtzmann, it was lacking even in a defi nite oral form ( Gestalt ) or a sin-
gle dominant legend (he introduced the Siegfried legend as one such contender but
ultimately rejected this possibility). In that case, even the criterion of a “cruel crude-
ness of passion” identifi ed by Holtzmann as the hallmark of the ancient Germans,
cannot bring us further, since there was strictly speaking no text that could have
survived into the Brahmanic Mahābhārata. Partly in order to resolve these diffi cul-
ties and partly in order to posit an “Enlightenment” for the ancient Indo-Germans,
Holtzmann in chapter 8 introduced the thesis of a poetic composition. According
to him, a “genial poet” would have “extracted a single narrative from the legendary
materials present [to him]” and “refashioned” it “to an independent artistic composi-
tion, to the M ahābhārata (according to its oldest form).”4 4 Even though he conceded
that “the transition from the old professional poetry to the artifi cial epic [Kunstepos] led
to a wide gap, which only a true poetic genius was capable of fi lling,”4 5 he seems to
have thought there was a way of resolving the confl icting imperatives of upholding
an oral bardic tradition (necessitated by his bardic hypothesis) and simultaneously
41 . Ibid., 67.
42 . Ibid., 68.
43 . Ibid.
44 . Ibid., 67.
45 . Ibid., 67 (emphasis in original). Th e prefi x Kunst- can mean both “art” and “artifi ce,”
with the latter sense of an artifi cial, conscious creation predominating here over the aes-
thetic meaning.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 85
claiming some kind of textual source (as required for his Brahmanic hypothesis).
Writes Holtzmann:
How do we, however, come from this epic bardic poetry to a great epic arranged
according to a [defi nite] plan, such as is present to us in the old Mahābhārata ? Th e
question arises whether a true poet also stood at the head of the Indian epic, who,
out of the mass of legends handed down, placed a particularly outstanding [exam-
ple] in the center, artistically grouped others in the form of episodes around this
[one], sharply delineated the characters and let them collide against each other
in a tragic confl ict, arranged the events next to each other in a well-thought-out
sequence from the fi rst beginnings of the strife down to the horrifi c catastrophe,
and carried a single leading and cohesive thought through the artistically and logi-
cally structured whole; in other words, whether the old epic transmission found a
poet of the fi rst order, a Homer, who impressed the stamp of his genius, once for
all, upon it? 4 6
By invoking his uncle’s theory of Homeric composition (in 1854, the elder Holtzmann
had proposed that central fi gures whom he called samâsas would have retained “an
overview over the entire epic” while subordinate fi gures called vjâsas would have
been responsible for presenting the epic “presented in song in explicit detail” 47 ),
Holtzmann Jr. sought to account for the transformation of the Mahābhārata from
an oral Indo-Germanic epic tradition to a written composition. Like his uncle, he
made a distinction between individual legends preserved by the bardic tradition and
an overarching plan as constructed by a “genial poet.” But whereas Holtzmann Sr.
had postulated a personifi cation of the v jâsas to Vyāsa (the traditional author of the
epic), Holtzmann Jr. seems to have seen the so-called arrangers of the epic tradition,
the samâsas , as the key fi gures in this process. Rather than seeing Vyāsa as the com-
poser, he seems to have imagined a s amâsa (an Indian Homer, as he explicitly called
him) who selected a particular vjâsa , placed it at the core of his poem, and then artis-
tically arranged other vjâsas around it to obtain a single composition. Following this
discussion of the composition of the epic, in chapter 12 Holtzmann introduced the
suggestion that the original poet of the Mahābhārata would have been a Buddhist
poet. As he put it, “if we suppose that our epic in its earliest artistic form [Gestalt]
was the work of a Buddhist poet, then it is understandable that the strict Brahmanic
revisers displaced Duryodhana’s faction, especially Kar ṇa , the poet’s favorite hero;
in the same measure, Krsh ṇa ’s faction had to be glorifi ed, as soon as one started to
bring this into connection with V ish ṇu .”4 8 With this, Holtzmann brought forward the
Indo-Germanic epic hypothesis into the horizon of his theological and religious con-
cerns. As noted earlier, one of his motivations for positing a poetic composition was
to highlight a development among the ancient Indo-Germans in the direction of an
Enlightenment. In order to do so, Holtzmann found it most convenient to associate
46 . Ibid., 68.
47 . Holtzmann Sr., Untersuchungen ueber das Nibelungenlied , 163–64.
48 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 94.
86 Chapter 02
the Indo-Germans warriors with ancient Buddhists. Even though the introduction of
the Buddhist hypothesis complicated the picture of an old Indo-Germanic epic with
heroic elements and a later Brahmanic revision, it was a key element in his narrative
of Germanic identity. Holtzmann had already accounted for the Brahmans’ resent-
ment of the Indo-Germans in terms of the contrast between the heroic, noble, and
free-thinking outlook of the former and the cowardly, dishonest, and manipulative
outlook of the latter. However, the introduction of the Buddhist composition also
allowed him to characterize their resentment in terms of a religious opposition.
IDEAS OF RELIGIOUS CONFLICT
Although Holtzmann initially set out to identify the characteristics of the ancient
Germanic peoples, this project, surprisingly enough, also required a characteriza-
tion of Germany’s Protestant inheritance vis-à-vis its Catholic past. For reasons we
shall see later, Holtzmann was obsessed with the idea of religious confl ict. He read
the Mahābhārata as primarily a record of various religious confl icts. Even though
he initially did not make it explicit, he considered the Brahmanic takeover of the
Indo-Germanic epic itself to be the fi rst stage of a protracted confl ict, one that con-
tinued via Buddhism until the fi nal triumph of Brahmanism around the eighth cen-
tury CE. He noted of the epic that “political and dynastic interests” alone could not
explain the complete reversal in its sympathies:
But political and dynastic interests alone cannot explain such an unusual falsifi ca-
tion, as is the case here. In a period of the political division of the country into mul-
tiple, often mutually hostile regions, no dynastic interest suffi ces to motivate such
a systematic and laborious, albeit also frequently incompetent and inconsequently
performed, falsifi cation, such animosity against the old heroic fi gures of the ances-
tral period, as played a role in the revision of the Mahābhārata .4 9
Instead, he proposed that “in the case of such a people [i.e., the Indians]” a diff erent
and “much more powerful motivation” had to be sought, namely “religious fanati-
cism [religiöser Fanatismus].” “Indian history,” he claimed, “is, in the fi rst place,
religious history [Religionsgeschichte]; it circles around fundamental principles and
questions of metaphysics and provides us with one of the most pertinent proofs of
the strength and ineradicability of metaphysical need in the human heart.” As such,
he argued, “the reason for this revision” had to be sought “in a religious agenda, and,
specifi cally, in such [an agenda] as was common to the Brahmans of all lands and all
factions.”5 0 Even though the revisionistic tendencies of the Brahmans were, at least
in Holtzmann’s original narrative, directed against the Indo-Germanic oral epic, for
practical reasons they could only undertake such a revision once a text became avail-
able in the form of the Buddhist poetic composition. Th e theory of a religious confl ict
49 . Ibid., 96.
50 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 87
between Buddhists and Brahmans was especially suited to explaining why the latter
might have undertaken such a revision. Writes Holtzmann:
Around the time of the beginning of our calendar, the hard and bloody battle seems
to have gotten underway, in whose course the resurrected Brahmanism fi nally
became master over its dangerous foe. One appears now to be fairly univesally in
agreement that one must locate the bloom of Buddhism in the centuries 300 B C till
500 AD , the fi nal victory of Brahmanism in the period 800 to 1000. Unfortunately,
we still do not have any coherent detailed presentation of this violent war of reli-
gion. But it will suffi ce for a general characterization of it when only the well known
verse were preserved to us: “Whoever, from the bridge (of Rāma , which leads to
Ceylon) till the snowy mountains, does not kill the followers of the B uddha , chil-
dren as much as old men, must [himself] be killed, thus has the king commanded
his servants.” Th e verse is taken from the bizarre poem Ç a nk̇ aravijaya , that is, the
victorious march of Çiva [Śiva], cf. Gildemeisters Chrestomathie 1868 p. XII and
p. 92 v. 66. Here, the speaker of the Brahmans, Kumārila , fi rst defeats the Buddhists
in a disputation at the court of king Sudhanvan , then in performing miracles, in
the last case with the help of Vish ṇu . Th ereupon, Sudhanvan gives the order to kill
all Buddhists; for, he says, great-hearted men may not spare even their friends,
when they have sinned; R āma , the son of Jamadagni , too, killed his own mother.
Incidentally, the course of the gigantic battle can be a matter of indiff erence to us
here; its result at any rate remains fi rm. Buddhism was violently exterminated in
those areas where it had blossomed for centuries. Th e causes are clear: on the one
hand, a violent eff ort, an energetic Counter-Reformation of the Brahmans, which,
through its adoption of the folk-gods especially the beloved Vish ṇu-K ṛsh ṇa , and of
the entire folk-superstition, had won over the masses for itself, and, on the other
hand, a degeneracy that had entered into Buddhism, in that it had already quite
early deviated from its original tendency. 51
As in the fi rst part of his text, where he saw the Mahābhārata as a proxy for a reli-
gious and spiritual struggle (between the Brahmans and the Germans), here too he
argued that the Mahābhārata was a key element in the battle between Buddhists and
Brahmans. According to him,
S oon after the beginning of the great battle between Brahmanism and Buddhism the
Brahmans reworked the poem for their [own] purposes and contrasted a new ortho-
dox [rechtgläubige] redaction of the same [i.e., of the poem] to it. Th is [version]
distinguished itself from the old [poem] through the glorifi cation of the P ā ṇḍava
and the demotion of the Kaurava , through the infl ux of V ish ṇu and the deifi cation
of K ṛsh ṇa , through the emphasis on orthodox [orthodoxen] Brahmanism. Th is fi rst
Brahmanic redaction was still hostile toward Çiva [Śiva].5 2
51 . Ibid., 97–98.
52 . Ibid., 128.
88 Chapter 02
However, the Brahmans were not able to fi ght Buddhism successfully on their own.
Instead, they were forced into an alliance with the rising cult of Kṛṣṇa, explaining
why the central deity of the epic is the god Viṣṇu-Kṛṣṇa.
Th e religious ideas that dominanted the poem [i.e., a combination of Indo-Germanic
pantheism coexisting alongside Buddhism] suff ered a complete revolution through
the introduction of V ishnuism . Th e tribes of the Andhaka, V ṛsh ṇi, Sātavata wor-
shipped Vāsudeva , probably a deifi ed tribal hero . . . . A religion attached itself to his
worship, which [religion] penetrated wide sections of India; a religion of warriors,
who knew to narrate much about the deeds of their god . . . . 53
Of this composite Brahmanic and folk god, Holtzmann argued that “his adventures
throughout do not bear the stamp of the old heroic legend; V āsudeva is not a knightly
champion; he demonstrates more cunning and deceit than actual bravery; he him-
self, like his relatives and the quarrelsome pastoral race that follows him, appears to
have a strong tendency to drunkenness and luxuriousness, to gambling and sensu-
ous love-making.” Holtzmann conceded that the tribe of the Vṛṣṇis (Kṛṣṇa’s people
in the epic) was “not a strictly Brahmanic race” and their worship “not a Brahmanic
religion.” Th e tribes “that worshipped Vāsudeva ,” he wrote, “the Y ādava do not belong
to the race of the center; their tribal father Y adu , in the very old legend of Y ayāti , is
cursed and disinherited by this his own father.” However, he explained the fact that
the Brahmans entered into an alliance with such a marginal tribe on the grounds
that, “as the Brahmans looked around for allies for the great battle against the
Buddhists, they had to attempt to win the worshippers of V āsudeva for themselves.”
According to him, in order to gain the sympathies of Kṛṣṇa’s followers, the Brahmans
undertook to “fus[e] ” their god “ Vāsudeva with Nārāya ṇa , who in the meantime had
risen in the Brahmanic world, the god of the primal waters, of the water of creation
(Weber Ind. Stud. IX 2), a somewhat older form of V ish ṇu .” 54 Th ereafter, “both [gods],
Vāsudeva and N ārāya ṇa , further blended themselves with Vish ṇu , an old sun god
who, already in the Veda , is not insignifi cant, [and] who now through his association
with the popular Vāsudeva and the pantheistic N ārāya ṇa was raised to the highest
god . . . . ” In a third and fi nal stage that was “still more important for the formation
[Gestaltung] of the epic,” argued Holtzmann, there then occurred a “fatal identifi -
cation of the epic K ṛsh ṇa with the warrior-like V āsudeva of the Yādava .” Kṛṣṇa, he
claimed, was not a Vedic deity. His antecedents appeared, rather, to lie in the old
Indo-Germanic epic: “Th e epic knew of a K ṛsh ṇa , who was accorded a very impor-
tant role, a leader of a pastoral race allied with the Pā ṇḍava , who, however, never
appears as a warrior (he never fi ghts alongside the others, he only steers A rjuna ’s
chariot), but as a scheming politician, whose faithless recommendations run counter to
the old concepts of knightly honor the P ā ṇḍavas carry out and thereby attain victory.”
According to Holtzmann, the fact that “K ṛsh ṇa was one of the many names of Vāsudeva
of the Y ādavas ” inspired the Brahmans, “more out of political as religious reasons,”
53 . Ibid., 131 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
54 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 89
to identify not only “their [god] Vish ṇu [who was] legitimated by the Vedas” with
Kṛṣṇa, but also the Kṛṣṇa of the Yādavas, in turn, with the Kṛṣṇa of the epic. “Th us,
the decisive [and] fatal step for the Mahābhārata took place: the plotter of the piece
was raised to a hero, indeed to a god, and K ṛsh ṇa was declared to be identical with
Vāsudeva and V ish ṇu . Th e consequence was a total alteration of the poem which
placed the old attitude therefore so to speak on its head.” 55
Although designed to account for the complexity of Kṛṣṇa’s presentation in the
epic, Holtzmann’s theory of three Kṛṣṇas—an epic Kṛṣṇa known for his disregard of
the heroic code, a folk Kṛṣṇa who was the chieftain of the Vṛṣṇi or Yādava tribes, and
a Brahmanic Kṛṣṇa formed through the identifi cation of the Brahmanic god Viṣṇu
with the deifi ed tribal hero Kṛṣṇa—was not without its problems. Why should the
old epic have known of a character called Kṛṣṇa, if, as Holtzmann claimed, it was
the product of a heroic oral bardic tradition? If the original epic consisted of bardic
compositions in praise of Indo-Germanic warriors, as Holtzmann explicitly claimed,
why would they have introduced a character like K ṛ ṣ ṇa? Further, if this epic had
been composed, as Holtzmann also suggested, prior to contact with non-Āryan or
Brahmanic civilization, how could they have been acquainted with the name K ṛ ṣ ṇa?
K ṛ ṣ ṇa, Holtzmann at other times suggested, was a Brahmanic character. But if so,
why would they have introduced one of their own into the epic in a negative light?
Further, if K ṛ ṣ ṇa was a Brahmanic innovation, he could not have been introduced
into the epic until after the beginning of their religious rivalry with the Buddhists.
Indeed, as Holtzmann told it, two further processes had to take place before the
Brahmans could introduce Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa into the text as an element of their political strat-
egy against the Buddhists: fi rst, K ṛ ṣ ṇa had to undergo identifi cation with Nārāya ṇa;
thereafter, this composite being Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa-Nārāya ṇa had to undergo identifi cation with
Vi ṣ ṇu. Holtzmann argued that the homonymy between the Brahmanic-folk K ṛ ṣ ṇa
and the epic Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa would have prompted the Brahmans to identify their deity with
the epic character. But in that case, what agency was behind the epic K ṛ ṣ ṇa? Could
it be that the Indo-Germanic bards, anticipating their eventual decline, had already
created the character as a kind of template for a Brahmanic K ṛ ṣ ṇa to come?
Holtzmann did not address these basic confusions. On the contrary, he insisted
that his theory of three K ṛ ṣ ṇas was best able to account for the complexity of K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s
presentation in the epic. As he told it, “while such completely new ideas forced their
way into the poem, the old narration in its basic traits asserted itself too fi rmly in
the memory of its surrounding world for it to be given up, so to speak; [thus] it could
not be avoided that diff erent views about Kr ̣sh ṇa - Vish ṇu attained currency one after
and next to one another in our poem.”5 6 Th erefore, he argued, “at one time K ṛsh ṇa is
a mere human, at another time he is an incarnation of V ish ṇu , at yet another, Vish ṇu
himself. Th e latter has already attained supremacy in most passages, in others he is
still clearly subordinate to the old gods Indra and B rahman .” 57 Further, citing the views
of Wilson and Burnouf, he argued that only a theory of the gradual apotheosis of an
55 . Ibid., 132.
56 . Ibid., 132–33 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
57 . Ibid., 133.
90 Chapter 02
epic hero to a Brahmanic divinity could account for the fact of the gradual evolution
of K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s character in the epic:
In other places, the divine nature of K ṛsh ṇa is less decidedly affi rmed; in some, it is dis-
puted or denied; and, in most of the situations in which he is exhibited in action, it is as a
prince and warrior, not as a divinity. He exercises no superhuman faculties in the defence
of himself or his friends, or in the defeat and destruction of his foes.” [Holtzmann citing
Wilson V ish.P . Einl. p. 15; Holtzmann now continues:] Even in the current redaction of
the poem the apotheosis of K ṛsh ṇa is made plausible to the reader gradually with a cer-
tain caution; at fi rst he appears as a mere man, then fi rst from 1, 224, 8 = 8160 onwards
he is declared to be identical with Nārāya ṇa ( Brahman must instruct A gni about this, to
whom it is obviously new[s] ), then Indra 3, 47, 13 = 1891 discovers that N ārāya ṇa is the
same as V ish ṇu . Both names, N ārāya ṇa and V ish ṇu , are used alternately as a description
of the same god 3, 101, 9 = 8722 among others. Th at the supremacy of V ish ṇu was a
new idea to which contemporaries only slowly and hesitantly accustomed themselves is
shown by the speeches of the old gods, which, so to speak, introduce and present [him]
and the remarks about the bad people who do not want to believe in the divinity of
Vish ṇu . Th us 6, 66, 3 = 2975 the amazed gods ask B rahman [Brahmā?] what sort of god
he [i.e., Vis ṇ ̣u] is, to whom he has just prayed, and Brahman teaches them in detail about
the person and essence of V ish ṇu . . . . Many passages complain about people who deny
the divinity of V ish ṇu , especially 6, 66, 18 = 2990 much is said about such [people]. Th e
Vish ṇuo f the epic who has been raised in this manner to the highest god is very diff erent
from that of the old poets of the hymns “le V ish ṇu des V ēdas n’est en aucune manière le
Vish ṇu des mythographes” Burnouf Bh. P. III Einl. p. 22.5 8
Although weak in the details, Holtzmann was clearly invoking a theory of epic com-
position that had widespread appeal for most Western scholars. What could be more
self-evident than that the Brahmans, always jealous of their privilege and seeking to
exercise still greater control over the minds of the populace, would have conspired
to take over the Mahābhārata, the most important text of noble K ṣatriya warriors?
What could be more self-evident than that they would have done so by assimilating
their gods to folk deities? What could be more self-evident than their introducing
their theological and philosophical doctrines only gradually into the text, skillfully
weaving them into existing oral epic materials? Th e story Western scholars told of
the Mahābhārata was one of progressive corruption, where corruption did not sim-
ply imply the confl ation of two textual sources but, rather, the infi ltration of non-
Āryan ideas into Āryan civilization. 59
58 . Ibid.
59 . For the continued prevalence of this trope in contemporary scholarship, see the works
of Fitzgerald, cited earlier. See especially his “Th e Great Epic of India,” where he claims that
“the pernicious fragmentation of the K ṣatriya order is presented in the G reat Bhārata pri-
marily in terms of the dissolution and polarization of the preeminent royal family of the
ancient Aryan heartland of North Central India.” Fitzgerald, “Th e Great Epic of India as
Religious Rhetoric,” 619. Fitzgerald, however, shies away from identifying Brahmans with
non-Āryan, Dravidian culture, reverting rather to the Lassenian view.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 91
IDEAS OF TEXTUAL CORRUPTION
A look at Mahābhārata criticism as it developed in Holtzmann’s Zur Geschichte und
Kritik bears out just how central the narrative of corruption was to the Western
reception of the text. Even though the theory of a Brahmanic takeover of a K ṣatriya
epic can be traced back to the work of Lassen and Goldstücker, it is Holtzmann who
fi rst developed a comprehensive account of the mechanisms of this takeover. First,
he charged that the Brahmans introduced new characters and transformed the con-
tent of the narratives:
Th e poem was corrupted in the fi rst Brahmanic redaction through the preferen-
tial treatment of the Pā ṇḍavas, primarily of Arjuna, the loyal friend of the deifi ed
K ṛsh ṇa, the tribal father, and furthermore of his brothers, relatives, and friends
[the reference is to the “preferential treatment” accorded the Pā ṇdạ vas in the new
redaction]. Th e fi ve brothers were presented as perfect ideals of Brahmanic kings
and slaves of the priests, Arjuna made as much like the Brahmanic Rāma (the son of
Daçaratha) as possible, K ṛshn ̣a, even where he only appears as a human, presented
as a picture of virtue and his wickedness whitewashed through massive sophistry. 60
Second, he charged that the Brahmans also transformed the ethical outlook of the
poem. As he put it, the central purpose of the Brahmanic revision was to under-
take an “a dapation to the spirit of Brahmanism ,” which entailed showing that the social
order of the Brahmans existed as a matter of right since time immemorial:
Not only the course of the poem, the evaluation of the main fi gures, [and] the domi-
nant system of mythology in it had to be changed in this revision, but an adapation
to the spirit of Brahmanism had to be carried out as well, specifi cally, the social and
communitarian conditions corresponding to the priestly worldview had to be pre-
sented as already extant in remote antiquity, indeed as present from the beginning
of human society, and as existing as a matter of right. 61
Holtzmann also raised three more specifi c criticisms of the Brahmans. First, he
argued that the Brahmans were responsible for the repression of women. “All active
involvement of women in the course of the action,” he claimed, “was reduced to a
minimum because, according to the neo-Brahmanic view, only submissiveness and
reclusivity were appropriate to women.” 62 Second, he claimed that the Brahmans,
not content with making changes to the epic, also actively conspired to seize political
control from the K ṣatriya rulers of India (although the way they did so, again, was to
introduce appropriate narratives into the Mahābhārata):
Furthermore, the kings of the prehistoric period were all outfi tted with house priests
( purohita ), without whose advice and agreeement they undertook no important
60 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 134 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
61 . Ibid., 147 (emphasis in original).
62 . Ibid.
92 Chapter 02
steps, and no element is not utilized to prove the predominant role of the Brahmans
already in the time of the distant forefathers; the greater the insolence with which
the fi rst caste behaves, the later or the more revised [ueberarbeiteter] is that respec-
tive piece of the Mahābhārata . In the priestly interest, people of the Brahmanic caste
were inserted at every point into the narration, as, for example, the priest D amana
in the N alopākhyāna who aids the king in [gaining] progeny as R ̣shyaçr nġ a and oth-
ers [aid] Daçaratha in the R āmāya ṇa . Alongside the gods on earth, the Brahmans,
and V ish ṇu , the old gods were actually superfl uous; a number of passages which
report their active involvement in the course of the action were left out or severely
shortened: a most palpable and irreplaceable loss. 63
Finally, these changes to social customs and political structures could not but have
an eff ect on the cultural, aesthetic and ethical values of the Indians. As Holtzmann
described it, “just as the rationalism of the Brahmans corrupted the old mythology,
so also could it only have a corrupting eff ect on poetry; wonder was considered child-
ish and the agency of the old gods in the fates of the heroes was replaced by a natu-
ralistic form of explanation.” 64 He was even harsher in his verdict on Indian moral life
after Brahmanism:
Furthermore, how much Brahmanism with its sophistic approach damaged the
old, healthy, and potentially further developable moral of the Indians and twisted
their concepts of right and wrong—the oversubtle speeches of K ṛsh ṇa and his
followers are testimony thereof. In place of morals and religion entered ritual
[Ceremoniendienst] and [the belief in] salvation through works [Werkheiligkeit]
from the time of the Brahman Restoration [brahmanischen Restauration] down to
our times. 65
Th e war with Buddhism was, in fact, fateful even for the victors [i.e., to the
Brahmans]; [as a concession to] the loyal allies, the Vishnuites, one had to subtract
something from the seriousness of the moral [code], as long as the privileges of the
Brahmans and the authority of the V eda were maintained. As Weber (Ind. Stud. IX
120) remarks, one made the yoke as light as possible and demanded only subjection;
indeed, for the followers of the sect of V ish ṇu even sacrifi ce and learning is superfl u-
ous, confession of faith in Vish ṇu suffi ces. 66
Holtzmann’s criticisms of the Brahmans were wideranging, but not always consis-
tent. It seemed as though in his eagerness to blame the Brahmans for every social
ill, he often forgot that he was dealing with an epic, a literary work that, in spite
of Lassen’s best eff orts, could not be read as a literal account of history. Further,
he seems to not have always distinguished between interventions in the text and
interventions in reality. For instance, after detailing the corruption to the Indians’
moral sense that took place following the Brahmans’ seizure of power, he returned
63 . Ibid., 148.
64 . Ibid.
65 . Ibid., 148–49.
66 . Ibid., 149.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 93
to the theme of how the Brahmans had taken control of the Mahābhārata. Here he
described in two long passages how Brahmanic changes to the text, especially the
random insertion of passages, might have impaired the value system of the old epic:
Th e history of the negotiations that now follow between the Kaurava and the
Pān ̣dạ vas is completely corrupted; instead of specifi c suggestions and advice, we
only hear completely general moral observations and philosophical explications,
which do not cohere in the least with the course of the narrative; the real history
is hardly recognizable out of the individually scattered hints. Such utterly abruptly
inserted pieces are only inserted in order to conceal a gap. When an Indian cop-
ies a manuscript and does not fi nd it to be complete, he inserts pieces of other
related works “in order to preserve the appearance of completeness” (Roth Katal.
p. 9 n. 247); “leaves taken from some other book—precious mode of book making”
complains Taylor Kat. II. 607 cf. 609. Entirely in the same manner, the revisionists
[of the Mahābhārata inserted entire pieces in place of others [they had] excised. . . . 67
In the second passage, Holtzmann made it clear that he saw an explicit connection
between the Mahābhārata’s textual history and a wider history of India:
With this fi rst Brahmanic revision begins the t hird period of the history of the
Mahābhārata , characterized by the conscious endeavor to bring the old poem into
harmony with the strictly Brahmanic system although [this was] already altered by
its assimilation to the folk religions, by their preference for the P ā ṇḍavas and their
nastiness toward D uryodhana . Since the second revision [i.e., counting the Buddhist
composition now as the fi rst revision] often had texts before it that contradicted
each other in the details, which it sought to unify for better or worse, it is appropri-
ate to suppose that during this third period diff erent recensions of the Brahmanic
epic were in circulation in diff erent regions of India. Th at the revision was specially
intended for the warrior caste, which since the beginning was greatly smitten with
the epic, is very likely given the material and contents of the [revised] work.6 8
Holtzmann’s articulation of the Mahābhārata’s textual history into three phases—
Indo-Germanic oral epic tradition followed by a Buddhist poetic composition followed
by a Brahmanic revision—has been extremely seductive for many Western scholars,
who have followed him either in his critique of Brahmanism (James L. Fitzgerald)
or his fantasies of a heroic epic culture (Kevin McGrath) or in his ideas of oral epic
tradition (John L. Brockington). And yet, when we look more closely at Holtzmann’s
67 . Ibid., 144. Incidentally, this myth continues in contemporary scholarship. Van
Buitenen writes: “In essence, an Indian book consists of a number of loose leaves held
together by two loose boards and tied by a piece of string running through one or two
holes in the leaves and the boards. . . . A manuscript was a person’s private property. . . . It
was his to do what as he pleased. If it pleased him to insert in his loose-leaf book a couple of
leaves containing a variant version of one of the stories, he would do so without compunc-
tion. . . . ” J. A. B. van Buitenen, “Introduction,” in Th e Mahābhārata, vol. 1. Th e Book of the
Beginning (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973), xxix.
68 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 150.
94 Chapter 02
arguments for the Brahmanic revision of a K ṣatriya epic, we fi nd serious fl aws in the
argument. For instance, although initially imagined as a Brahmanic redaction, it now
appears that this textual undertaking must have been multiple, scattered, and got-
ten underway at diff erent times in diff erent parts of India, for, if we read Holtzmann
correctly, it seems that when the Brahmans got together to undertake their revision,
they already had multiple redactions before them. In the fi rst place, they were dealing
not with an Indo-Germanic epic, but with an Indo-Germanic epic tradition. Th is tra-
dition, moreover, was transmitted orally and itself kept shifting as bards composed
new narratives and embellished or recast old ones. Holtzmann does partially resolve
this problem by introducing the thesis of a Buddhist poetic composition. But even
this off ers only a partial solution, since it does not explain how the Brahmans then
replaced all of the oral epic tradition. Even if they revised the Buddhist poetic com-
position, what of the other oral narratives in circulation? 69 Holtzmann also did not
explain how or why the contents of the oral epic tradition, which after all was warlike
and concerned with the deeds of Indo-Germanic heroes on the battlefi eld, could have
survived unchanged into a Buddhist poetic composition. Surely, if we are to seek a
change to the outlook of the original epic, it must be here at the juncture of the Indo-
Germanic and Buddhist traditions?
But even if we grant Holtzmann that the Brahmans revised a single poetic com-
position and that, through this, they were able to corrupt or decimate the entire
Indo-Germanic tradition, it is not clear exactly what this fabled “Urepos” was. Was it,
as Holtzmann at times claimed, the inheritance of the three epic peoples, composed
at a time when the three were not distinct races and lived in a common homeland?
Or was it, as Holtzmann at other times suggested, a series of bardic compositions
detailing individual confl icts and acts of heroism, without a single guiding princi-
ple? Or was it, as Holtzmann also claimed at yet other times, the work of a great
Germanic poet, who wished to show the tragic confl ict between his heroic age, an
age that was slowly dying out, and the more unscrupulous values of a newer age? But
in that case, the epic must have been composed at the very cusp of the Brahmanic
ascendancy and not centuries before, as Holtzmann seemed to suggest. Crucially,
it must then have been composed in India itself and not outside in the unnamed
homeland of the three epic peoples. It would then be a new composition, composed
for the express purpose of refl ecting Germanic experiences on north Indian soil and
69 . Holtzmann did off er a partial solution to the problem, by arguing that the Brahmans
“collected the diff erent redactions that had arisen in the course of centuries; the oft contra-
dictory elements were combined to a whole; [but] if it was all too diffi cult to reconcile the
nonidentical versions, one narrated the same story twice.” Ibid., 179. But even this does
not suffi ce to explain the mechanics of “Brahman redaction”: how does one collect oral
narratives in such a way that the new authorized version replaces the oral tradition? How
does placing all the available oral versions of a story within a written exemplar contribute
in any way to their extermination? Surely, if anything, the more versions the Brahmans
collected and included in their authoritative written text, the more they would have pre-
served the heroic oral epic? Th eir role would precisely have been that of preservers and col-
lectors of ancient oral tradition rather than as the textual iconoclasts Holtzmann imagines
them to be.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 95
not, as Holtzmann had called it, an original “epic inheritance” of the three epic peo-
ples. 7 0 In other words, was the “Urepos” suffi ciently “Ur” or did it, in turn, have an
“Urepos” behind it. And if so, what was the connection of these two Urepen (three,
if we include the manifold bardic poems composed on the spot by bards following
in the train of heroic kings)? Where were they composed and what was their cen-
tral theme? It seems that the theme of the earliest of these Urepen would have been
a glorious historical triumph, achieved at the time the original epic people entered
into or settled in their original homeland, wherever this might have been. But the
second composition was already a horse of a very diff erent color, if Holtzmann is to
be believed. It was no longer one grand confl ict that stood at the center of the epic—
indeed, the epic itself had fragmented into an epic tradition —but a series of smaller
confl icts, battles fought between rival Indo-Germanic clans as they pursued poetic
immortality and the heaven promised to the dying warrior on the battlefi eld. Here,
the dominant tenor of the epic had shifted: it had now taken on quasi-religious, mys-
tical tones as the dying warriors prepared for their fi nal journey secure in the knowl-
edge of the warriors’ heaven that awaited them. Th e third composition, again, was a
diff erent beast altogether: now, instead of the quasi-religious tones of the second,
the dominant tenor now was an U ntergangspathos , as the heroic Germanic warriors
prepared for their inevitable downfall and disappearance. Describing the transition
from the second to the third composition, Holtzmann writes that “the sharply delin-
eated characteristics of the main heroes and agents of the epic reveal the hand of a
single and signifi cant poet; if we consider the uniform structure of the narrative as a
whole and in individual details, we arrive each time at the same result. Th e series of
accidental battle scenes, which he [i.e., the poet] found before himself, were turned
by him into a poignant picture; he shows us the tragic struggle of two principles; of
knighthood, whose time is over; and of the newly arising politics, and presents the
former to us in all the glory of a setting sun.” 71 And yet, even if some Germanic poet
had put together the epic materials he found before him, rearranged them to refl ect
the evolving political situation, whereby the Germanic tribes now found themselves
confronted with indigenous, non-Āryan tribes, that would not explain Holtzmann’s
thesis of an i nversion in the epic’s sympathies. If the epic poet had anyway intended
to portray a Germanic civilization in the process of dissolution, what sense did it
make to claim that the Brahmans, arriving newly triumphant on the scene, would
have needed to undertake a revision of the poem? Surely, both compositions—the
old and the new—would have been in agreement on this one point, that the heroic
Germanic culture was defeated and on its way out, while Brahmanism was the wave
of the future? How could a work—supposedly created to refl ect the tragic decline of
the heroic age—possess U ntergangspathos if it denied the very U ntergang that pathos
depended upon?
When it came to his thesis of a second Brahmanic revision, Holtzmann’s argu-
ment was similarly riddled with holes. If, as he claimed, the second revision “often
had texts before it that contradicted each other in the details” and that “diff erent
70 . Ibid., 43.
71 . Ibid., 89.
96 Chapter 02
recensions of the Brahmanic epic were in circulation in diff erent regions of India,”7 2
how could the Brahmans have undertaken a single, collective revision? Did they bring
all these extant versions to a single place in India where they then undertook their
revision? Was the revised text then carried back to its places of origin? And fi nally,
why should this revision in particular have been “specially intended for the warrior
caste”? If Holtzmann’s refl ections about the fi rst Brahmanic revision are correct,
then the heroic age was already in decline by this time. It seems Holtzmann imagined
the fi rst revision as being directed against Buddhism and perhaps as including a sop
to folk religions such as the Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa cult. Hence, a second revision was required, tar-
geting the warriors in particular. But in that case, Buddhist and Indo-Germanic ele-
ments must have been always clearly distinguished in the epic. If Brahmanic polemics
against the former left the latter untouched (hence necessitating a second round of
changes), then how does Holtzmann explain the fact that a Buddhist poet undertook
to become the preserver and compiler of the Indo-Germanic tradition? Either he did
not introduce any specifi cally Buddhist elements (or did so in a way indistinguishable
from the Indo-Germanic elements) or the fi rst Brahmanic revision would have taken
care of its Indo-Germanic and Buddhist predecessors at a single stroke. Further, if
the second revision was aimed principally at the warrior caste, why gather diff erent
versions of a Brahmanic text from diff erent parts of India? Surely the point was not
to send this new instrument of ideology back to Brahman communities? Still more
problematic, Holtzmann’s account failed to explain the continued existence, indeed,
the transmutation of the heroic Germanic warriors into enlightened, tolerant and
peace-loving Buddhists. Why were Brahmans seeking to radiate out a message, past
some three centuries of Buddhist culture, to pockets of a Germanic warrior tradi-
tion that seemingly had survived (within?) this culture? And how did he account
for the fact that the German poet had composed the epic on the very cusp of the
Brahmanic ascendancy but the two were now suddenly separated by approximately
three centuries of Buddhism? How could the poet have portrayed the “tragic struggle
of two principles; of knighthood, whose time is over; and of the newly arising poli-
tics, and presents the former to us in all the glory of a setting sun,” 73 if for a long time
between the two, the only new political or religious ideology had been Buddhism?
Either he was, in addition to being a “single and signifi cant poet,” also a powerful
prophet, or the confl ict Holtzmann was referring to had actually taken place between
the Indo-Germanic tradition and Buddhism. Holtzmann could not plausibly claim
that the poet was reporting on an actual confl ict between the two, when they, in
Holtzmann’s own account, were not contiguous traditions.
In spite of these diffi culties, Holtzmann tenaciously defended his thesis of a
Brahmanic takeover of a preexisting epic. Indeed, he explicitly imagined the revised
text as an instrument of Brahmanic polemics in an ongoing confl ict with the Buddhists:
It appears that the Brahmans, already at the beginning of the great battle dur-
ing the restitution of the Brahmanic dynasties (around 300 B C . . . ), brought out a
72 . Ibid., 150.
73 . Ibid., 89.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 97
revised Mahābhārata onto the battle-fi eld alongside [their] other weapons. A total
transformation of the literary treasure already present [Holtzmann means the
pre-Brahmanic, i.e., Buddhist literature], to the extent that it was not destined for
extermination, was absolutely necessary as preparation for taking up the battle
with Buddhism. Th e Mahābhārata too was made to undergo it [i.e., undergo such
a transformation]; the tendency of the work was strictly Brahmanic, the attitude
toward the non-Brahmanic members of the community was solely one of contempt,
an attitude that was only capable of seeing in [the] Buddha a deceptive corrupter
(“the deluder by illusion” V ish . P. Wilson III 206) and an enemy of the Vedas, who
led [others] to eternal damnation. Later, following the[ir] complete victory over
Buddhism, the Brahmans attempted to eliminate all memory of [the] B uddha ; what
could remind [people] of him and was not simply to be erased remained standing
under the title of Çiva [Śiva].7 4
Holtzmann also proposed a third redaction of the epic. Unlike his fi rst Brahmanic
revision directed against the Buddhists and the second Brahmanic revision directed
against the warrior, he did not make it clear what the purpose of this redaction was
other than to suggest it incorporated elements of Śaiva cosmology or philosophy into
the text:
Following the victory achieved over Buddhism, the Brahmans subjected the entire
epic literature to a general revision; the Mahābhārata was made as much like the
Puranas as possible and these like the Mahābhārata ascribed to a common author
Vyāsa . Th e hallmarks of this second revision are: reconciliation with Çiva [Śiva];
expansion of the narrative material through didactic sections; unusual expansion of
the extent of the work; insolence of the Brahmans driven to a peak; heightening of
Vishnuistic sectarianism and of the bias toward the Pā ṇḍava . Like the content, the
language and meter were fi nally fi xed.7 5
As with his theories of the fi rst two revisions of the text, there were a number of problems
with this idea of a third redaction. First, it shared the basic problem that it was unclear as
to which text he was referring to: did the Brahmans revise a single exemplar or did they
introduce Śaiva doctrines into all available manuscripts? If, as he suggested, the second
Brahmanic revision had to contend with multiple versions of the text, it seemed likely that
the third redaction also would have had to contend with diff erent versions of the revised
epic. However, Holtzmann did not provide a solution. He also remained silent on the ques-
tion of whether the same group of Brahmans was involved in this redaction as the previous
two revisions or whether it was a diff erent group. It seemed that the fi rst had been a group
of Vais ̣ ṇava Brahmans, so it was unclear why they would now suddenly include Śaiva ele-
ments in their text. It was also unclear whom they were targeting with this redaction: was
it their own Vai ṣ ṇava group or were they trying to appeal to Śaiva groups? Holtzmann also
had no answer to the question of how such a composite text might have been received
74 . Ibid., 151.
75 . Ibid., 152.
98 Chapter 02
amongst Vais ̣ ṇava circles: would they have accepted this new Śaiva text as their own?
Might they not have rejected a Śaiva Mahābhārata in preference for the original? From
Holtzmann’s statements, it appears that he did not make any distinction between the two
groups: for him, the point of the new redaction, as much as of the fi rst two revisions,
was to consolidate Brahmanic power. Th us, whereas he repeatedly lamented the loss and
destruction of the Indo-Germanic culture at the fi rst Brahmanic revision, we do not fi nd
any statements regarding the loss and destruction of Vais ̣ ṇava Brahman culture (if, indeed,
he made a distinction between diff erent groups of Brahmans) in the wake of the third
Brahmanic redaction. Finally, he also left the distinction between a revision and a redac-
tion unclear. It seems that he used the fi rst term preferentially to describe a Brahmanic
takeover of existing materials, especially since the German Umarbeitung has a sense of
transformation or inversion in perspective. (Th e related Ueberarbeitung , in contrast, has
the sense of a reworking or refashioning, but Holtzmann does not seem to make a pro-
grammatic distinction between the two.) In contrast, by redaction ( Redaction ) he appears
to have intended only the insertion and rearrangement of materials, without a transfer
of textual authority. But this distinction only further underscored the fact that he was
treating all Brahmanic groups alike and that he had not suffi ciently thematized the kinds
of textual processes he thought to be at work in the Mahābhārata’s evolution. In fact, what
he meant in both cases was not so much a textual evolution as diff erent kinds of histori-
cal falsifi cations, which he thought had been introduced into history by the Brahmans’
manipulation of texts such as the Mahābhārata. It was to counter these distortions that
he ultimately entered the Mahābhārata debate.
IDEAS OF HISTORICAL DISTORTION
Although the Indian epic stood at the center of Holtzmann’s book, it was clear from his
refl ections that his main concern was not to present an account of the Mahābhārata, but
of Brahmanism in general. As with the works of the British historians John Holwell and
Charles Grant, 76 Holtzmann’s book was in fact a contribution to the genre of Orientalist
accounts of the society and morals of the Hindus. Like the works of his predecessors, his
book also pursued a political agenda through its negative protrayals of Brahmans. And,
as in the case of Holwell and Grant, the thesis of a Brahmanic falsifi cation of history was
a major component of his arguments for critical oversight of the tradition. Holtzmann
made four charges in particular against the Brahmans:
1. “Th e Indians have not just neglected their historical science, but intentionally
obscured and falsifi ed it.” 77
76 . See John Zephaniah Holwell, A Review of the Original Principles, Religious and Moral,
of the Ancient Bramins: Comprehending an Account of the Mythology, Cosmogony, Fasts, and
Festivals, of the Gentoos, Followers of the Shastah (London: Printed for T. Vernor, 1779) and
Charles Grant, Observations on the State of Society among the Asiatic Subjects of Great Britain,
Particularly with Respect to Morals; and on the Means of Improving It (London: 1792).
77 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 95.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 99
2. “All the corruption of history [Geschichtsverderbniss] of our Scholastics and
Catholic priests is child’s play compared to the systematic falsifi cation and
destruction of all history by the Brahmans.” 78
3. “Th e Brahmans thereby eliminated all sense for the historical in their people,
so that even European scholars received the impression that one could not
speak of internal history and development in India but only of permanence and
ossifi cation.” 79
4. “Th e greatest enemy of Brahmanism is the historical spirit. Th e Brahman declares
[that] the world has always been the same and will [always] remain the same.” 80
In the fi nal chapter of his book, he then expanded these criticisms into a comprehen-
sive theory of how the Brahmans would have corrupted the Mahābhārata:
Just before and during the expulsion of Buddhists a general revision of the entire
epic literature took place, whose main goal was to make the diff erent works, the
Mahābhārata , the R āmāya ṇa , and the P urā ṇa conform to each other as much as pos-
sible. Th e tendency of this revision was that of leveling-down; the readers should
get the impression that actually the same thing stands [i.e., is said] everywhere [i.e.,
in all texts everywhere]. Th e greatest enemy of Brahmanism is the historical spirit.
Th e Brahman declares [that] the world has always been the same and will [always]
remain the same. 81
As Holtzmann saw it, Indian literature as a whole in all its manifestations suff ered
from Brahmanic corruption. Th ere was no work that they had not infi ltrated in some
way with their doctrines, gods, or representations of social order and this was, for
him, clearly a problem that needed to be combated:
78 . Ibid., 96. Holtzmann lists Bunsen’s letters to Max Müller as the source of the pas-
sage; the text is our translation of his German. In Bunsen’s text, the word “child’s play
[Kinderspiel]” is emphasized; see the letter from April 23, 1856 in Essays von Max Müller ,
vol. 3, ed. and trans. Felix Liebrecht (Leipzig: Wilhelm Engelmann, 1872), 472. For an
English translation, see Christian Karl Josias von Bunsen, “Letter to Max Müller, April
23, 1856,” in Chips from a German Workshop , ed. Max Müller, vol. 3 (New York: Scribner,
Armstrong, and Co., 1876), 459–60, but this translation is fl awed. “Scholastiker” is not
just “schoolteachers,” but refers to the Scholastics. Likewise, “Pfaff en” is not just “priests,”
but refers to C atholic priests, the term having acquired the meaning of a derogatory term
for them after Luther (see Deutsches Wörterbuch , s.v. “Pfaff en”). Also interesting in this
context is Bunsen’s remark: “I soon recognized that you [i.e., Müller] were a bsolutely right
that the chronological investigations into Indian antiquity had led to nothing more certain
than the conviction that the earlier views, with few exceptions, were either erroneous or
unfounded. As soon as I arrived at this conviction, upon reading the best works on the sub-
ject (Lassen and Roth), I grew furious in my spirit, as happens to me from time to time . . . . ”
Christian Karl Josias von Bunsen, “Brief an Max Müller vom 17. Juli 1856,” in Essays von
Max Müller , vol. 3, ed. and trans. Felix Liebrecht (Leipzig: Wilhelm Engelmann, 1872), 484
(Bunsen’s emphasis).
79 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 104.
80 . Ibid., 152–53.
81 . Ibid., 152–53 (emphasis in original).
100 Chapter 02
From the beginning onward, India [i.e., Indians] worshipped the Brahmans and
Vish ṇu ; deifi cation of the Brahmans and worship of V ish ṇu also had to be taught to
the same extent everywhere in the epic poetry, one set the number of the Purā ṇas
at eighteen; [and] one counted just as many books in the Mahābhārata and the
great battle was stretched out to [fi ll] exactly as many days. Th e eighteen Purā ṇas
and the Mahābhārata , however, all have the same composer, V yāsa ; [and] hence
eventual contradictions in them are only apparent; all these works have the same
content. It is clear that V yāsa is and means nothing other than the personifi cation
of the general revision of the entire epic literature (we ignore the V eda completely
for the moment). Whatever of importance and signifi cance stood in one work may
not be lacking in the Mahābhārata and vice versa. Th us, all these works contain a
section on the description of the world with lists of mountains, rivers, and peo-
ples: these sections appear to have a common source, now lost. One of the main
failures of the M ahābhārata seemed to be that it narrated too little about K ṛsh ṇa ;
that is why accounts about his deeds and his divinity were extracted from puranic
sources [and] scattered through the entire poem, and, as this appeared not to be
enough, an appendix, the Hariva ṁça , was incorporated into the work [i.e., into the
Mahābhārata]. Many pieces were taken out of the diff erent P urā ṇạs and [inserted]
into the M ahābhārata in a shortened form; thus in the third book the sections about
Skanda ; the lists of the pilgrimage sites in the third and the ninth [book]; and much
about duty and law, sacrifi ce and the caste system in the thirteenth [book]. Th e
intent of the Brahmans was fulfi lled: the same thing stands in the M ahābhārata as
in the P urā ṇa and across wide stretches of the former the same tone of tedious-
ness prevails, the same intellectual vapidity and thoughtlessness as in the latter. Th e
Rāmāya ṇa , too, whose last Vishnuistic revision occurs in this period, was brought
into the greatest possible accordance with the M ahābhārata and both [works] mutu-
ally borrow episodes and individual passages from each other. 82
Brahmanic corruption of texts, for Holtzmann, thus essentially manifested in
three forms.
1. Th ere was a disregard for genre and style, as these could contain clues to historical
periods.
2. Brahmans also sought to confound the contexts of texts insofar as they contained
references that could indicate historical details.
3. At a bibliographic and biographic level, they systematically combined and con-
fused texts so as to give the impression of a single monolithic tradition.
As he saw it, the Brahmans one by one assimilated various texts into each other,
imposed the same structure and the same divisions, copied passages from one text
into another, and leveled out all distinctions. “Th e intent of the Brahmans was
fulfi lled,” Holtzmann wrote. “Th e same thing stands in the Mahābhārata as in the
Purā ṇa and across wide stretches of the former the same tone of tediousness prevails,
82 . Ibid., 153.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 101
the same intellectual vapidity and thoughtlessness as in the latter.” 83 According to
him, the pinnacle of Brahmanic corruption could be seen from the way they fi nally
ascribed entire classes of literature (the eighteen Purā ṇas, the four Vedas, and the
Mahābhārata) to a Brahman, namely, Vyāsa. It is not clear whether, when Holtzmann
spoke of Vyāsa, he meant a fi ctional character or a real person. At times, he speaks of
Vyāsa being written into the epic, perhaps as a kind of cipher for the Brahmanic take-
over of the text and it is clear that when he spoke of the eighteen Purā ṇas, etc., being
ascribed to Vyāsa, he meant a literary reference. At other times, he clearly thought
Vyāsa was a historical personage, as, for instance, when he blamed him for the intro-
duction of Brahmanic blood into the Indo-Germanic line. But in any case, Holtzmann
took this threat emerging from Vyāsa quite seriously. A large part of his critical enter-
prise was dedicated to undoing the eff ects of Brahmanic corruption of the texts. Th is
entailed not only the separation out of Brahmanic from non-Brahmanic sections, but
also the writing out of Brahmans from the text.
Th e clearest statement of Holtzmann’s ideas of the various Brahmanic revisions
of the epic and their underlying motivations can be found in this concluding chapter.
He writes:
So that one could narrate [the story of] V yāsa and his version of the M ahābhārata ,
the frame narrative of the older reworking of the snake sacrifi ce of king Janamejaya
had now to be embedded in another story; so followed a second enframing . Th e cur-
rent redaction recounts how U graçravas , the son of Lomaharsha ṇa , takes part in the
Naimisha forest in a twelve-year-long sacrifi cial festival, and narrates the story of
the snake sacrifi ce to the priests and observers there; in this story, V aiçampāyana
again presents the entire Mahābhārata . Th is enclosure is defi nitely puranic, for
many Purā ṇas are also narrated during the occasion of the Naimisha -sacrifi ce
and the introduction in these agrees almost verbatim with the fi rst verses of our
Mahābhārata at present. Now, however, U graçravas , the speaker of the second
revision is, according to the statements of the Indians themselves, a generation
younger than Vaiçampāyana , the speaker of the fi rst [revision]; not he, but his
father L omaharsha ṇa is a direct pupil of V yāsa . . . and also contemporaneous with
Vaiçampāyana . . . thus, the Mahābhārata recited at the time of the son is younger
than that presented at the time of the father. More clearly than this, where it con-
cerns history, an Indian cannot express himself. What sense does it make to high-
light that the Mahābhārata was narrated twice, fi rst during the snake sacrifi ce and
then during the N aimisha -sacrifi ce, if one is to associate with this the message that
it was entirely the same poem both times? Is not thereby indicated and excused the
fact that the present recension, that of Ugraçravas , is a later revision of the older
[revision] of Vaiçampāyana ? What the latter recites is our fi rst Brahmanic revision,
what is narrated in the Naimisha forest is our second [revision], which thereby
places the poem along the same lines as the Purā ṇa fi rst presented in the same for-
est at the same occasion. 84
83 . Ibid.
84 . Ibid., 155–56 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
102 Chapter 02
Here we see that for Holtzmann the essential principle of Brahmanic revision was to
obscure historical events. Whereas the older epic had been a historical account and
had involved real partisans, the later epic, according to him, was more or less a fab-
rication. In particular, he placed a great deal of weight upon the fact that there was,
as he put it, a “diff erence among the listeners at both performances.” Th us whereas
“ Vaiçampāyana narrate[d] the fi rst M ahābhārata to the king, his priests, and council-
lors; U graçravas narrate[d] the second not at the court of Ç atānīka , but before wise
men in the forest, whose leader is Çaunaka.”8 5 Holtzmann took this reference to the
narration of the Mahābhārata to king Janamejaya as evidence of its K ṣatriya origins.
He argued that the fact that the fi rst Mahābhārata (the fi rst revision) was narrated to
a king at a court, while the second Mahābhārata (the second revision) was narrated
to Brahmans in a hermitage suggested a shift in the epic’s contents and outlook. Th us
whereas the fi rst narration corresponded to the Brahmanic revision of the Buddhist
composition at the court of a king (perhaps Aśoka), the second corresponded to the
second Brahmanic revision, once the epic had been completely assimilated to the
Purā ṇas and to Purā ṇic ideology.
But although Holtzmann thought this double narration bore out his theories
of epic composition, there were a number of problems with his argument. First, he
did not explain why, if the point was to obscure all traces of the heroic knightly ori-
gin of the epic, the Brahmans would have retained a narration to king Janamejaya.
Second, he had placed only the Buddhist poetic composition at the court of a king,
not its Brahmanic revision. Th us, in theory, the fi rst narration of the poem could
already have occurred in the Naimi ṣa Forest to a circle of Brahman seers. Th ird, if
the Brahmans had, as he claimed, undertaken a revision of the epic with the express
intent of impressing their ethics, social codes, and religious outlook on the Germanic
warriors, why would they locate its narration in the Naimis ̣a Forest? Although explic-
itly aimed at converting warriors to their cause (Holtzmann wrote: “Th at this revi-
sion was especially intended for the warrior caste, which since time immemorial had
been fascinated with the epic, is most likely, given the material and contents of the
work”8 6 ), the epic’s audience in the fi nal redaction appears to have shrunk to a small
circle of Brahmans living in a forest hermitage. Surely, if Holtzmann’s views of the
Mahābhārata as an instrument of Brahmanic propaganda were correct, this narra-
tion of a Brahmanic epic ought to have been set at the court of kings, with the heroes
and warriors prominently expressing assent. Finally, he saw in Sa ṁjaya’s narration
to Dh ṛtarā ṣtṛ a the archetype of the Indo-Germanic bardic tradition. Although he did
not explicitly clarify whether this narration itself was the old Indo-Germanic epic he
had sought, it seems that he conceived of this narration as older than Vaiśa ṁpāyana’s
narration. Th us, he wrote that “in the main part of our epic” concerning “the descrip-
tion of the great battle,” “V aiçampāyana gives the word to S anjaya , the friend of
Dh ṛtarāsht ṛa . Every evening, after he has come back from the battle, S anjaya narrates
to the blind king the events of the day, at fi rst very briefl y [and] then in detail.” 87 From
85 . Ibid., 156.
86 . Ibid., 150.
87 . Ibid., 157.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 103
his perspective, these three narrations coincided neatly with their proposed categories
and locations: the Indo-Germanic epic unfolded between a bard and a king on a battle-
fi eld; the Brahmanic epic between a Brahman and a king at a court; and the Purān ̣ic
between Brahmans in a hermitage. But although each of these occurred in precise
sequence, this still left Holtzmann’s Buddhist poetic composition unaccounted for.
Surely if this was the fi rst written epic, it should be the most prominent of all. Only
in one passage did Holtzmann off er a clue as to where he located this Buddhist com-
position in the Mahābhārata. Noting that “ Buddha converts the Sanjaya in Magadha
(Oldenberg Buddha p. 138),” he argued that this “identity of names . . . could be coinci-
dental,” but then clearly drew the opposite conclusion as he noted that “we thus have
three narrators: Sanjaya, Vaiçampāyana, Ugraçravas and three listeners: D h ṛtarāsht ̣ra,
Janamejaya, Çaunaka , which would agree with our assumption of an original poem
[Urgedichts] and two revisions.”8 8 From this reference, it seems that Holtzmann saw
Sam ̇jaya’s narration to Dh ṛtrās ̣tṛa as not only the prototype of the Indo-Germanic
epic but somehow also related to its Buddhist composition. But in that case, why did
he make a distinction between the Indo-Germanic and the Brahmanic traditions, if
he did not see that Indo-Germanic and Buddhist traditions as being separate? Surely
if the Indo-Germanic culture could evolve into a Buddhist culture, it could also have
evolved into Brahmanism. What distinguished Buddhism and Brahmanism?
IDEAS OF ENLIGHTENED RELIGION
In reading Holtzmann’s Mahābhārata, we cannot miss the tone of fear at being
overrun or overtaken by foreigners. Words such as “Überfremdung” (alienation),
“Untergang” (decline), “Verwischung” (loss of identity), “Vertreibung” (expulsion),
“Umwälzung” (upheaval), “Umgestaltung” (transformation), “Umdichtung” (recom-
position) and “Umarbeitung” (revision), as well as terms such as “Verunstaltung”
(defacement), and “Verderbung” (ruination) suggest a pervasive anxiety regarding
foreign domination.8 9 Th e language is always cataclysmic, the events always presented
as a loss of purity or an eff acement of identity. Th ese fears, as much as a desire to recover
a pure Indo-Germanic origin, are at the root of Holtzmann’s reconstruction of the epic’s
history. Th e following passages may serve to give the reader an idea of the depth of his
opposition to a racial and/or cultural confusion:
Buddhism, namely, which one had already compared in its beginning [stages] with
Protestantism (Benfey Orient und Occident I 139 or Kl. Schftn. I 279), was soon
88 . Ibid.
89 . For “Untergang,” see ibid., 57, 102, 130, 133, 136, and 195; for “Verwischung”
(in the form “verwischt”), 16, 71, 72, 142; for “Vertreibung,” 102, 152, 166 and 195; for
“Umwälzung,” 57, 94, 96, 131; for “Umgestaltung,” 14, 96, 106 (“umgestalten”), 131, 191,
195; for “Umdichtung” (in the form “umzudichten”), 174; for “Umarbeitung,” 6, 14, 96, 106,
131, 191, 195; for “Verunstaltung,” 69, 100, 195; for “Verderbung,” 46 (“verderbten”), 118
(“verderbt”), 148 (“verderblich”). Holtzmann does not use the term Überfremdung , but related
words such as “fremd” and “befremdend”; see ibid., 14, 23, 90, 100, 116, 126, and 161.
104 Chapter 02
corrupted through its association with the barren magic of Çivaismus [Śivaism],
whose root, on the one hand, must be sought in the wild demonic cult of the natives . On
Dravidian religion, it suffi ces here to point out the interesting essay by Caldwell (ancient
religion of the Dravidians) at the end of his V ergleichenden Grammatik [Comparative
Grammar]. It [i.e., Śivaism] was and is comprised, according to its [very] essence, of
the worship of evil spirts, bhūta , through frenzied dances and repulsive sacrifi ces: even
today in Malayala-country, garlic skins, nails, hair, leeches, lizards are off ered to the
bhūtas, narrates the missionary Karl Graul in his Reise nach Ostindien III (1854) 228;
among higher animals [however] only the cock ibid., III 185; these sacrifi ces are pro-
cured by Brahmans of a lower rank, who have dedicated themselves to the service of
the original demons of the country, [that is] of the d urdevatā( ibid., III 228. 334 n. 14).
Especially the local divinities, the grāmadevatā , are almost always such demons, Graul
III 73. Th is service to the b hūtas also passed from the natives over to the newcomers, as
the epic and the Puranas clearly illustrate. 90
Furthermore, this demonism has been regarded a s a precursor of Çivaismus[ Śivaism],
especially by Köppen, who (“der Religion des Buddha” II 1859, p. 29ff .) expresses the
view that the rise of Çivaismus is till now an unsolved riddle, but it is probably not
Aryan, but rather, arose from the wild demonic cult of the aborigines . . . . Karl Graul
too arrived at the same conviction, [in India] on the ground; he calls Çivaismus “a trans-
plant borrowed from the demonic worship of the Indian aboriginal population and
grafted onto Brahmanism” III 187, “a left-over of the sinister nature worship that per-
vaded India before Brahmanic religion” III 69. In Malayala-country the same repulsive
sacrifi ces are off ered to Çiva [Śiva] and K ālī , and naturally also occasionally to Vish ṇu ,
as to the b hūtas III 228 and the local divinities, g rāmadevatā , to whom an orthodox
Brahman never off ers sacrifi ce, [but who] are without exception devils belonging to the
family or the retinue of Çiva III 73. 91
Curiously, Holtzmann does not appear to have seen an opposition between Indo-
Germanic and Buddhist culture. On the contrary, as we have seen, he looked on
Buddhism favorably and even considered a Buddhist poet working, however improb-
ably, at the court of Aśoka to have been the author of the fi rst written version of the
epic. Indeed, he considered Buddhism to have only succcumbed to the attacks of the
Brahmans because of a “weakening” 92 that took place it once it entered into contact
with aboriginal traditions:
Th at now a f usion of Buddhism with Çivaismus [Śivaism] and therewith also with the
demonology of the aborigines took place, that Çivaismus corrupted and defaced
Buddhism is a very illuminating suggestion of Köppen, Buddha II 243. It was
Çivaismus that introduced foreign elements into the circle of Buddha’s follow-
ers: magic and the demonic cult, magical chants, magical circles, incantations, poss-
essions, resurrection of the dead I 558 II 29, whose monstrous idols [are] found [at
90 . Ibid., 99 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
91 . Ibid., 99–100 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
92 . Ibid., 98.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 105
the] entrance to Buddhist temples I 505. In those same temples, next to the image
of the B uddha, Çiva as the protector, defender, and avenger of religion and of the
Church found a place next to his black spouse, Kālī II 29. 260; the necklace of skulls
[Schädelkranz] that he wore around his neck had transformed itself into the rosary
[Rosenkranz] of the Buddhists II 319. . . . It was the older Çivaismus that trans-
formed the teaching of the B uddha into this barren confusion one calls shamanism
[and] that is characterized by a belief in spirits, spells, and magic. 93
Th ereafter, Buddhism off ered an easy target for “the attacks of the newly revived
Brahmanism,”9 4 especially since a religion preaching a “message of tolerance and
suff ering,” according to Holtzmann, “lacked the correct basis” to defend itself. 95 He
claimed that “ Çiva ” had to become a part of the Buddhist pantheon “as the vengeful
defender of their faith” in their struggle against Brahmanism. 96 Th e alliance however
was to no avail. Like the Indo-Germans before them, the Buddhists found themselves
in the dilemma that any attempt to strengthen themselves through an alliance with
local faiths or local peoples had the eff ect of simultaneously weakening them as much
as if they permitted foreign elements to penetrate their religion. As with the epic
tradition, Holtzmann therefore saw Buddhism as being caught in a tragic struggle,
where it was only a matter of time before it would be overrun by Brahmanism.
Th e story Holtzmann recounted of Buddhism was thus essentially identical to the
one he recounted of the Indo-Germanic tradition. Indeed, he seems to have considered
Buddhism an organic outgrowth of the latter. In his narrative, as Protestantism was to
Germanic antiquity, Buddhism was to Indo-Germanic antiquity. Buddhism, for him,
represented the fulfi llment of the rational spirit of the former. In essential aspects, it
replicated Protestantism: it was a tolerant, rational, and austere faith that, at least in
its purer incarnations, had little patience with ritual and even less for Brahman priests.
Little wonder, then, that he explicitly described it in terms of an Enlightenment:
Th e rise, growth, battle and decline of Buddhism could not but leave its traces in
the development of the Indian race; B uddhism and Indian literature , in particular,
must have mutually infl uenced each other much more strongly than it is possible to
realize given the present state of research. Such a violent catastrophe as the expul-
sion of a religion that stood for so long in full blossom and was battled with all the
means of politics and of science could not remain without a powerful infl uence on
the development of Indian literature. Art and poetry were eagerly pursued at the
courts of Buddhist kings; indeed, Th eodor Benfey was inclined to ascribe even the
scientifi c development of grammar, that is, one of the most illustrious aspects of
Indian intellectual activity, to Buddhism: “Th e blossoming of the intellectual life of
the Indians proceeded essentially from Buddhism. I have many reasons to think
that even one of the most illustrious points of Indian intellectual development,
[namely] grammar, was a Buddhist creation” P ancatantra I p. XIII. Th e same [i.e.,
93 . Ibid., 100–101.
94 . Ibid.
95 . Ibid., 102.
96 . Ibid.
106 Chapter 02
Benfey] Kleinere Schriften I 209: “It is becoming ever more obvious that almost the
entirety of the higher intellectual existence of the Indians proceeded predominantly
from Buddhism and [that] this [i.e., Buddhism], as long as it blossomed in India, had
the greatest and most recent share in this [development].” [Benfey too in volume I,
p. 222] presents the same [thesis], that Buddhism “created a vital artistic and scien-
tifi c life, which also had a highly signifi cant infl uence outside of its religious circle”;
it was “borne and fulfi lled by the most vital scientifi c consciousness” I 244. [Now
continuing in his own voice, Holtzmann adds:] One can fi rst speak of an Indian
history and literary history when we have succeeded in once again reconquering for
Buddhism its infl uential position in the course of the development of Indian life.9 7
If we [now] return to the times of Buddhism when it was still young, to the c ourt
of Açoka and his dynasty , we fi nd all conditions fulfi lled there which would make the
appearance of a great blossoming of the poetic art likely. In that time, “the land
[i.e., India] scaled such a high level of political and social development as never
again later, and the administration of state and the political constitution were in all
respects so well ordered as only at this one time [in history]” Lassen II 713. 98
Th e repulsion of the Macedonians, the successful war against the Seleucids, the
fi nal liberation from the Greek yoke must have had all the more vitalizing an eff ect
on the Indian national consciousness. To be sure, Max Müller anc. lit. p. 30 says: “the
Indian never knew the feeling of national unity”; but, as it now appears, unfairly. Th e
battle against the Hellenes brought the Indians to a consciousness of their national
solidarity and the upswing of patriotic feeling enabled a capable royal family to unite
all of north India under a single local sceptre. As a rule, a period of blossoming of
national literature follows such times of fortunately ended civil wars, national prog-
ress, and growing prosperity . . . . If [furthermore] we also add the powerful impulse
that the teaching of the B uddhae xercised on the intellectual life of the Indians of the
time, then we may see the times of C andragupta , of Açoka , and their dynasty as being,
from the very outset, highly conducive to the blossoming of a national literature.9 9
Essentially, Holtzmann’s characterization of Buddhism can be reduced to fi ve points:
1. Buddhism was conducive to “a consciousness of . . . national solidarity.”
2. It was a period marked by the “upswing of patriotic feeling,” and the “[unifi cation
of] all of north India under a single local sceptre.”
3. In a “time of fortunately ended civil wars,” “national progress,” and “growing pros-
perity,” a growth in scientifi c knowledge ensued.
4. Patronage of “art and poetry” at “the courts of Buddhist kings,” was conducive to
the “scientifi c development of grammar” and the “blossoming of the intellectual
life of the Indians.”
5 . Finally, this was also the period that saw the creation of “a vital artistic and scien-
tifi c life,” “borne and fulfi lled by the most vital scientifi c consciousness.”
97 . Ibid., 102–3.
98 . Ibid., 104 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
99 . Ibid., 105.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 107
Holtzmann also explicitly compared Aśoka to king Frederick I of Prussia and the
Enlightenment philosopher and critic, Lessing. He wrote that although “ Açoka
[Aśoka] appears to have felt himself to be a Buddhist somewhat more seriously
than Constantine, who is so often compared to him, was a Christian, he nonethe-
less deserves to be termed a follower of the Buddha only in the same broad but true
sense as that in which we call Frederick the Great and Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
Protestants.”1 00 In yet another passage, he introduced Buddhism in terms that sug-
gest he saw a parallel between the Enlightened tolerance of Frederick I and the reli-
gious pluralism of Aśoka:
Th e religion that A çoka introduced at his court was a plural religion just like that
later of the great Moghul Akbar [the reference is to Din-i-Ilahi, a religion founded
by Akbar]; he himself was “more a human than a Buddhist and as a ruler too clever
to force Buddhist dogmas onto his subjects, that is why he consistently empha-
sized the universal human in his edicts” Weber Ind. Strf. III 285. [Now continuing,
Holtzmann adds:] His inscriptions recommend a universal tolerance and ethics that
is nobler than all ceremonial ritual [Ceremoniendienst]; they all preach peaceable-
ness and religious toleration, while they only refer rarely to the B uddha .1 01
Th ese passages suggest that when Holtzmann presented Buddhism in terms reminis-
cent of eighteenth-century Germany, he did not merely intend to describe it in terms
his readers might be familiar with. Rather, he seems to have wished the comparison
to be read literally. In his project to recover the ancient Indo-Germanic tradition,
Buddhism constituted the counterpart to Protestantism in the East. It off ered him a
way of creating a certain narrative of the Germanic peoples in which there was a direct
connection between their heroic, tribal culture and the scientifi c achievements of the
Enlightenment. In a number of passages, Holtzmann explicitly affi rmed this con-
nection. Writing of Aśvatthāman’s nighttime massacre of the sleeping warriors (an
undertaking in which he is aided by the goddess Kālī), he noted that the fact that he
carried out his massacre “almost without accomplices” “suggests that the old legend
provided him [i.e., Aśvatthāman] with one of the old gods as a helper, whose involve-
ment, however, was at fi rst completely eliminated by the Enlightenment [Aufklärung],
but later on reintroduced under the name of one of the new gods. 102 Although the
sole occurrence of the term Aufklärung in Holtzmann’s Mahābhārata, the use of this
term to describe the Buddhist stage of the epic is signifi cant. He also used the terms
Gegenreformation (Counter-Reformation) and R eligionskriege (wars of religion) to
describe the confl ict between Buddhism and Brahmanism. 103 In the same passage, he
also spoke of “the hard and bloody battle” between Brahmanism and Buddhism and
of the “extermination” of Buddhism following a successful Counter-Reformation.1 04
100 . Ibid., 116.
101 . Ibid.
102 . Ibid., 122.
103 . Ibid., 98.
104 . Ibid.
108 Chapter 02
IDEAS OF RELIGIOUS PERSECUTION
In this assimilation of Buddhism to Protestantism, it was very important for
Holtzmann to underscore the damage done to Buddhism by Brahmanism. Just as the
rise of Brahmanism had been harmful to the Indo-Germanic tradition, so, too, was
its revival in the eighth century devastating to Buddhism. In the story Holtzmann
told, the Indo-Germanic and Buddhist periods constituted one seamless entity. In
his opinion, left to itself, the Indo-Germanic tradition would have continued in a
transformed yet essentially similar form in Buddhism, much like the Germanic
tribes found their truest fulfi llment in Protestantism. Brahmanic resurgence, how-
ever, disrupted this continuity, threatening to rupture German history at its source.
Obviously, something had to be done and that something, Holtzmann proposed, was
to counter Brahmanism by exposing or perhaps even reversing its falsifi cations and
corruptions. But before we look at how Holtzmann envisaged Mahābhārata criticism
as a form of historical intervention, it is important to fi rst understand how he con-
ceived of the relationship of Buddhism to Brahmanism.
In the story of Germanic betrayal Holtzmann recounted, the narrative of persecu-
tion occupied an important place. For him, it was important to portray the Buddhists,
no less than the ancient Indo-Germans, as a persecuted people. From his perspective,
the free-thinking, independent spirit of the Germans made them a target for oth-
ers. As he saw it, the history of the Germanic peoples was one long story of being
forced to abase themselves before lesser peoples. For instance, citing Tacitus, he
argued that German warriors found death preferable to surrender. Holtzmann also
made frequent reference to the way the ancient Indo-Germans were defeated by the
treachery of non-Āryan tribes, who did not adhere to the heroic code of the Germans.
But his most explicit criticisms were reserved for the persecution the Buddhists—
allegedly—suff ered at the hands of the Brahmans. Indeed, it is here that he fi rst
introduced the idea of religious persecution, via the use of the word Ketzer (here-
tic). Th e term, dating back to the eleventh or twelfth century, was originally used in
the sense of h aereticus . It is thought to have originated with the Manichean sect of
the Cathari (K atharoi ,the pure). Variants are present throughout Europe; although
the origin is lost, the word was placed in a certain relationship to the cat (German
Katze ), the devil’s animal. 105 Before we look more closely at the meanings associated
with the term, let us consider its occurrences in Holtzmann’s Mahābhārata. In all,
Holtzmann used Ketzer and related terms a total of 16 times. Th e greatest concentra-
tion of terms occurs in chapters 13 (8 occurrences) and 15 (3 occurrences), followed
by chapter 12 (2 occurrences). Th e term occurs only once within chapters 5, 14, and
16. Th us, half of all occurrences can be found in c hapter 13 (“Traces of Buddhism
in the Present Mahābhārata”). Th e most frequent form is Ketzer (11 occurrences,
including the dative plural Ketzern ), followed by K ezterei (heresy) and Ketzerhass
(hatred of heretics) (2 occurrences each). Finally, Ketzersecte (heretic sect) occurs
105 . Deutsches Wörterbuch , s.v. “Ketzer.”
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 109
only once—a reference to the Cārvākas, who according to Holtzmann are a symbol in
the Mahābhārata for the “extirpation” of Buddhism.1 06 Th ree of these references are
especially signifi cant. Writes Holtzmann:
1. “ In the Bhagavatapurā ṇa 6, 8, 17 B uddha is represented as an incaration of Vish ṇu
and is invoked for protection against heresy [Ketzerei].” 107
2. “ When Manu 4, 30 says that a heretic [Ketzer] is not to be greeted, the one com-
mentator explains the word pāshan ̣ḍin , heretic [Ketzer], with: Buddhist, the other
with: ascetic in a red robe, Bühler Manu p. 133.”1 08
3. “ In the B hāgavata Purā ṇa, Çiva occasionally still comes out looking bad; his follow-
ers are called heretics [Ketzer] ( pāshan ̣ḍa ) 4, 2, 32; of the Vishnuites, it is said that
they desert the ghorarūpān bhūtapatīn 1, 2, 26.”1 09
Why did Holtzmann seize upon this one term to characterize the relationship of
Buddhism to Brahmanism? Positively, he had already identifi ed Buddhism with
Protestantism and attributed it characteristics he associated with the Enlightenment
such as economic, social, and scientifi c progress. However, this still left its relation-
ship to Brahmanism underdetermined. Holtzmann regarded Brahmanism as a back-
ward faith and thought that only a violent Counter-Reformation had permitted it to
regain control over the Indian subcontinent. But he still needed to characterize the
relationship of Brahmanism to Buddhism more precisely. Th e reference to Buddhists
as pāshan ̣ḍa (atheists or those following false doctrines) gave him a way to do this.
Curiously, though, in the 14 instances where he used the term (16 if we count
the derivatives), only four were based on actual textual references. Th ese four were
to Bhāgavata Purā ṇa 6.8.19 (incorrectly cited as 6.8.17), Bhāgavata Purā ṇa 4.2.32,
Manusm ṛti 4.30, and an incomplete reference to B ṛhannāradīyapurā ṇa. Except for
these four, Holtzmann’s use of Ketzer appears to have been on his own initiative.
Further, the texts he cited did not refer to Buddhists literally as Ketzer, but used the
Sanskrit pāshan ̣ḍa instead.1 10 Holtzmann took both these passages as referring to
Ketzer. However, Amarakośa expounds pā ṣa ṇḍam as v aidikamārgaviruddhi (opponent
of the Vedic path) and du ḥ ṣāstravartin (follower of the wrong ś āstra ). In both instances,
the term refers to religious confl ict not in the sense of Holtzmann’s R eligionskrieg , but
in the sense of a philosophical debate concerning correct understanding (and a correct
way of life based upon this understanding). Th e translation heterodox , which contains
the Greek doxa ( opinio , opinion), is perhaps closer to what is meant.
106 . See Holtzmann Jr., Z ur Geschichte und Kritik , 36 and 103 (for “Ketzerei”); 106, 108,
110, 111, 118, 122, 127, 140, 150, and 193 (for “Ketzer”); 109 (for “Ketzersecte”); 118 and
140 (for “Ketzerhass”).
107 . Ibid., 103.
108 . Ibid., 110–11.
109 . Ibid., 150.
110 . See Bhāgavata Purā ṇa 6.8.19: dvaipāyano bhagavān aprabodhād buddhastu
pā ṣa ṇḍaga ṇapramādāt / kalki ḥ kaleh ̣ kālamalāt prapātu dharmāvanāyoruk ṛtāvatāran ̣ / and
Bhāgavata Purā ṇa 4.2.32: tad brahma parama ṁ śuddha ṃ satā ṃ vartma sanātanam / vigarhya
yāta pā ṣa ṇḍa ṃ daiva ṃ vo yatra bhūta-rā ṭ || .
110 Chapter 02
From Holtzmann’s perspective, however, the translation of pāshan ̣ḍa by Ketzer was
more expedient. Holtzmann wanted to construe the relationship between Buddhism
and Brahmanism on analogy with that between Protestantism and Catholicism and
the term K etzer , with its associations with the Counter-Reformation, gave him a way
to do so. His uncle, Adolf Holtzmann Sr., had been vicar in Kandern and it is thus quite
likely that he was aware of the implications of labeling Buddhists heretics. Crucially,
by attributing the use of the term to the Brahmans, he could play on Protestant fears
of Catholic misuse of authority. Grimm’s dictionary notes: “Protestants and reformed
were and are then overwhelmingly called ketzer among Catholics; for example,
Schönsleder clarifi es [the meaning of] ketzerei using [terms such as] ‘Luthertum,
Calvinum profi teri.’ ”1 11 Th e appellation K etzer could be a death sentence, as it was in
the case of several Reformers. Th e indiscriminate use of Ketzer seems to have been
designed to suggest a connection between Brahmanism and Catholicism.
In pursuit of this goal, Holtzmann often used the term in relation to the
Buddhists. For instance, in his use of the term on pages 108 to 109 and on 118, he
confused a textual argument with a historical argument. As we have seen earlier,
Holtzmann claimed that the earliest poetic composition had been composed at the
court of a Buddhist king. It ought therefore to bear traces of this Buddhist infl uence.
However, later redactors, being hostile to Buddhism, revised the epic, presenting
Duryodhana, Kar ṇa, and others (who Holtzmann thought were possibly fi ctional-
ized characters based on actual Buddhist kings or heroes) in an unfl attering light.
Holtzmann specifi cally pointed to the fact that Duryodhana has heretical traits in
the Mahābhārata such as refusing to acknowledge the divinity of K ṛ ṣ ṇa and perse-
cuting his followers. Th e argument has a superfi cial appeal, since it appears plausible
that a persecuted group might create a fi ctional account portraying their persecu-
tors in a negative light, above all as heretics and evil men destined to fall. But when
we look more closely at Holtzmann’s account, we fi nd a number of problems with
the argument. To begin with, the Brahmans did not have a blank page before them.
Rather, as he explicitly argued, they took over a preexisting epic, the so-called poetic
Buddhist composition. Further, they not only had to revise this text, reversing the
balance between the good and evil sides, but as Holtzmann explicitly claimed in the
Ketzer-passage on page 109, they also had to “excis[e] ” the names of the originally
good side (who now took on the role of the aggressors in the revised epic).1 12 But how
could the Brahmans, on the one hand, undertake to erase the memory of the hereti-
cal movement of Buddhism and, on the other hand, also undertake an inversion of
the poem? Either their intent could have been to portray the Buddhists as heretics
or to deny their existence; but the only way to claim that they wished to do both is to
confuse a historical argument with a textual one, as Holtzmann in fact did.
Holtzmann seems to have been unaware of these tensions in his work. Obsessed
with drawing a parallel between Brahmanism and Catholicism and with showing
how, in the absence of the German critic, the Counter-Reformation had succeeded
in India, he overlooked the fact that he was trying to attribute two contradictory
111 . Deutsches Wörterbuch , s.v. “Ketzer.”
112 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 109.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 111
motivations to the Brahmans at the same time. From his perspective, it seemed
self-evident that the Brahmans would seek in every way to gain the upper hand over
the Buddhists. Th us, they would seek not only to invert the fundamental ethical
and social values of the epic but also to excise certain details such as all references
favorable to Duryodhana and to conceal or change the identities of Duryodhana and
his allies, who could not be recognized as Buddhist rulers or as being based upon
Buddhist rulers. As he noted, “excessive polemics” by “arous[ing] curiousity and
doubt in the reader” could have the opposite eff ect to the one intended. 113 Hence,
he argued, the Brahmans were forced into two kinds of responses: they could either
oppose or, alternately, obscure the text. Under the fi rst rubric, he included all the
passages he thought had been intentionally retained as a warning to the readers, as
well as those he thought the Brahmanic redactors overlooked. In the Ketzer-passage
on page 118, he thought he had found the archetype of all such references. In his
opinion, the reference to the Cārvakas in this passage was intended as an oblique
reference to the “exterminated Buddhism.”1 14 As he described it,
After the priests had attained complete victory, they to be sure did not let the lit-
erature of the Buddhists fully vanish, but they completely revised whatever they
considered worth preserving and carefully removed all elements that opposed their
system. Th ey attained their goal; it was as though the Buddhah ad never lived, his teach-
ing never ruled. Th erewith, the Brahmans exterminated the historical sense in their
race completely, so that even European scholarship got the impression that one can
hardly speak of inner history and development in India, [but] only of permanence and
ossifi cation. 1 15
Finally, on pages 118 and 140, Holtzmann also invoked “Ketzerhass” as the reason for
revision. He argued that it was possible, from “the present form” of the epic, to sense
that the Brahmans had been motivated by extreme hatred toward the Buddhists. “Th is
hatred of heretics [Ketzerhass],” he wrote, “is expressed clearly enough in the present
form of the Mahābhārata and of the P urā ṇa [Holtzmann refers to the Purā ṇas collectively
as a genre] . . . atonement is possible for all sins, but whoever has contact with Buddhists
and heretics cannot be absolved of his sins says the B ṛhannāradīyapurān ̣a Aufrecht cat.
Bodl. 10a.” Even though Holtzmann’s argument was nonsensical (we can make assump-
tions about the Brahmans’ motivations only once we have two versions of the text for
comparison and not simply on the basis of what we think was removed by them out of
hatred toward the Buddhists), he also declared Ketzerhass to be the reason why Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa
did not permit the Pā ṇḍavas to mourn for the fallen Gha tọ tkaca. Even more problem-
atically, he then concluded, “all the more [i.e., all the more, given this Ketzerhass] did
all recollections of that time have to be eliminated.” 116 Th is conclusion clearly did not
follow: if the Brahmans’ aim had been to eliminate all recollections, they would hardly
have retained the story of the heretical Ghat ọ tkaca. Moreover, the argument as a whole
113 . Ibid., 118.
114 . Ibid., 109.
115 . Ibid., 104.
116 . Ibid., 118.
112 Chapter 02
suff ered from petitio principii. Holtzmann’s reason for asserting that the Brahmans had
undertaken a revision was that he assumed that the Brahmans, being opposed to the
Buddhists, could not have let the Buddhist text stand. But as proof of their opposition
to the Buddhists, he then pointed to the same text, arguing that the revisions to the epic
demonstrated the Brahmans’ hatred of the Buddhists.
Why did Holtzmann insist on defending the hypothesis of Brahmanic persecu-
tion even when his arguments for it, as we have seen, were unconvincing? A look at
his second reference to Ketzerhass, on page 140, is revealing. Noting that “[as] we
know from the story of Kopronymos [i.e., emperor Constantine V] . . . the hatred of
heretics [Ketzerhass] can follow its victims all the way into their diapers [bis in die
Windeln hinein],” he argued that references to Duryodhana’s inauspicious birth were
further evidence of how the Brahmans pursued their vendetta against Buddhism
even to the point of defaming their enemies’ childhood.1 17 Holtzmann’s reference
to Constantine V, who was titled Kopronymos or Copronymos (the Dung-named
one; k opros , feces or animal dung; onoma , name) by Byzantine sources for his sup-
port of iconoclasm, 118 suggests that once again the context for his work was not
the Indian epic nor even Buddhism, but rather European history, especially as it
pertained to confl ict between the Church and various schismatic movements. 119 Th e
suggestion that Brahmans had prosecuted Buddhists under the pretext of “heresy”
was clearly designed to evoke Protestant resentments toward the Catholic Church.
Luther himself had been found guilty of heresy by the Papal Legate Cajetan in
1518. (Th at he escaped being delivered to Rome was due to a lucky coincidence: the
death of Emperor Maximilian in January 1519 created a power vacuum in the Holy
Roman Empire. As pope and Curia jostled for power in the race to nominate the
new emperor, the time was not opportune for a confl ict with Luther’s protector,
the Great Elector of Saxony. 120 ) As with his ideas of the old heroic Indo-Germanic
epic, here too Holtzmann was using the Mahābhārata merely as a foil for Protestant
anxieties.
IDEAS OF RELIGIOUS CORRUPTION
Not surprisingly, the largest part of Holtzmann’s Mahābhārata was dedicated to a
censure of the Brahmans, whom he blamed for the destruction of Germanic culture
in both its ancient heroic Āryan incarnation and its modern rationalist Buddhist/
Protestant incarnation. We fi rst look at some of his main criticisms under three
headings: (1) repression of Buddhism and infi ltration by folk cults; (2) Corruption
117 . Ibid., 140.
118 . See François Xavier de Feller, Biographie universelle ou dictionnaire historique , vol. 4
(Paris: J. Leroux, 1848), 33, who explains the name as “ainsi appelé parce qu’il sâlit les
fonts baptismaux lorsqu’on le baptisait.”
119 . See the entry for “Constantine V,” in Th e Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium, ed. Alexander
P. Kazhdan (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991), 501.
120 . Manfred Schulze, “Luther, Martin (1483–1546),” in Biographisches-Bibliographisches
Kirchenlexicon , vol. 5 (Herzberg: Verlag Traugott Bautz, 1993), 447–82.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 113
of texts and insertion of mystical doctrines; (3) Arrogance, greed, misuse of
authority:
1. Repression of Buddhism and infi ltration by folk cults:
A main sign of the second puranic revision in contrast to the fi rst Brahmanic [revi-
sion] appears to me to be the reconciliation with Çiva [Śiva]. Th e long battle with
Buddhism had forced the Brahmans to look around for allies in their own people and
to conclude a compromise, as earlier with Vishnuism, so too now with Çivaismus
[Śaivism]. Following Çiva then the entire apparatus of the later folk religions of
India gained entrance into the mythology of the Indians and gave it that tasteless
imprint which Goethe had treated with such justifi ed repugnance. 121
After driving out Buddhism, the earlier allies of the Buddhists, the Brahmans—
clever as they were to hold on to the main thing and constantly ready to [make] all
possible concessions in secondary matters—had nothing more to object against a
folk god such as Çiva , as long as his followers left the authority of the Vedas and the
supremacy of the Brahmans untouched: in these two points, however, they did not
and do not [even today] appreciate any frivolity at all. 122
Th e decay of Brahmanism fi rst occurs when they [i.e., the Brahmans] no longer
had any rival to fear; after they had driven out Buddhism, there arose among them
[i.e., the Brahmans] a boundless insolence, which even foreign rule was not capable
of dampening. But as concerns the M ahābhārata , we may at least be thankful to them
that they preserved the poem from loss and have not completely distorted it, which
no power could have prevented them from doing [had they wanted to do so]. 123
2. Corruption of texts and insertion of mystical doctrines:
With the second revision of the poem coincides the violent t ransformation of the
Mahābhārata into a law code or dharmaçāstra . Th e epic, the favorite lecture of the
warriors of old, became a textbook intended for those who were not permitted to
read the Vedas or, like the warriors themselves, did not understand them; their Veda
is the M ahābhārata , the fi fth Veda as it is called now and again . . . and this poem so
beloved since time immemorial among the warrior class had to put up with being
transformed into a kind of encyclopedia and having endless teachings about all pos-
sible things divine and human inserted into it in the form of unending speeches;
the books Çānti [Śāntiparvan] and Anuçāsana [Anuśāsanaparvan] completely [and]
large parts of the books Vana and U dyoga are dedicated to these goals. According to
the Indian view, the aim of the Mahābhārata is a didactic one: in the hands of the
Brahmans the ancient epic has been changed into a didactic legend, Max Müller anc.
lit. p. 18.1 24
121 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 165–66 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
122 . Ibid., 166.
123 . Ibid., 195.
124 . Ibid., 177–78 (emphasis in original).
114 Chapter 02
One sees that the Indians hold precisely these didactic sections of the great poem
to be the decisive ones, whereas for the European reader they are a boring torture. 125
Th ey [the Brahmans] have transformed the old heroic poem, the most beautiful
spiritual treasure of their race, into a boring Purana that only preaches worship of
Vish ṇu , reverence before the Brahmans, and soulless faith in works [Werkdienst].
Spain has been cited as an example of what a monastic worldview can do to an entire
race over which it gains power; anyone who wishes to see the same principle at work
in poetry ought to study the Mahābhārata . 126
3. Arrogance, greed, misuse of authority:
Just as were the Vishnuistic [tendencies], so too were the Brahmanic tendencies
continuously heightened; I mean the eff orts to exaggerate ever more the privileges
of the priestly caste and their honor equivalent [even] to the gods. After the victory
over the Buddhists the Brahmans no longer had to fear a rival and lapsed into bound-
less pride, which expressed itself all the more drastically, the later the time to which
the respective piece of the Mahābhārata belongs. Th e worst passages in this regard
are those contained in the book which, according to all indications, is the youngest,
namely, the thirteenth. One can read passages such as 13, 35, 19 = 2160: “Th rough
the grace of the Brahmans, the gods inhabit heaven, only through submission before
the Brahmans can the earth be ruled, the Brahmans are gods even to the gods them-
selves”; cf. Muir S. T. I 130. 506.1 27
U nconditional faith in Vish ṇu , reverence before the Brahmans, and precise
observation of the external ceremony [äusserlichen Ceremoniells], this is fi nally all
that is recommended to the contemporary reader of the M ahābhārata and, to the
warrior, in particular, the reports of the deeds of the gods and the heroes are only
related in such a form that he can never forget how every victory is only due to the
help of Vish ṇu and the strengthening power of priestly prayer and sacrifi ce. If Indra
himself in all his glory trembles more before every holy man than all the A suras
together, how much more cause does an earthly king have to fear and to honor the
Brahmans.1 28
Brahmanic arrogance and esteem of salvation through works [Werkdiensts]
attain their highest level here [Holtzmann means the thirteenth book of the epic,
which always attracted his particular ire]. Th e Brahman as such is worthy of wor-
ship, irrespective of his personality; “whether well-dressed or dirty, whether eat-
ing or fasting, whether the clothing is fi ne or coarse, a Brahman is a Brahman” 13,
152, 14 = 7175. Besides obedience and generosity in relation to the Brahmans,
the king has no other duties that he could not dispense with. “When you want to
possess the ocean-girted earth, worship the Brahmans with submission and gifts;
only by gifts can their majesty be placated” 13, 35, 22 = 2163. In these unending
125 . Ibid., 179.
126 . Ibid., 194.
127 . Ibid., 176–77.
128 . Ibid., 177.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 115
and peevishly boring speeches of the books Çānti [Śāntiparvan] and Anuçāsana
[Anuśāsanaparvan] is truly de rebus omnibus et quibusdam aliis the language. 129
Th ese excessive and unfounded criticisms suggested that the central motivation for
Holtzmann’s reconstructions of the epic was not an interest in the epic itself much
less a desire to appreciate it for its philosophy, literary richness, or, indeed, for its
narrative. Rather, the epic was a mere object in his quest to defi ne German iden-
tity as secular, Enlightened, and rational. In this quest, the hypostatized concept of
“Brahmanism” no less than that of “Buddhism” off ered him a means of making certain
points about the relationship of Protestantism to Catholicism. His characterizations
of Buddhism and Brahmanism were primarily drawn from his ideas of Protestantism
and Catholicism. 1 30 Th e term W erkdienst , used throughout in a negative sense, in par-
ticular gave him a way to make a case against Brahmanism. 131 Th us, whereas he saw
Buddhism as an Enlightened, proto-rational religion, he characterized Brahmanism
in terms familiar from the Lutheran critique of the Catholic church (see table 2.1 for
a comparison of his characterizations of the two religions). Among the many charges
Holtzmann raised against the Brahmans was that they extracted money from the
laity in return for spurious services and promises of attaining eternal bliss in the
afterlife, that they advocated the effi cacy of works, and that their religion was ori-
ented toward external ceremonies, but lacked an inner spiritual core. Holtzmann
also suggested that the Brahmans, by inserting themselves between the peoples and
their (original) gods, had made direct, simple worship impossible. Instead, they had
become the intermediaries between the people and the gods, with the further result
that a devout populace was now delivered over entirely to their control.
Further, he claimed Brahmanism with its ceremonialism, its sophistic reason-
ing, and its confusion of moral doctrines was responsible for the decline of the
Indo-Germans. Citing the opinions of Rammohan Roy, he argued that Brahmanism
had corrupted the moral sense of the Indians:
K ṛsh ṇa and his pupils gladly cite sentences from the scriptures in justifi cation of
their faithlessness, old proverbs and holy verses, the example of the gods, religious
and philosophical teachings, which they then interpret and apply according to their
convenience. Th e old mythology, founded as little as that of Homer on a moral
129 . Ibid., 188–89.
130 . Th is is true not only of Holtzmann, but also of other scholars such as Albrecht
Weber, Christian Lassen, and Hermann Oldenberg. As a rule, the story Western critics
of the Indian epics told replicated their own understanding of European cultural history,
especially as concerns the reformation of social and political institutions and the enlight-
enment of the human mind.
131 . Grimms notes that around the mid-seventeenth century W erkdienstler is used as a
“dismissive characterization of the Catholics, who hope to attain justifi cation before god
through the performance of [good] works (opera bona)” and provides the following inter-
esting notice: “It has been . . . proven by me, that the werckdienstler [i.e., those seeking
salvation through the performance of good works] in Papacy [pabstthumb; cf. modern
German Papsttum] make god to an unjust god; J. A. SCHERTZLER beweis (1664) C 2a.”
Deutsches Wörterbuch , s.v. “Werkdienstler.”
116 Chapter 02
Table 2.1 HOLTZMANN’S CHARACTERIZATIONS OF BUDDHISM AND
BRAHMANISM COMPARED
Buddhism Brahmanism
Enlightened Unenlightened
Tolerant Prone to fundamentalist violence
Conducive to scientifi c inquiry and scientifi c Dogmatic; opposed to scientifi c inquiry
progress
Socially progressive Socially conservative
Possessing historical self-consciousness Lacking historical self-consciousness and
antihistorical
Egalitarian Caste based
Nationalistic Under the Brahmans’ control; given to infi ghting
among rival sects
Conducive to the development of grammar and Sunk in mystic speculation; hostile to critical
the philological sciences thinking
basis, off ered enough examples which the politicians could invoke; may God speed-
ily purify the minds of my countrymen from the corruptness that such tales are
too apt to produce, calls out the admirable Rammohun Roy, after he has listed such
accounts. Translations of books of the Vedas 2nd ed. London 1832 p. 189. K ṛsh ṇa
invokes such examples; I ndra and the other gods too, he says, have in battles with
their enemies not scorned the weapons of deceit and of treason 9, 58, 5 = 3250. 132
Holtzmann, moreover, thought there was a direct connection between the Brahmans’
corruption of the epic and their corruption of the values of their people. Th e old
epic, which preserved a recollection of the archaic age, had been the principal source
of moral guidance for the ancient Indo-Germanic tribes. It had instructed them in
values (death is preferable to dishonor), afterlife representations (for the warrior
dying on the battlefi eld, entry into heaven is assured), social codes (the knightly
code in warfare, the duty of blood-vengeance), and, in general, promulgated a virile,
free-spirited outlook. By contrast, Brahmanism had tied the people down to ritual,
made them fearful of gods and punishments, rendered them passive through ideas
of karma and rebirth, and in general, caused them to become, by turns, underhanded
and subservient.
Holtzmann’s critique of the Brahmans was not restricted to the charge that
Brahmanism had led Indians away from their Germanic heritage and, in the process,
caused them to become weak and enervated. Rather, he also took umbrage at what
he considered the Brahmans’ self-serving reason for imposing their belief system
upon the people: their desire to enrich themselves at the people’s expense through
requiring various sacrifi cial off erings and gifts. Commenting on the exhortation to
practice charity toward the Brahmans, Holtzmann wrote, “especially conscientiously
132 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 84–85.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 117
is emphasized his [i.e., Yudhi ṣtḥ ira’s] generosity in relation to Brahmans; he pres-
ents them at every suitable occasion with thousands of cows, [and] even at unsuit-
able [times], for example when he lives in the dense forest as a helpless exile 2,
32, 2 = 904.” 133 He also wrote, “besides obedience and generosity in relation to the
Brahmans the king has no other duties that he could not dispense with. ‘When you
want to possess the ocean-girted earth, worship the Brahmans with submission and
gifts; only by gifts can their majesty be placated’ 13, 35, 22 = 2163.” 134 In yet other
passages, Holtzmann rehearsed Luther’s criticism of works and of ceremonialism. 135
In his opinion, “Buddha had wanted to teach nothing else than what the older or
contemporaneous Upanishad also taught, which, in the same way, rejected the belief
in salvation through works [Werkheiligkeit] and ceremonialism [Ceremoniendienst]
and declared the Veda to be inadequate for attaining the highest good [of salva-
tion].” 136 However, with the “Brahman Restoration” around the eighth century CE,
Holtzmann argued, “ceremonialism [Ceremoniendienst] and the belief in salvation
through works [Werkheiligkeit]” took the place of “morals and religion.” He fur-
ther claimed that the eff ects of this return to ceremonialism and to works could be
seen “down to our times.”1 37 Likewise, he noted of the Dānadharmaparvan of the
Śāntiparvan that “Brahmanic arrogance and esteem of salvation through works
[Werkdiensts] attaine[d] their highest level here.”1 38 In the concluding passage of the
book, he once again returned to the theme of works, writing, “not without a justifi ed
displeasure against the Brahmans, we set down the old epic. Th ey have transformed
the old heroic poem, the most beautiful spiritual treasure of their race into a boring
Purana that only preaches worship of Vish ṇu , reverence before the Brahmans, and
thoughtless faith in works [Werkdienst].”1 39
Th e rejection of works and the criticism of ceremonial were central components
of Luther’s critique of Catholicism. Both feature, for instance, in the fi rst and second
articles of the Smalcald Articles of 1537, in language that is remarkably similar to
that found in Holtzmann’s critique of Brahmanism. 140 Holtzmann, in reprising this
criticism, was clearly drawing on this Lutheran heritage. Seen in conjunction with his
comments about the Brahmanic persecution of Buddhists as heretics and his attribu-
tion of a successful Counter-Reformation to the Brahmans, it is clear that he sought to
project his problems with Catholicism onto Brahmanism. But the inspiration for this
Lutheran critique of Catholicism came from elsewhere. It was not Protestantism per
se, but rather, a Romantic fascination with German antiquity, inherited ultimately
133 . Ibid., 134–35.
134 . Ibid., 189.
135 . For a discussion of Luther’s attitude toward the sacraments, see Werner Jetter,
Die Taufe beim jungen Luther: Eine Untersuchung über das Werden der reformatorischen
Sakraments- und Taufanschauung (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1954).
136 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 117.
137 . Ibid., 149.
138 . Ibid., 188.
139 . Ibid., 194.
140 . See especially the fi rst article (Martin Luther, Concordia: Th e Lutheran Confessions
[St. Louis: Concordia, 2005]).
118 Chapter 02
from his uncle, that motivated Holtzmann to activate elements of Luther’s critique
against Brahmanism. Th e motif of blaming “priests” for the destruction of the
Germanic epic tradition, for instance, came directly from Holtzmann Sr.’s studies on
the Nibelungenlied. In his words,
we know, in essence, the content and the form of the German epic, which preserved
the mythological representations and the historical recollections of the most ancient
times, and was transmitted in its purity and completeness from generation to gen-
eration by a well-organized bardic guild that stood in connection with the priest-
hood. In this way the epic, the old mare, survived till the time of the introduction of
Christianity. Th e Church, however, could not suppress the old religion without also
destroying the epic. Along with the ancient sacrifi cial hymns and prayers, the myth-
ological and, closely associated with them, historical poems too had to perish. Along
with the heathen priests, the caretakers of the epic poetry had to disappear before
the Christian bishops. Indeed, the Church was for a period of time in doubt whether
it did not also want to eliminate the German language; and, after all, a language
permeated by heathenism must have been a great hindrance to the new religion.
How tenaciously, however, the language endured, how impossible its destruction
was, is shown best in terms of the circumstance that even for high Christian fes-
tivals the Church had to tolerate the usage of heathen, mythological names, such
as Easter. Th us, in spite of all bans and the strongest measures, it did not succeed
in suppressing the old poems. Precisely the ever repeated strengthening of the ban
against the c antica rustica, inepta, gentilia, diabolica demonstrates how unwillingly
the populace let itself be robbed of its historic recollections. But since the songs
lacked the care of a trained bardic class, they had to necessarily lose their complete-
ness and purity; they fell apart into fragments, which gradually sank from the old
noble style of the heroic poems into the coarser tones of the ballads. Heathen motifs
had motivated the old songs and dominated them as the leading idea; as heathenism
disappeared and was forgotten, much had to become unintelligible in the old songs;
there remained only the torn limbs of a body whose soul had fl ed. Finally, in order
to fi nd acceptance by the clergy, they had to replace the vanished heathen motifs by
Christian [motifs] and cosy up to the completely changed customs. Th ese are the
highly unfavorable conditions under which the old epic could still endure for a while
after the introduction of Christianity. 141
Holtzmann Jr.’s project was a little more complicated, since he crossed his uncle’s
Romantic ideas of Germanic antiquity with a positive evaluation of modernity.
Whereas Holtzmann Sr. seems to have subscribed to a kind of neo-paganism,
Holtzmann Jr. seems to have been much more religious. To be sure, we fi nd the
same love of primitivism and irrationalism in his work as in his uncle’s, as when he
enthuses about the war gods of the ancient Indo-Germans. But primitivism appears
in his case to have been tempered by a rather austere vision of Protestantism. And
141 . Holtzmann Sr., Untersuchungen über das Nibelungenlied , 170–71.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 119
whereas his uncle gave up his post as vicar to embark on a new program of study in
Sanskrit and Indo-Germanic, and ultimately, on a second career as a Nibelungenlied
critic, Holtzmann Jr. traced the reverse trajectory, starting out as a Sanskritist and
using Indian texts to slowly work his way back to ideas of his faith. As we have
seen, he regarded the Enlightenment and Frederician Germany in glowing terms.
His comparison of Buddhism to Protestantism show that he had an extremely posi-
tive evaluation of Protestantism. He saw in it the fulfi llment of the rationalistic,
free-spirited mindset of the Germans. In contrast, he regarded Catholicism in uni-
formly negative terms. Although he was sympathetic to Indian antiquity, he did
not see this past in an organic relationship to the present, or, indeed, even to the
classical age. For him, it was only Buddhism that was the legitimate successor to
Indo-Germanic antiquity, much as Protestantism was the legitimate successor to
Germanic antiquity.
From Holtzmann’s explicit comparisons of Brahmans with Catholic priests
and Scholastics, it is clear that he was ultimately using the Indian epic as a foil for
German history. In a sense, he was projecting his uncle’s argument onto the Indian
context, perhaps to test its validity or perhaps to fi nd external confi rmation of a
hypothesis he was using to interpret European history. But whereas his uncle could
uniformly reject Christianity (and, one presumes, also modernity), Holtzmann Jr.
found himself in the unusual situation of having to defend Protestantism while
rejecting Catholicism as being damaging to the spirit of the Indo-Germans. Th is
introduced an important modulation into his uncle’s thesis. It was not Christianity
in toto that had destroyed the epic tradition (as his uncle had thought), but only that
part of it which could be identifi ed with unscrupulous priests, ceremonialism, insis-
tence on donation and the belief in works—in a word, Catholicism. At a deeper level
still, Holtzmann was not just interested in a critique of Catholicism (via its Eastern
analogue, Brahmanism), but in actually intervening in history. Setting out from his
uncle’s assumption that Catholicism had destroyed the ancient epic culture of the
Germans, he undertook to show that if he could but reconstruct the original epic, he
could simultaneously undo the damage done by the Catholic interregnum and thus,
ultimately, restore an integral history to Germany. In this project, the Mahābhārata
played a crucial role. First, it allowed him to postulate an original Indo-Germanic
epic on the basis of (imaginary) points of contact between the Mahābhārata and the
Nibelungenlied. On the basis of this epic (or, rather, the traces of it he claimed to fi nd
in the Mahābhārata), he was then able to delineate the outlines of a heroic Germanic
culture. In a second step, he then undertook to show that Brahmanism was a cor-
ruption of the heroic tradition. Its sources lay outside the Indo-Germanic tradition
(specifi cally, outside the Āryan race, as we shall see). Further, as Holtzmann repeat-
edly argued, it was fundamentally at odds with the spiritual and moral outlook of
the Germans. Textual reconstruction of the original thus took on added urgency as
a means of undoing Brahmanic corruption of Germanic culture. And once he suc-
ceeded in reconstructing an epic without its Brahmanic insertions, he would be able,
third, to draw together ancient Indo-Germanic and Buddhist culture and thus, ulti-
mately, to restore an integral history to the Germanic people (see chart 2.1 for a
clarifi cation of these stages).
snrecnoc
citsilanoitan
sih
fo
txetnoc
eht
ni
atarāhbāhaM
s’nnamztloH
:ynamreG
ot
yrotsih
largetni
na
gnirotseR
1.2
trahC
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 121
Although Holtzmann consistently used the language of “Brahmans” and
“Indo-Germans” to make his point, there can be little doubt that his ultimate
aim was to restore an integral history to Germany itself. First, as we have seen,
Brahmanism and Buddhism functioned in his account as ciphers for Catholicism
and Protestantism. Second, it would make no sense to restore an integral history
to the Indo-Germans, since, by his own admission, they were a vanished culture. In
a sense, the entire reconstruction of the Mahābhārata had been undertaken solely
for purposes related to Germany’s present. For reasons we may never know, he
seems to have experienced the Catholic period as a wound within German con-
sciousness; by projecting his feelings regarding Catholicism outward onto Indian
history, he found a way to deal with this trauma. By drawing together the lips
(Indo-Germanic and Buddhist) of the wound left by the Brahmanic interruption of
the textual transmission, he sought to heal a wound internal to German identity
itself: the text as plaster for the fractured German soul. Th e exact if artifi cial mir-
roring between German and Indian history in Holtzmann’s account shows just how
intimately bound up the Indian text had become with German ideas of history, of
selfhood, and of nationality. Nowhere would this be more evident than in his com-
ments regarding race.
IDEAS OF RACIAL CONTAMINATION
As we saw in the last chapter, from its earliest beginnings, German Mahābhārata
studies have been premised on the principle of a racial distinction between the com-
batants in the Mahābhārata war. Th is distinction, fi rst introduced in 1837 in the
work of the Norwegian Christian Lassen, amounted to no less than a reading of
Indian history in terms of race, specifi cally in terms of the superiority of the “white”
race. 142 Holtzmann, too, borrowed this principle, although he built it up into a much
more systematic account. As we have seen, the central principle of his reconstruction
was the idea of a reversal in the epic’s sympathies. As he put it,
According to the older poem, right and virtue is on the side of Kar ṇa and his
party; according to the younger [poem], on that of A rjuna; Duryodhana is the law-
ful king, Arjuna and his brothers rebels, Kar ṇa is the embodiment of the knightly
battle-code, K rsh ṇa always advises trickery and deception: this is the stand-point
of the old poem. 143
142 . For the central role played by Lassen in the creation of a “white” race, see McGetchin,
Indology, Indomania, and Orientalism , 164. Th e key role played by Lassen in the develop-
ment of modern ideas of race is not a matter of dispute, but what is less often noted is the
central role the Mahābhārata played in his reconstructions of ancient Indian history. If
the racism of Gobineau is unimaginable without Lassen’s researches, it is equally true that
Lassen’s researches are unimaginable without the Mahābhārata.
143 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 14.
122 Chapter 02
As for the reasons for this reversal, Holtzmann proposed that the solution to the
puzzle of “how one . . . came to leave the old interpretation and to take up the new,
opposed [interpretation]” had to be sought “there where Indian history has its genu-
ine ground, the fi eld of history of religion.” More specifi cally, he proposed that “it was
Vishnuism that demanded and enforced this transformation.”1 44 But when we take
a closer look at this answer, we fi nd it insuffi cient. How could Holtzmann, on the
one hand, claim that Buddhism was an organic outgrowth of Indo-Germanic tradi-
tion and, on the other, insist that Brahmanism was a perversion of the latter? What
separated Brahmanism from Buddhism or the Indo-Germanic tradition? It could
not be that the Brahmans had brought about changes in the text: as he explicitly
acknowledged, the epic tradition has always been in a state of fl ux. And as he noted,
“every dynasty seeks to link itself up with the old epic ruling houses in some way.” 145
Likewise, it could not be the fact that Brahmanism was further removed in time from
the Indo-Germanic epic tradition for—in some versions of his account at least—
Brahmanism preceded Buddhism. It was—again, only in some versions—in direct
competition with the heroic world. What made Buddhism consonant with heroic
Indo-Germanic ethics, but not Brahmanism?
A second, related problem concerns the identity of the revisionists. Although
Holtzmann initially considered the possibility that a “ruling line” might have “linked
its ancestry to Arjuna and thus created favorable conditions for the biased revision,”
this alone does not suffi ce to explain the reversal. Our concern here is not with the
name of the line that claimed descent, via Parik ṣit, from Arjuna, but with the name
of the ruler responsible for ensuring that Arjuna and his allies were portrayed in
a more favorable light in the revision. More specifi cally, why would the new ruler
or dynasty have resorted to a revision (in the course of which the epic’s polarity of
good and evil was reversed), when he or it could much more easily have associated
their names with the heroes of the old epic? Even if we are to believe Holtzmann’s
theory of a new rising power (call it Brahmanism) which wished to take over the
old epic, why not simply map oneself on to the existing power-political and ethi-
cal distinctions in the epic? What made it imperative that the epic henceforth
advance the cause of the Pā ṇḍavas? Th e obvious solution for any new claimant to
power in northern India would have been to claim the mantle of the Kaurava line.
However, Holtzmann rejected such a solution on grounds of race. In his opinion,
the Pā ṇḍavas were “a not pure Aryan tribe, [but] a thieving hill-folk [räuberisches
Gebirgsvolk] . . . that advanced victorious from the North.” Indeed, he argued that
Pā ṇḍavas were “not originally . . . blood-relatives [Blutsverwandte] of the Kauravas,”1 46
suggesting that any association with the Kauravas in the epic was a forteriori impos-
sible on racial grounds. If the Pā ṇḍavas in the epic were, in fact, portrayed as rela-
tives of the Kauravas, then that was a fabrication of later authors, wishing to endow
this non-Āryan tribe with a suitable pedigree. Holtzmann further underscored the
Pā ṇḍavas’ status as interlopers by claiming that their father Pā ṇḍu or the White One
144 . Ibid.
145 . Ibid., 95.
146 . Ibid., 33.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 123
(from whom their patronym Pā ṇḍava derives) “was freshly invented and grafted into
the old genealogy.” 147 As he saw it, the reason for this subterfuge was to posit a hypo-
thetical “white” ancestor, thus making it possible for the Pā ṇḍavas to claim Āryan
ancestry:
Th e Pā ṇḍava (i.e., the fi ve brothers, but likely not their father Pā ṇḍu) belong already
to the old legend and played a major role in the original Mahābhārata. In the revi-
sion, they appear as cousins of the chiefs of the opposing side. In the old poem,
they were impossibly related to their enemies; they were fi rst grafted into the old
dynasty at a place and time when they were the ruling royal dynasty. Th at they did
not belong to the old dynasty is, in my opinion, irrefutably clear from the custom
predominant among them of polyandry; in reference to this Yudhish tḥ ira expressly
invokes the example of his ancestors. . . . [But] if the fi ve brothers and their descrip-
tion as Pā ṇḍava already belong to the old legend and to the old poem, things prob-
ably stand otherwise with their father Pā ṇḍu. Th is name and the fi gure who bears it
was fi rst invented by the revisionists, “we are forced to [reach] the conclusion that
the Pān ḍ ạ vas existed earlier than their father Pā ṇḍu” (Ludwig myth. Element s. 9).1 48
In defense of this hypothesis of the invention of Pā ṇḍu, Holtzmann cited three
sources: Christian Lassen (1800–76), Albrecht Weber (1825–1901), and Alfred
Ludwig (1832–1912). Weber in his I ndische Studien of 1853 149 had described the
Pā ṇḍavas as a “thieving hill folk” (“räuberisches Bergvolk”) and claimed that, advanc-
ing from the north, they had conquered a large part of India. He also suggested that
the Pā ṇḍavas were inserted later into the text, possibly under an assumed name. 150
Holtzmann was clearly infl uenced by Weber’s work. He referred to the Pā ṇḍavas as a
“thieving hill folk” (“räuberisches Gebirgsvolk”) and also borrowed the latter’s theory
of the invention of the Pā ṇḍavas. In contrast, Ludwig in his “Über das Verhältnis
des mythologischen Elements zur historischen Grundlage des Mahabharata”1 51 advo-
cated a mythic explanation of the name Pā ṇḍu. Although Holtzmann cited his work,
he clearly found his symbolic approach less appealing than a historical one. But of the
147 . Ibid., 143.
148 . Ibid., 128–29.
149 . Albrecht Weber, Indische Studien. Beiträge für die Kunde des indischen Alterthums , vol.
2 (Berlin: Ferd. Dümmler’s Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1853); see esp. 402–4.
150 . “I tend to the opinion that the inclusion of the name of the Pândava in the old leg-
end of the Mahâbhârata was an entirely random [decision], occasioned merely by the fact
that the latter work emerged at a time and in a land where Pându, [or the] Pândava were
the current rulers, in whose honor [then] their name and likely also actual historical ele-
ments of their history were brought into assocation with the ancient legends of gods and
heroes. . . . ” Ibid., 402.
151 . Alfred Ludwig, “Über das Verhältnis des mythologischen Elements zur historischen
Grundlage des Mahabharata,” Abhandlungen der Könglichen Böhmischen Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaften 6, no. 12 (1884); see also his “Über die mythische Grundlage des
Mahâbhârata,” Sitzungsberichte der Königlichen Böhmischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften
9 (1895): 1–26; both discussed in Alf Hiltebeitel, “Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa in the Mahābhārata: A Biblio-
graphic Essay,” A nnals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 60 (1979): 65–110.
124 Chapter 02
three, it is the Norwegian Lassen who proved to be most useful to Holtzmann, since
he had already advocated that the “names P ându and K risna, white and b lack , . . . [were]
a reference to the two races that fought each other in Indian prehistory, the origi-
nal native black and the light-skinned, Sanskrit-speaking interlopers from the
North. . . .”1 52 Lassen had further advocated that “when it has once been proven that
in the history of the Pândava, names are present that do not signify individuals but
conditions and events, then we may extend this statement to the other descriptions
of this kind as well. As such are especially prominent the names black and w hite in the
history of the sons of Pâ ṇḍu,”1 53 and he continued:
Since the Pân ḳâla assuredly belonged to the Aryan races, we may not interpret the
relationship between them and the Pândava as though these ought to be described as
belonging to the black aborigines of India on the basis of the black color that is attributed
to Krish ṇâ, these [others] as the white Aryans. Nonetheless, the distinction according
to color must have a signifi cance and this can only be that the Pân ḳâla, like the Jâdava,
who are represented by Krish ṇa, both belonged to the Aryan races who entered [India]
earlier, [and] became darker through the infl uence of the climate as compared to the
youngest entrants from the north, and in contrast to these are called the black.1 54
On the basis of these refl ections, Lassen concluded that the names K ṛ ṣ ṇa, Pā ṇḍu,
and Arjuna could not have been names of “real individuals,” but rather, must have
been intended as descriptions of “conditions and historical relationships.” 155 Setting
out from these ideas of historical interpretation, Holtzmann took up Lassen’s the-
ory of a racial confl ict in Indian prehistory, but introduced a unique twist in it: the
names Pā ṇḍu and Arjuna were, of course, not references to real people, but they also
could not be read straightforwardly as indications of the historical situation. Rather,
Holtzmann proposed, the Brahmans, having understood the benefi ts associated
with having a white pedigree, undertook to craft precisely such a pedigree for the
non-Āryan Pā ṇḍavas. Whereas the latter, he conceded, were a real tribe and had, so
he thought, conquered and displaced the old heroic tribe of the Kauravas, he was
adamant that Pā ṇḍu himself was an invention. Th e Mahābhārata refers to Pā ṇḍu as
having been pale-skinned at birth (the name “Pā ṇḍu” literally means “the white one”)
and scholars have speculated that he might have been an albino. 156 Holtzmann, how-
ever, coming at the Mahābhārata from the perspective of Lassen’s pseudohistorical
ethnographic researches,1 57 took this as evidence of a racial inversion in the epic. To
152 . Lassen, “Beiträge,” 75.
153 . Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1, 2nd ed., 789.
154 . Ibid., 791.
155 . Ibid., 803.
156 . Most recently Wendy Doniger in Th e Hindus: An Alternative History (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2009), 294.
157 . “Th e Dekhanistic Indians too have the Caucasian physiognomy and form, their skin
color is darker than that of the Aryans, without attaining the black of the Negros, their lan-
guage, in contrast, is fundamentally diff erent. Furthermore, they are of Mongoloid origin.
Th ere could thus have occurred a mixing with the Aryans and thereby a transformation of
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 125
his mind, it was self-evident that the non-Āryan, dark-skinned primitive Pā ṇḍavas 158
had upended the racial order of the old epic, and perhaps the natural order as well
(see chart 2.2 for a clarifi cation of the role played by race in Holtzmann’s project).
Henceforth, the task of criticism would be to undo not only the contamination of the
text, but that of the Germanic race as well.
EVALUATING HOLTZMANN’S TEXTUAL PROJECT
Th is brief survey of Holtzmann’s Mahābhārata has brought to light a number of
problems with his work. Starting from his polemics against the Brahmans in section
2, we carefully traced his views of the epic proceeding via his ideas of the epic’s com-
position and historical context all the way to his ideas of racial contamination. In this
last section, it fi nally became clear how, starting from his criticisms of the Brahmans,
Holtzmann’s project was essentially grounded in a racial prejudice. Holtzmann’s
antipathy toward Catholicism no doubt played a role in his criticism of Brahmanism,
the type; one could imagine in this case that the small ugly inhabitants of the forest with
Dravidian language still preserved this type.” Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1, 2nd.
ed., 488.
“Th e ethnographic viewpoint already shows the Aryan race as the most important and
the dominant, as the cultural race of India; it is the actual object of Indian history; its
changing fates, their causes and eff ects are to be researched by us in the following inves-
tigations. . . . What, however, is to be determined here, when it can be determined, are the
characteristics that belonged to the race independent of the historical development and
are therefore unchangeable and condition precisely the uniqueness of the[ir] historical
development. Th ese are of two types: we must recognize that the physical conditions of its
existence exercise an enduring infl uence on the consciousness of a race and, through this,
contribute essentially to the formation of its basic character; to be sure, where we must
assume a resettlement in a new homeland, this infl uence does not belong to the original
formative elements, but shows up so early in our case [i.e., the Āryans in India], that it
cannot be distinguished from an original [element].In contrast, it would be a great mistake
to believe that physical infl uences alone determine the fundamental character of a race;
India like other countries shows this clearly enough; the Dekhanistic and the Vindhja-races
stood under the same infl uences of nature as the Aryans; [but they] have, however, never
raised themselves up independently to a higher development. We must thus recognize
a foundation of character, an original spiritual predisposition among the races, which is
developed and more closely determined, aided or hindered by the external nature of the
country as well as through historical events; it is the genius of the races placed [in them] by
Creation, which gives form to its unique form under the infl uence of nature and according
to the course of history.” Ibid., 490–91.
158 . Holtzmann did not explicitly refer to the skin color of the non-Āryan races.
However, his use of terms such as “Eingeborene” (native) and “Ureinwohner” (aborigine)
to characterize the Brahmanic and local traditions, which he contrasted with those of the
“Einwanderten” (invaders or immigrants), suggests that he took seriously Lassen’s idea
of a racial distinction. Further, his descriptions of the Indo-Germanic warriors, especially
his comparison of epic characters with heroes from the Nibelungenlied, leave little doubt
that he considered the Kauravas of the old epic to be of Germanic origin. References to the
“dark” gods and customs of “Malaya country” (a reference to south India) also suggest that
Holtzmann, like all Indologists of the day, took seriously the suggestion of northern India
as the homeland of the Āryan people.
cipe
eht
ni
snoitamrofsnart
evisseccus
eht
dna
selpoep
cipe
eht
fo
noitargim
eTh
2.2
trahC
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 127
but both Catholicism and Brahmanism became objects of his venom, because he felt
them to have betrayed the German people in some way. It is not necessary to dwell
any longer here on the racial, political, and evangelical dimensions of Holtzmann’s
project. However, before we conclude our look at his Mahābhārata, it is important to
take a survey his ideas of the epic’s textual history. Notwithstanding its problematic
political aspects, is there anything of scientifi c value in these reconstructions?
We shall focus here on a trio of characters central to Holtzmann’s theories of
the epic’s evolution: the Kaurava leader Duryodhana; his confi dant and accomplice
Aśvatthāman; and K ṛ ṣ ṇa. As these characters are at the core of Holtzmann’s recon-
structions, by looking at the way they have been portrayed in the text, we will simul-
taneously be able to assess the value of these reconstructions.
According to Holtzmann, Aśvatthāman is, “next to Kar ṇa,” the fi gure “treated
with the greatest favor in the old poem.” In support of this, he cited a passage from
the epic in support, according to which, “Brahman summoned up in his mind all
the excellences of man as he created Açvatthāman 9, 6, 12 = 303.”1 59 Th is preferen-
tial treatment of Aśvatthāman in the “old poem,” however, is not the only reason
Holtzmann was interested in him. Even more signifi cant is the fact that, according
to Holtzmann, Açvatthāman is one of the most “Buddhist” characters in the epic.
He wrote: “other Buddhist traces are found in the sections dedicated to the story
of Açvatthāman . His name sounds like the holy fi g tree of the Buddhists ( açvattha );
his father D ro ṇa has the same name as a pupil of the Buddha , the same pupil who
labored to distribute the bones of the deceased master (Wheeler III 143); he [i.e.,
Açvatthāman ] has the patronym G autama in common with the Buddha himself.” 160
Holtzmann also attached the greatest signifi cance to the story of Aśvatthāman’s
head jewel, a stone he was said to have been born with and which was endowed
with magical properties. Claiming that this stone “remind[s] us of the ‘protubérance
du crane’ (Burnouf Lotus p. 616), which is considered the foremost symbol of the
Buddha and is described as an ‘outgrowth on the center of the skull, [one] that is
repeated in all images of the Buddha’ (Köppen II 433),” Holtzmann argued for seeing
Aśvatthāman as the “personifi cation of the overcome Buddhism.” 161 In other pas-
sages, however, he presented Aśvatthāman as the prototype of the Indo-Germanic
hero. Arguing that Aśvatthāman, in contrast to the pusillanimous priests of the
later epic, had still retained traits of a martial heritage, he argued for seeing him as
one of the original epic characters. Th us, he noted of the nighttime episode of the
Sauptikaparvan in which Aśvatthāman slaughters the sleeping warriors that it was
“one of the oldest and most important parts of the M ahābhārata ; although highly
abridged, it is nonetheless remarkably well preserved.” 162 Holtzmann also claimed
that “the narrative of the nightly revenge of Açvatthāman shows us most clearly
the deep gulf that separates the older and younger recension from each other; the
159 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 76–77.
160 . Ibid., 111.
161 . Ibid., 112.
162 . Ibid., 111.
128 Chapter 02
character of the priestly hero is interpreted fundamentally diff erently in the two.” 163
Holtzmann clearly considered the character of Aśvatthāman to have been inherited
from the old epic, because a little later he wrote that “it was embarrassing to the revi-
sionists that the great villain A çvatthāman belonged to the priestly caste, but they
let this fact stand as an evil example of Buddhist confusion of the castes: Buddhism
is expressly accused of repealing the diff erences between the castes in the poem
Çan k̇ aravijaya v. 5 and 22 mentioned earlier.”1 64 (Curiously, he also thought that
Aśvatthāman, cursed by the Nārada and Vyāsa to wander the earth accompanied
by a “smell of blood and pus,” recalled “the story of the Wandering Jew [des ewigen
Judens],” which, he noted, “until now was considered to be ‘only loosely connected
with the Orient’.” 165 )
Holtzmann’s assessment of Duryodhana was similarly positive. Calling him a
“thoroughly worthy fi gure,” he wrote that although “in the complete expansion of
the poem, as it is now present to us, Duryodhana is presented as a coward, . . . no nar-
rative, which is necessary and indispensable for the plan of the work [Holtzmann
means the original plan, as hypothesized by him], confi rms this unfair judgment; the
old traits cannot be completely obscured.” 166 Holtzmann considered the story of the
fi nal contest in the battle, a duel of clubs fought between Duryodhana and Bhīma, to
be especially revelatory of the attitude of the old poem toward Duryodhana. Arguing
that this episode shows “very clearly even in the present version that justice and hon-
est bravery are represented by Duryodhana ,” Holtzmann thought Duryodhana to be
the epitome of the old knightly battle code favored even by the gods. Th us, he wrote
that “after his censuring speech to Bhīmasena , the warriors present, all of them ene-
mies, pay him vigorous tribute 9, 56, 42 = 3170, the gods call out hail! [Heil] to him 9,
54, 13 = 3089 and let fl owers rain down on him 9, 61, 54 = 3442.” 167 As with the fi gure
of Aśvatthāman, Holtzmann had a simple explanation for the negative portrayal of
Duryodhana. “If,” he wrote, “as was suggested above, Açoka was glorifi ed in the fi gure
of king Duryodhana , then it is natural that the Brahmans later placed the image of
Duryodhana in the shade.” As Holtzmann acknowledged, “that he [i.e., Duryodhana]
was a Buddhist is not said anywhere [in the poem]; this name [i.e., Buddhist] is
avoided.” But he remained convinced that the explanation for Duryodhana’s humili-
ation in the epic could only lie in his having been a heretic. As he put it, “the rea-
son for the harsh judgment is openly acknowledged: D uryodhana hates K ṛsh ṇa , he
does not accept his divine origin and character, therefore he is called a wild Rākshasa
and declared to be ripe for downfall 6, 66, 10 = 2982. 31 = 3003. 7, 11, 41 = 422.” 168
In another passage he pointed out that “his old name, Suyodhana , which has often
remained (even in unfortunate passages such as 5, 72, 12 = 2592), is mostly turned
into D uryodhana ” 169 and that “according to 1, 115, 28 = 4508 D uryodhana brayed
163 . Ibid., 120.
164 . Ibid., 123–24.
165 . Ibid., 112.
166 . Ibid., 72.
167 . Ibid., 72–73.
168 . Ibid., 108.
169 . Ibid., 139–40.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 129
like a donkey right after his birth.” 170 Citing the example of Constantine V, who was
mocked by his foes for soiling his baptismal font, he argued that “the hatred of her-
etics can follow its victims all the way into their diapers.” “For, Duryodhana is . . . an
accursed (3, 10, 32 = 380, by Maitreya ) heretic, a fosterling of Çiva and of the enemies
of the gods, who see a defeat of their cause in his death ( svapakshakshaya 3, 251,
21 = 15144).” Yet, loath to give up his theory of the noble Duryodhana, Holtzmann
argued that in contrast to these later corruptions, an older passage in the text had
“the old gods cry out “Hail!” [Heil] to him.” 171
When it came to the third of the epic characters at the crux of his reconstruc-
tion, Holtzmann was similarly confl icted. On the one hand, he noted that K ṛ ṣ ṇa,
the “character [who] is probably the most important for the inner critique of the
entire epic,” was “in the old narration” “neither god nor king, only chief—neither
prominent through birth (“son of a slave” 9, 61, 27 = 3414) nor through nobility of
temperament—of a pastoral tribe.” On the other, he was of the opinion that K ṛ s ṇa’s
“cunning” had ultimately decided the war “in favor of Y udhish ṭhira , for he kn[ew] how
to motivate the reluctant Arjuna to act contrary to the traditional precepts of honor-
able warfare.” “Th us, in the old M ahābhārata ,” concluded Holtzmann, “he [i.e., K ṛ ṣ ṇa]
plays a very signifi cant but barely honorable role; the race of the Y ādava , to which he
belongs, is considered crude, addicted to being drunk and immoral; he himself is listed
by his foes in an emphatic sense among the shepherds and slaves 2, 41, 6 = 1438. 2,
42, 1 = 1474. 2, 45, 4 = 1564. Th ey berate him as a cow-killer 2, 41, 16 = 1448 and
accuse him of not following the rules of honest battle 2, 41, 13 = 1445.” 172 Th is nega-
tive assessment of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa continued and, indeed, was heightened when Holtzmann
came to speak of the non-epic K ṛ ṣ ṇa, the Yādava hero K ṛ ṣ ṇa Vāsudeva. “Th e lascivi-
ousness of Kr ̣sh ṇa, the alcoholism of his brother Rāma (cf. Vish. P. Wilson V 66; also
in Mahābhārata 1, 219, 7 = 7912 called kshība , which Nīlaka ṇtḥ a explains as mad-
humatta ) and his entire people (cf. Book 16) are familiar traits, which derive from a
period in which K ṛsh ṇa was still just the deifi ed tribal hero of a forceful but crude and
sensual pastoral race, [but] had by no means raised himself to a personifi cation of the
pantheistic All-Soul.” In contrast, he argued that “the K ṛsh ṇa of the old Mahābhārata
[did] not demonstrate precisely these failures, for his enemies would not otherwise
have hesitated to blame him for them. But “for all that,” noted Holtzmann, “he [i.e.,
the epic K ṛ ṣ ṇa] is a sophist and a faithless politician, and it is diffi cult to say who did
greater harm to the morals of the Indian people, the divine Sophist K ṛsh ṇa or the
divine debauchee K ṛsh ṇa.”1 73
170 . Ibid., 140 and see ibid., 73.
171 . Ibid.
172 . Ibid., 78.
173 . Ibid., 137–38. Although shocking and perhaps even distressing, readers must
remember that these comments were made in the context of a tradition of polemics with
a long history within German Protestantism. Luther’s fondness for scatological language,
for instance, is well documented. Oberman refers to a sermon from 1515 in which Luther
declares, “A backbiter does nothing but chew with his teeth the excrements of other people
and sniff at their fi lth like a swine. Th us, human feces becomes the greatest pollutant,
topped only by T euff els Dreck .” In the course of the sermon, Luther’s passion rises to a
130 Chapter 02
Other passages focused on working out the contrast between the epic K ṛ ṣ ṇa and
the epic (Kaurava) heroes. For instance, he argued that whereas “the heroes saw
war . . . as a knightly sport [and] as an honest duel,” 174 K ṛ ṣ ṇa represented the values
of a new, less scrupulous age, “this is the judgment of the old poem, as spoken 9, 60,
28 = 3367 by the brother of K ṛsh ṇa, Rāma the son of V āsudeva : ‘Th e honest one has
been defeated in a dishonest manner.’ ” 175 In his opinion, K ṛ ṣ ṇa “plan[ned] all the
attacks [that are] faithless and unspeakable according to the old concepts of honor-
able warfare while the Pā ṇḍava carr[ied] them out, occasionally Arjuna after some
reluctance, occasionally Bhīmasena without further compunction.” 176 It is not exactly
clear where, for Holtzmann, the divide lay between the old epic Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa, a scheming
politician to be sure, and the Brahmanic K ṛ ṣ ṇa, incarnation and protagonist of the
frenzy, until he breaks into German and cries, “ ‘Sehet wie hat sich der beschissen’—see
how he covered himself with shit—then the eff ective answer is, ‘Das frissestu!’—stuff it,
eat it yourself.” Cited and translated in Heiko Oberman, “Teufelsdreck: Eschatology and
Scatology in the ‘Old’ Luther,” S ixteenth Century Journal 19, no. 3 (1988): 443. Oberman
also notes that in the compendium volume to Luther’s Passional Christi und Antichristi,
“at the same time the graphic illustration of Luther’s last and most ferocious writing
against the papacy, W ider das Papsttum zu Rom, vom Teufel gestiftet , Luther addresse[d]
the pope as ‘du unverschampts lügen maul, lester [!] maul, Teufels maul,’ because he has
produced stinking shit laws that smell to heaven, namely his Drecket and Drecketal . Th is
woodcut sequence of 1545, usually referred to as the Papstspotbilder and regarded as con-
clusive proof for the anal vulgarity of a sick and bitter old man, opens with the presenta-
tion of the birth of the antichrist out of the lower intestines of the devil, and concludes
with two woodcuts showing the most eff ective way to deal with the pope, by directing a
Pfurtz , or farts, against his ban, and releasing feces in his tiara. In this way, as the Latin
caption advises: Adoratur Papa Deus Terrenus .” Ibid., 443–44 (for the relevant images, see
p. 184 of this book). Finally, Luther was not alone in the use of scatological language as a
rhetorical device. In response to his Contra Henricum Regem, a diatribe against Henry VIII
in which Luther suggested that the English king ought to be smeared in shit, Sir Th omas
More wrote: “But meanwhile, for as long as your reverend paternity will be determined
to tell these shameless lies, others will be permitted, on behalf of his English majesty,
to throw back into your paternity’s shitty mouth, truly the shit-pool of all shit, all the
muck and shit which your damnable rottenness has vomited up, and to empty out all the
sewers and privies onto your crown divested of the dignity of the priestly crown, against
which no less than against the kingly crown you have determined to play the buff oon. In
your sense of fairness, honest reader, you will forgive me that the utterly fi lthy words of
this scoundrel have forced me to answer such things, for which I should have begged your
leave. Now I consider truer than truth that saying: ‘He who touches pitch will be wholly
defi led by it’ (Sirach 13:1). For I am ashamed even of this necessity, that while I clean out
the fellow’s shit-fi lled mouth I see my own fi ngers covered with shit. But who can endure
such a scoundrel who shows himself possessed by a thousand vices and tormented by a
legion of demons, and yet stupidly boasts thus: ‘Th e holy fathers have all erred. Th e whole
church has often erred. My teaching cannot err, because I am most certain that my teach-
ing is not my own but Christ’s,’ alluding of course to those words of Christ, ‘My words are
not my own but His who sent me, the Father’s’ (John 12:49)?” Th omas More, Responsio
ad Lutherum , in Th e Yale Edition of Th e Complete Works of St. Th omas More , vol. 5, ed. John
M. Headley (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1969), 311–13.
174 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 79.
175 . Ibid., 80.
176 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 131
Brahmanic system of values. But in the latter parts of his work, he demonstrated a
defi nite tendency to shade the epic K ṛ ṣ ṇa into the Brahmanic K ṛ ṣ ṇa. Th us he wrote,
K ṛsh ṇa and his pupils gladly cite sentences from the scriptures in justifi cation of
their faithlessness, old proverbs and holy verses, the example of the gods, religious
and philosphical teachings, which they then interpret and apply according to their
convenience. Th e old mythology, founded as little as that of Homer on a moral basis,
off ered enough examples that the politicians could invoke; may God speedily purify
the minds of my countrymen from the corruptness which such tales are too apt to
produce, calls out the admirable Rammohun Roy, after he has listed such accounts.
Translations of books of the Vedas 2nd ed. London 1832 p. 189. K ṛsh ṇa invokes
such examples; Indra and the other gods too, he says, have in battles with their ene-
mies not scorned the weapons of deceit and of treason 9, 58, 5 = 3250. 177
In another passage he accused K ṛ ṣ ṇa and his followers of changing “the old say-
ing: where justice is, there too is victory” into “where K ṛsh ṇa is, there is justice and
victory.” According to him, the new poem “summarily rejected” “refl ections about
justice and falsehood as being dangerous.” Th ese were, he concluded, “the fundamen-
tal principles according to which K ṛsh ṇa and his followers act, by means of which they
triumph; they stand in glaring contrast to the knightly outlook and way of acting of
Karn ̣a and his comrades, to whom nothing is more hateful than falsehood and breach
of promise; they represent the old principle of honest battle, [while] these [i.e., the
Pā ṇḍavas] are representatives of a new principle, of a faithless politics.” 178 But here,
too, Holtzmann did not see these values as being uncontested. In his judgment,
the diffi culty K ṛsh ṇa has in teaching A rjuna his principles, the sharp rebuke A rjuna
receives from the other warriors due to his actions, who accuse him of consorting
with the low-minded K ṛsh ṇa (“who can behave thus, if he is not a friend of K ṛsh ṇa ?”
7, 142, 86 = 5964), [and] the condemnation Rāma the son of Vāsudeva gives voice
to, [and], on the other hand, the emphasis Duryodhana places on the fact that he has
gone the path of the fathers 9, 5, 30 = 268, all this clearly shows that at least in the
poet’s representation of the d harmayuddha , the honest battle is the custom of the
ancient knightly age, the faithless politics of K ṛsh ṇa , however, appears as a newly
arising principle.1 79
Th ese characterizations of Duryodhana, Aśvatthāman, and K ṛ ṣ ṇa off ered
Holtzmann a way to concretize the epic’s genesis. After all, what could be more
self-evident than that the Brahmans, fi nding a heroic warrior epic before them,
had to change the roles and/or identities of various characters in order to bring the
text more in line with their views. Since Lassen, Western scholars had been unani-
mous in declaring the Mahābhārata to have originally been a K ṣatriya text. Indeed,
177 . Ibid., 84–85.
178 . Ibid., 87.
179 . Ibid., 87–88.
132 Chapter 02
Goldstücker had declared that, as the “record of the greatest martial event of ancient
India” the Mahābhārata “would as naturally threaten to depress that of the fi rst or
Brahmanical caste” as it off ered “an exaltation of kingly splendour and of the impor-
tance of the military caste.” 180 Drawing on the work of these scholars, Holtzmann
naturally thought he had found the most plausible model of how these changes would
have occurred in the text. Suyodhana, the heroic leader of the Kauravas, the honest
party of the old epic, would become Duryodhana, the wicked prince opposed to K ṛ ṣ ṇa
and his followers. Aśvatthāman, the heroic Brahman warrior of the old epic, would
retain his identity as a Brahman, but his actions would now be interpreted in light
of the new ideology as a betrayal of Brahmanism and this, too, would be retained as
evidence of the dangers of confusion of caste. K ṛ ṣ ṇa, the scheming politician of the
old epic, would become Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa Vāsudeva, the drunken, lascivious folk hero, and still
later K ṛ ṣ ṇa, the Brahmanic god entrusted with off ering divine sanction to the actions
of the encroacher Pā ṇḍavas. Th e rewrite of the epic would be complete, the old heroic
tradition all but wiped out, and a new dominant ideology—that of Brahmanism—
installed in its place.
But although this narrative has a certain superfi cial plausibility, it is when we
look closer at the mechanics of Holtzmann’s reconstruction that certain problems
crop up. First, there is the problem that Holtzmann cannot logically explain how
the Brahmans would have revised the epic, when no written text existed of it. An
oral bardic tradition cannot be “revised” in the same way as a written text. It can at
most be added to or embellished, and while it may change with time, there is no way
to attribute this shift to a defi nite moment in time, or, indeed, to a defi nite band of
“redactors.” Second, there is the problem that if the Indo-Germanic epic existed only
in the form of an oral bardic tradition (i.e., as a plurality of narratives dealing with
individual confl icts or acts of heroism), there could have been no question of rewrit-
ing the narrative. Th ere must have been at least one central narrative, a narrative
that summed up the essence of the heroic world such that it would make sense for
the Brahmans to rewrite it. Holtzmann’s solution to the problem was to aver that, at
some stage in its history, the Indo-Germanic epic tradition indeed underwent textu-
alization, either at the hands of a an Indo-Germanic or a Buddhist poet. But this only
introduced further complications into his narrative.
Consider, for instance, the fi rst scenario: that there existed a written composi-
tion with a defi nite theme. If, as Holtzmann suggested, an anonymous bard had
undertaken to portray “the tragic struggle of two principles—of knighthood, whose
time is over, and of the newly arising politics,” 181 he could only have done so if the
Indo-Germanic period had been directly followed by the Brahmanic period. Further,
the Brahmanic characters in the epic need not then have been introduced by the
Brahmanic redactors. If the poet’s aim was to portray the confl ict between the
Indo-Germanic and Brahmanic worlds, he would have needed to include at least some
Brahmanic characters in his narrative. At times, as for instance, when Holtzmann
speaks of the epic K ṛ ṣ ṇa, he seems to advocate precisely this solution. Brahmanism
180 . Goldstücker, “Hindu Epic Poetry: Th e Mahâbhârata,” 98.
181 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 89.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 133
was well known to the Indo-Germans, who were engaged with it in a hardbitten strug-
gle for superiority. On this scenario, we can at most imagine that the Brahmans, fi nd-
ing upon victory an epic revolving around the confl ict between the Indo-Germanic
and Brahmanic worlds, would have reversed the polarity in the epic, that is, made
the victorious Indo-Germans into the losers and adapted the story to present the
Brahmans as triumphant. Th is is, in fact, something Holtzmann explicitly argues for
with his (or, rather, his uncle’s) infamous inversion hypothesis. But there arises a
problem here: if the old Indo-Germanic poet truly wanted to present “the tragic strug-
gle of two principles,” if he truly wanted to show that “knighthood[’s] . . . time [was]
over,” what sense would it make to portray the Indo-Germans as emerging victorious
out of the war? Surely, if the knighthood, as Holtzmann says, is to be presented “to
us in all the glory of a setting sun,” 182 it must always have been the losing side in the
epic. So now it seems that the most the Brahmans could have done upon gaining
victory was to ensure that “the old honest battle-ethics of the knights” were not pre-
sented as “succumb[ing] to treason and deceit,” 183 but to legitimate tactics and supe-
rior skill. But this we know emphatically not to have been the case, for Holtzmann
himself cites many examples where the Brahmans present instances of treason and
deceit. If they rewrote the epic, it seems their intent was not at all to present K ṛ ṣ ṇa
and the Pā ṇḍavas as fl awless heroes. Add to this the problem that Holtzmann vacil-
lates between whether the Indo-Germanic bard came up with a poetic composition,
intended to evoke tragic eff ects, or with a historical account, which was merely tragic
as a side eff ect, and it is clear that the bardic composition hypothesis does not get us
very far in explaining the epic’s genesis.
But Holtzmann’s second scenario, that the oral epic was fi rst written down in the
Buddhist period, is not much better. If a Buddhist poet was responsible for the textu-
alization of the epic, this epic cannot have been concerned with the confl ict between
the Indo-Germanic and Brahmanic worlds. In this confl ict, Brahmanism would have
won and taken over the Indo-Germanic epic and it is this epic the Buddhist poet
would have had to revise. His would have been the second texualization—a revision,
in fact—and not the fi rst, as Holtzmann explicitly argues. If, however, we take the
alternative that the Buddhist poet “extracted a single narrative from the legendary
materials present [to him]” and “refashioned” it “to an independent artistic composi-
tion, to the M ahābhārata (according to its oldest form),”1 84 then Brahmanic elements
could only have entered the epic after the end of the Buddhist period. Th ere is no
scenario in which the Brahmans could have taken over the epic, handed it over to the
Buddhists, and then asked for it back. Th en there is the problem that if Brahmanism
had not entered on the stage as yet and the Mahābhārata was not as yet a vehicle
of religious rhetoric, there is no plausible reason why a Buddhist (!) would under-
take to preserve the memory of blood-drinking, wife-bartering Indo-Germans. In
spite of Holtzmann’s eff orts to present the Indo-Germanic and Buddhist traditions
182 . Ibid.
183 . Ibid.
184 . Ibid., 67.
134 Chapter 02
as congenial, there is no scenario in which we can imagine the former as following
seamlessly into the latter.1 85
Here is where Holtzmann’s account rapidly begins to unravel. It seems he hated
Brahmanism so much that he was unsure whether to make the epic an instru-
ment of the Brahmanic campaign against the Buddhists or an instrument of the
Brahmanic campaign against the Indo-Germans. He wanted, on the one hand, to tie
the Indo-Germans to the Buddhists. Th e thesis that a Buddhist poet would have “out
of the mass of legends handed down, placed a particularly outstanding [example]
in the center, artistically grouped others in the form of episodes around this [one],
sharply delineated the characters, and let them collide against each other in a tragic
confl ict,” 186 seems to have off ered him a way of doing so. Th is collusion, further-
more, had the advantage that he could now imagine the Brahmanic counterresponse
as being one single response, directed against both parties of the alliance. If the
Indo-Germanic and Buddhist poet were one and the same, no contradiction should
arise and it would be easy to imagine the Brahmans, mortal enemies of free-spirited
thought as well as of scientifi c progress, as being bent upon the destruction of this
Indo-Germanic Buddhist epic.
In a broad outline, it is clear that this is exactly what Holtzmann had in mind.
First, as we have observed, he wished to see Buddhism as the natural successor to
Indo-Germanic tradition and Brahmanism as an alien imposition upon this culture.
From his hyperbolic criticisms of Brahmanism, it is clear that he saw Brahmanism as
the Eastern analogue to Catholicism, which Holtzmann Sr. had already identifi ed as
the mortal enemy of the pagan Germans. Second, he clearly thought of Brahmanism as
somehow being hostile to the spirit of both Germanism and Buddhism, even though
this created extraordinary problems for him regarding where to locate Brahmanism
historically. On the one hand, if it came between Indo-German and Buddhist tradi-
tions, the former could not have gone over seamlessly into the latter: a Brahmanic
interregnum had to be admitted. It was also necessary to locate Brahmanism before
Buddhism if the Brahmanic response to Buddhism was to assume the status of a
Counter -Reformation. On the other hand, if Brahmanism came after Buddhism,
there was no reason for it to experience such hostility toward Germanic tradition,
since this would now be a tradition that had been buried for some three centuries
in Buddhism. Th ere could also not be a direct confl ict, tragic or otherwise, between
the “knighthood” and the “newly arising politics,” with the further consequence that
185 . Especially from his comments regarding Duryodhana as king Aśoka, Holtzmann
seems to have had in mind Aśoka’s conversion to Buddhism following his campaign against
Kali ṅga. Aśoka, a fearsome general and warrior, is said to have become pacifi c after wit-
nessing the great destruction of the Kalin ̇ga war. It seems as though here all the condi-
tions required to imagine a transition from the Indo-Germanic to the Buddhist worlds
are truly met. But there is a problem here, because any epic commissioned by a penitent
king Aśoka/Duryodhana would have had to culminate in a rejection of violence and a mes-
sage of peace. Th e Mahābhārata, indeed, does so, ending with the message of ahi ṁsa as
the highest d harma , but then, crucially, it would not be an Indo-Germanic epic, dedicated
to preserving the memory of the Indo-Germanic tradition and its heroic values. It would
precisely be rejecting those values.
186 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 68.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 135
the epic would lose what was, according to Holtzmann, its central narrative prin-
ciple. Th e only way out of this dilemma was to assume the existence of a common
Indo-Germanic-Buddhist epic tradition. Yet, as is clear by now, this assumption is
an unsustainable myth. Its only function in Holtzmann’s work was to perpetuate
the theory of a Catholic/Brahmanic betrayal of the Germanic people. In essence, it
provided him a way of projecting his issues with the Roman Catholic church out-
ward—onto Indian history—and thereafter reimporting them in the form of critical
scholarship—as a “scientifi c” account of history. 187
Once we set aside this confl ation, the only way to look at Holtzmann’s project is
to treat these two traditions in isolation from each other (see chart 2.3 for a clarifi ca-
tion of the parallel descent of the epic via the Indo-Germanic and the Buddhist com-
positions). It is here that the contradictions in his theory become especially glaring.
A look at Holtzmann’s characterizations of what are, for him, the three central
epic characters shows just how absurd his project was. As we have seen, he sought
to concretize the process of the epic’s transformation in terms of the changes to
Aśvatthāman’s, Duryodhana’s, and K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s respective identities in the epic. Taking
up these three characters as paradigmatic examples for the kinds of changes redac-
tors would have made—and would have needed to make—to the epic, he tried to
off er evidentiary support for the Lassen-Goldstücker hypothesis of the epic’s ori-
gins as a K ṣatriya text. But when we look more closely at this attempt, insurmount-
able problems arise. Take, for example, Aśvatthāman. Identifi ed in the earliest stage
of Holtzmann’s text as a Brahman, he progressively mutates into something quite
diff erent: a double-headed Indo-Germanic Buddhist fi gure. Th us, we read: “In the
Mahābhārata [Holtzmann means the text in its present form], the classes are already
strictly distinguished from each other, but nonetheless not as absolutely closed off
from each other as in M anu or in Āpastamba . In the epic two Brahmans, Dro ṇa and
Açvatthāman , father and son, play a main role as brave warriors. Th is fact was not
invented by the compilers and redactors, but unwillingly enough taken over from the
old poem; that they did not dare to change this relationship [i.e., the fact that they are
Brahmans] can have had its reason only in the general prevalence of the legend.”1 88
But once Holtzmann introduces the hypothesis of the Indo-Germanic original epic
in c hapter 6, Aśvatthāman takes on a progressively more Indo-Germanic cast. In
Holtzmann’s words, “Indian and German antiquity simultaneously complement each
other. Both races . . . hold the duty of blood-vengeance to be holy . . . one would rather
presume to be reading an ancient German legend than a poem from the land of the
tender-nerved Indians, when one comes across the narrative in which the revenge of
Açvatthāman for the treasonous murder of his father D ro ṇa is described.” 189 Peculiarly,
187 . Th is has not stopped others from reviving the Holtzmannian myth. His
anti-Brahmanism continues in the work of contemporary scholars such as James
L. Fitzgerald. But that is not to say that it is any more tenable. Th e seductions of the new
historicist philology being what they were, scholars have been willing to overlook its
anti-Catholic, anti-Semitic implications (see fi rst note in this chapter), but this does not
make their work is any way more “scientifi c.”
188 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 17.
189 . Ibid., 49.
cipe
eht
fo
tnecsed
eTh
3.2
trahC
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 137
the fi erce Brahmanic warrior begins moving retrogressively relative to the rest of
history: he is progressively stripped of his defi ning Brahman identity, while his war-
rior side comes increasingly to the fore. But what is a Brahman already doing in the
epic, when the emergence of Brahmanism—at least on this account—is at least sev-
eral centuries away? Furthermore, even if we revert to the fi rst account, where an
Indo-Germanic poet composed the epic as a story of the tragic confl ict between the
Indo-German and Brahman traditions, the martial Brahman could hardly have been
on Duryodhana’s side. And if was written into the epic later, when did he acquire
Indo-Germanic traits? Even if Aśvatthāman was originally present as a pro-German
Brahman in the epic and, as Holtzmann avers, the later redactors did not dare to
change this fact due to “the general prevalence of the legend,”1 90 how does a martial
Brahman survive the Buddhist phase?
Th ings get even more confusing when we consider Holtzmann’s account of
Aśvatthāman’s fate at the hands of the Buddhist composer. Instead of moving
backward through history and becoming progressively more Germanic, the charac-
ter reverses direction and now begins moving forward through history, ultimately
mutating into the historical Buddha. Th is is absurd, because even if we were to imag-
ine that the Buddhist poet chose to confer Buddhist identities on his Indo-Germanic
prototypes (in essence, retelling the confl ict as a Buddhist Tripi tạ ka tale), why choose
a martial Brahman of all things to be the Buddha in his retelling? According to leg-
end, Gautama Buddha was born to king Śuddhodana of the Śākyas. Th us he started
life as a K ṣatriya before becoming a renunciate. If the poet’s intent, as Holtzmann
seems to think, was to endow the epic characters with suitable post-Indo-Germanic
world identities, would it not make sense to take an Indo-Germanic warrior as his
template? And if Aśvatthāman’s Brahman identity is so essential to him that even a
“genial” poet could not eliminate it from his narrative, how is it that it conveniently
goes under just at those moments when he is the Buddha?
Whatever Aśvatthāman’s true identity, Holtzmann placed overwhelming
emphasis on his Indo-Germanic and Buddhist traits. Even if originally a Brahman,
Aśvatthāman so completely internalizes the Indo-Germanic outlook that the later
redactors had no choice but to make him a compatriot of Duryodhana’s, an evil and
sinister fi gure. (Indeed, from the perspective of the Brahmanic redaction, it makes
little diff erence whether he is Indo-Germanic or Buddhist since, as Holtzmann tells
us, he has for all practical purposes, surrendered himself to the devil. 191 )
Duryodhana’s case is even more interesting. In addition to claiming that
Suyodhana was an Indo-Germanic hero, Holtzmann also argued for seeing
Suyodhana/Duryodhana as king Aśoka. He writes:
If we may seek the great Unknown, the poet of the Mahābhārata , at the court of
the Buddhist kings of north India, perhaps that of Açoka or his followers, then it is
likely that this poet adduced the religious views of his masters and patrons to his
heroes, perhaps glorifi ed the king at whose court he lived precisely in the fi gure of
190 . Ibid., 17.
191 . Ibid., 123.
138 Chapter 02
Duryodhana . Th en it would also be clear why later the victorious Brahmanism had
to invert and present K ar ṇa’s faction from the worst side. One would thus have to
investigate whether, even in today’s Mahābhārata , king Duryodhana and his friends
are represented as heretics or, even worse, as Buddhists.1 92
If, as suggested above, in the fi gure of Duryodhana, king Açokaw as glorifi ed, then
it is natural that the Brahmans later placed the image of D uryodhana in the shade.
Th at he [i.e., Duryodhana] was a Buddhist is of course not said anywhere; this name
[i.e., Buddhist] is avoided.1 93
In the fi gure of Aśvatthāman, we found a confl ation of Indo-Germanic and Buddhist
characteristics (overlaid over a foundation of Brahman identity). Aśvatthāman, a
fi ctional character from the old epic, had been refashioned in the Buddhist poet’s
account to appear as a real, historical character, namely, the Buddha. In the fi gure of
Duryodhana, we fi nd a similar confl ation of Indo-Germanic and Buddhist character-
istics, but with the additional complication that it is now the real, historical character
who gives rise to the fi ctional character. Th us, the historical king Aśoka appears to
have given rise to the character of Duryodhana in the epic, even though—according
to the same account—Duryodhana or Suyodhana, as we must call him, was already
present in the epic as an Indo-Germanic hero and opponent of the Pā ṇḍavas. But in
that case, why would the poet have projected a Buddhist identity on to Duryodhana
in particular? It is one thing to claim that, out of gratitude to his patron, he modelled
a character in the epic after him. It is quite another to claim that, out of gratitude,
he re-modelled an epic character after him. In the latter case, Holtzmann would have
to explain why this character in particular was suited to become the epic prototype
of the historical Aśoka, and that means, once again, to show what makes the Indo-
Germanic and Buddhist traditions congenial. Simply asserting their proximity is not
suffi cient as a form of reasoning; in fact, it suff ers from petitio principii since this is
precisely what is to be demonstrated.
Even if we overlook this absurdity, other problems remain. If, as Holtzmann
argues, the poet “adduced” “the religious views of his masters and patrons to his
heroes,” what sense does it make to speak of Duryodhana and his associates being
“represented” “in today’s Mahābhārata ” a s Buddhists? Surely, they would already b e
Buddhists post the fi rst Buddhist composition? Or perhaps we are meant to under-
stand the claim as saying that some traces of Duryodhana’s Buddhist origins survived
past the Brahmanic redaction. But in that case, why erase Duryodhana’s Buddhist
qualities at all, if the point was precisely to write a propaganda narrative?
Th e confl ation of the historical Aśoka with the fi ctional Duryodhana is also beset
with other problems. If Duryodhana loses the Kuruk ṣetra war, he can hardly be a
model for the victorious Aśoka, whose Buddhist trajectory was launched with his
brutal suppression of the rival power of Kali ṅga. But if he wins the battle at the
expense of the slaughter of his cousins, his cousins’ off spring, and even the unborn
children in the women’s wombs, he can hardly provide an appropriate parallel for the
192 . Ibid., 105–6.
193 . Ibid., 108.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 139
historical personage he supposedly inspired and/or was based on. 194 Whichever way
we look at it, it seems Duryodhana and Aśoka must part ways—even without the
assistance of Brahman redactors. Holtzmann’s attempt to combine two characters
with such opposite characteristics once again bears out our claim that his concern
here was with neither historical accuracy nor narrative logic. Rather, his guiding aim
was to fuse Indo-Germanic and Buddhist culture in some way—a desire that mani-
fests most conspicuously in his evocation of a “secret bond” (“geheimnisvolles Band”)
that links Aśoka and Duryodhana:
Th at a secret bond exists between A çoka and Duryodhana is also clear from the fact
that the accounts of the miraculous birth of Duryodhana and his hundred broth-
ers, as the M ahābhārata presents it to us, corresponds remarkably with similar leg-
ends about Açoka and his family. Th e mother of Duryodhana, it is recounted, 1, 115,
1 = 4483 brings a bundle of fl esh into the world; this is cut up into a hundred parts,
these are preserved in vats and from them arise one hundred sons. . . . A çoka too has
a hundred brothers Lassen II 213 and his grandfather C andragupta (whose identity
with Açoka has been asserted by Talboys Wheeler) arises with his brothers from a
lump of fl esh that is born from his mother II 197. Lassen explicitly draws our atten-
tion to the similarity of these legends with those of the Mahābhārata .1 95
Th e bizarre nature of Holtzmann’s assertion ought not obscure the real issues at stake
here. As we have seen in preceding sections, one of Holtzmann’s central concerns in
his Mahābhārata was to restore an integral history to Germany, which he did via pro-
jecting German history onto India. Th us, Germans appeared as Indo-Germans and
Protestantism as Buddhism. In a second step, he then used Mahābhārata criticism as
a means to construct an alternative history of India, one in which Brahmanism either
never appeared or is excised from the historical record such that Indo-Germanic tra-
dition fl owed seamlessly into Buddhism. As he reminds us, “Buddhism accept[ed] the
entire old mythology; we fi nd Indra and B rahman worshipped next to Buddha (Benfey,
Kl. Sch. I 184. Holtzmann Th ierkreis pp. 26–27).”1 96 In Holtzmann’s eyes, this made
Buddhism the logical successor to the Germanic tradition. It off ered him a way of
asserting a continuity to German tradition, which he found missing in European his-
tory due to the incursion of Roman Catholicism. Here at last, he thought, was a tradi-
tion free from the taint of the “corruption of history [Geschichtsverderbniss]” of the
epic tradition. In contrast, the Brahmans, like “Scholastics and Catholic priests,” but
unlike Buddhists (and, one presumes, Protestants) had been responsible for a mas-
sive falsifi cation of history.1 97 It fell to the modern Mahābhārata critic to uncover this
falsifi cation, which he could do best by deploying the methods of historical criticism.
It is when we turn to the third of Holtzmann’s key epic characters, K ṛ ṣ ṇa, that
we most clearly discover what was entailed in such criticism. First, there was the
194 . We thank Alf Hiltebeitel for pointing this out (personal communication).
195 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 106 (Holtzmann’s emphasis).
196 . Ibid., 116.
197 . Ibid., 96.
140 Chapter 02
necessity of denying the divinity of K ṛ ṣ ṇa. As Holtzmann put it, “the epic knew of a
K ṛsh ṇa , . . . accorded a very important role, a leader of a pastoral race allied with the
Pā ṇḍava ”1 98 Second, there was the need to deride and profane the god of the Hindus.
Th eir god, Holtzmann informed them, was “crude, addicted to being drunk and
immoral”; he was, furthermore, himself a “cow-killer,” making a nonsense of their
ideas of ethics. 199 Indeed, there was no accusation so terrible that Holtzmann would
not hurl at Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s head. Th ird, all sorts of pseudohistorical explanations had to be
conjured up to explain how K ṛ ṣ ṇa could have appeared as a god to the Hindus. Th us,
there could be Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa, the epic character; K ṛ ṣ ṇa, the folk hero; K ṛ ṣ ṇa, the founder
of a religious tradition; Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa, the chieftain of the Yādava clan; but there could not
be Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa, the all-god. And even if one acknowledged K ṛ ṣ ṇa as god, he was at best a
particularistic god, the god of the Hindus, who could be explained out of the cultural
particularity of this people.2 00
MAHĀBHĀRATA CRITICISM AFTER HOLTZMANN
Even though Holtzmann off ered his vision of the Mahābhārata as a contribution
to Mahābhārata criticism (on page 9 he writes that in the “inner criticism of the
Mahābhārata is found a problem that is destined to profi tably employ many future
generations of scholars” and on page 11 he utters his infamous statement about
how “the most important principle for the inner criticism of the Mahābhārata” was
uttered by his uncle), in reality his work had little to do with what has, since the nine-
teenth century, usually been understood by the term. Textual criticism, as has been
noted, is a mechanical method of reconstruction of archetypes. Glen Most observes,
Lachmann’s method is mechanical, both in the sense that it must presuppose the
unthinking transcription of manuscripts if it is to be applied to them and in the
sense that the determination of relations of fi liation is achieved on the basis of
simple rules and calculations of probability. Ideally, choices of manuscripts and of
readings based on this method will be rational in that they will depend not on the
taste of the individual scholar but on objective evidence that can be mathematized
and evaluated. 201
198 . Ibid., 132.
199 . Ibid., 78.
200 . Holtzmann’s pseudohistorical researches into K ṛ ṣ ṇa were carried forward by
Hopkins and even more so by Garbe. Th eir ideas of K ṛ ṣ ṇa as an arriviste god fi nd their fi n-
est expression in the work of Walter Ruben. See his Konkordanz und Kommentar der Motive
seines Heldenlebens (Vienna: Adolf Holzhausens Nfg., 1943), and see also Ulrich Scheider,
“Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s Postumer Aufstieg: Zur Frühgeschichte der Bhakti-Bewegung,” S aeculum 33,
no. 1 (1982): 38–49; reprinted in O pera Minora , ed. Marion Meisig (Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz, 2002), 215–25. Both works are classic examples of the way German
Indologists sought to meet the theological challenge posed by alternative ideas of divinity
through constructing a narrative of the origin of those ideas in primitive tribes or cults
prone to deifying their heroes and/or religious leaders.
201 . Most, “Editor’s Introduction,” 10.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 141
Further, the method is based on a method of manuscript comparison and evaluation.
As R. Marichal puts it, “our only source are the manuscripts themselves, then, in the
fi nal analysis, these stemma. We therefore do not have the right to repudiate their
evidence on the pretext that it appears absurd to us.”2 02 Th e idea of this new method
of textual criticism was that by basing their editorial judgments on the evidence of
the codices themselves, scholars would be able to avoid the notorious e mendatio ope
ingenii (correction according to one’s wits), which had been responsible for a number
of unattested readings creeping into the tradition. Th is new emendatio ope codicum
(correction according to the manuscript sources), as it was called, was held in the
nineteenth century to be a major advance. In particular, it greatly reduced the scope
for the use of subjective i udicum , the bane of nineteenth-century philologists inter-
ested in the recovery of historical archetypes.
But what Holtzmann and the other Mahābhārata critics were now proposing went
far beyond what a Renaissance scholar might have understood by the use of subjec-
tive iudicum . Even the most ardent critics of the vulgate Bible in the eighteenth cen-
tury such as Richard Bentley would not have dreamed of “editing” the Bible so that it
became an Indo-Germanic text with later Semitic “interpolations.” And yet, that was
precisely what the German critics, led by Holtzmann, were undertaking to do.
Holtzmann and co. might have adopted Bentley’s assertion that “For us, reason
and the facts are worth more than a hundred manuscripts.”2 03 Except that, in their
case, the “reasons and the facts” were the existence of Āryan tribes and a prehis-
toric confl ict that pitted the white race against the black. Th e next scholar we must
consider after Holtzmann, the Bonn Indologist Hermann Oldenberg, overtly dis-
tanced himself from Holtzmann’s theses,2 04 but in reality, actually duplicated most
of them. In the process he endowed Holtzmann’s claims with a veneer of scientifi c
legitimacy. Th us, on the very fi rst page of his book, he averred that the Mahābhārata
“constitutes the powerful link between old and new India, the India of the Aryan
and of the Hindu.” Oldenberg thought that “Indian bards and poets [would have]
laid the fi rst foundation for the monstrous poem” that would eventually become
“the Mahābhārata, that is, the great poem of the Bhārata-clan.” Like Holtzmann, he
thought that the Mahābhārata “began its existence as a simple epic narrative,” but,
as he argued, it “grew in the course of the centuries to a monstrous chaos: besides
the main narrative there are true primal forests of smaller narratives, besides that
countless and endless teachings about theological, philosophical, natural-scientifi c
matters, law, politics, worldly wisdom and practical advice.”2 05
202 . Robert Marichal, “La critique des textes,” in L’histoire et ses méthodes , ed. Charles
Samaran (Paris: Éditions Gallimard, 1961), 1285.
203 . Cited and translated in Timpanaro, Th e Genesis of Lachmann’s Method , 55. Timpanaro
lists the original as Bentley’s edition of Horace (note on Carm . 3.27.15) but does not men-
tion which of the two volumes it is in.
204 . “Th us, the hypothesis under discussion appears to me to be built up on a foun-
dation that does not suffi ce by far to carry it. Has one not applied the all too question-
able standards of the Christian Middle Ages here to the Oriental work of poetry—excited
over the newly discovered Indo-German tradition, seen Germanic tribes in the Indians?”
Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata , 37.
205 . Ibid., 1.
142 Chapter 02
Oldenberg’s judgment, that the Mahābhārata was composed of a mass of heterog-
enous narratives, was to become one of the enduring prejudices of modern scholar-
ship. It would not be questioned, for instance, by any German scholar of rank well
into the twenty-fi rst century. Later generations of scholars would cite Oldenberg’s
assessment of the Mahābhārata as settled wisdom, without being aware that this
assessment was derived largely from Holtzmann. Holtzmann’s rabid assertions
would thus enter into the mainstream. Th eses such as the assumption of an original
heroic bardic epic would become a stock-in-trade of modern Mahābhārata scholars.
Scarcely a scholar would bother to inquire into the origins of these prejudices or into
what commitments they entailed for the scholar. Like Oldenberg, they would trust
in “the highly inconsistently transmitted text of such monstrous value,” being, “in
the far distance” “purifi ed and secured by the philological art which it has a claim
upon.”2 06 But they would not see how that “philological art” itself was corrupt, inas-
much as it set out from the premise of a text in need of purifi cation where “purifi ca-
tion” referred not to the emendation of certain readings but to the purging of the
epic of its non-Āryan elements.
A brief look at Oldenberg’s Mahābhārata suffi ces to bear this out. For him, too,
“northern India, . . . enter[ed] overwhelmingly for consideration for antiquity as
the homeland of Aryan culture.” He considered the northwest in particular to be
the home of the “tribes, of whom the ancient accounts report.” “Th e Vedas arose
there, [and] Vedic culture had its seat there.” Th e epic, too, “belongs to the West.”2 07
“Signifi cant and tragic events that occur in its lap are the material of the epic.” Calling
the epic the story of “a battle between warring cousins,” he deliberately excluded
all other kinds of materials from purview. 208 Following a prejudice by now familiar
to us from Holtzmann, he averred that he “fore[went] to trace more closely what is
further reported after the main battle—endless teachings, which Yudhi ṣtḥ ira, now
consecrated king, receives from Bhī ṣma, a wise man, from this hero of the enemy
side wounded to the point of death; the royal horse sacrifi ce, which he performs, and
other such things that are narrated in the closing books—unimportant [matters],
and of dubious or extremely dubious origin.” 209 In his opinion, these were all extrane-
ous to the epic’s central concern, the battle between the Kauravas and Pā ṇḍavas, of
which he wrote, “one sees that these are all human occurrences, although portrayed
mythically, nonetheless, in the last analysis, quite certainly historical. Th e heroes of
the Mahābhārata are, in this respect, related to Achilles and Agamemnon of Greek
epic; [they are] not primordial and superhuman men such as Gilgamesh and Eabani
of the Babylonian.” 210
Oldenberg declared that “what off ers itself easily and naturally to wide-ranging
epic fashioning were human fates, the fates of princely lineages.”2 11 As he imagined
206 . Ibid., 2.
207 . Ibid.
208 . Ibid., 3.
209 . Ibid., 6.
210 . Ibid.
211 . Ibid., 7.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 143
it, the epic must have arisen from a circle of legends pertaining to historic personages,
narrated retrospectively to the descendant of one of those lineages.
Among the scattered fragments of historical recollection that the later Vedic period
has left behind, one is found here, which we may evaluate as more signifi cant and
more intelligible. . . . A royal father and a royal son, both surrounded by great splen-
dor. Th e poet of a poem preserved in the Atharvaveda tells us where they ruled: over
the Kurus, precisely the tribe that stands in the center of the later Vedic period and
the Mahābhārata. Its period, too, is tolerably reliably ascertainable. Th e metrical tech-
nique of this poem, its location not in the Ṛgveda but in the Atharvaveda, indeed,
the frequent mention of both these princes in the later Veda texts, while the Ṛgveda
knows nothing of them: this all comes together to ascribe them [i.e., the princes] in
all likelihood to the period after but probably not much after the Ṛgveda, prior to the
Brāhma ṇa period. 212
Following in the train of the Lassen-Goldstücker hypothesis of epic origins and the
Holtzmannian hypothesis of narrative elements being clues to historical circumstances,
Oldenberg thought that “even if the narrative of its recitation at Janamejaya’s sacrifi ce
may be fi ction and most probably is fi ction,” “something correct [must] shine through
here all the same.” As he wrote, “does not the genealogical connection of Parik ṣit and
Janamejaya with those heroes [i.e., the Pā ṇḍavas] make a thoroughly believable impres-
sion? . . . And it is, in fact, possible that the fi rst foundation for this poetic composition
was laid precisely at Janamejaya’s court, a poem that—naturally, in endlessly trans-
formed form—narrates to us even today of the fi ght between the Bhāratas.” 213
Th e problem with this assertion is that no scholar had yet shown that the
Mahābhārata was a historical account or that it ought to be taken as a historical
account. Th is, too, was a prejudice deriving from the Lassen-Holtzmann school of
epic scholarship. For instance, Oldenberg averred of the epic that “we may consider
it totally plausible . . . that events that were more or less similar to the battle of the
two heroic lineages actually occurred. Of course, what in the epic, in epic fashion, is
narrated as something earth shaking, as the great occurrence of the past, certainly
had, in truth, far more modest dimensions. . . . ” 214 Of course, Western scholars were
aware of the reception of the text as a work of sm ṛti literature, that is, a work deal-
ing with law, ritual, and philosophy. Before Oldenberg, the Jesuit scholar Fr. Joseph
Dahlmann had published a treatise characterizing the Mahābhārata as a work of legal
and moral wisdom. 215 Oldenberg, however, brushed aside these objections. To his
212 . Ibid., 8.
213 . Ibid., 9.
214 . Ibid., 11.
215 . Joseph Dahlmann, Das Mahābhārata als Epos und Rechtsbuch. Ein Problem aus
Altindiens Cultur- und Literaturgeschichte (Berlin: Felix L. Dames, 1895) and see also his later
Die Genesis des Mahabhārata (Berlin: Felix L. Dames, 1899) defending himself (success-
fully) against Hopkins’ criticisms. Alternative approaches to the Mahābhārata w ere avail-
able to German scholars, had they wished to take them. Unfortunately, the Jesuit father’s
work, too, was brushed aside as not meriting serious consideration (see Oldenberg’s
144 Chapter 02
mind, it was self-evident that the Indians, failing to develop historical research in the
same sense as the Egyptians or Babylonians, were incapable of appreciating the true
meaning of the text. 2 16 As he put it, “narration of stories, as one needed it and as it alone
was conceivable at the time, existed . . . precisely as the epic: festive entertainment, mov-
ing lore of the κ λ έ α ἀ ν δ ρ ῶ ν; fl attery of the descendants, who as co-possessors had a share
in the fame of the ancients.” 217 In all respects, the Indians showed themselves to be poor
caretakers of texts, for,
whether the narrative plays out in the king’s palace or on the battlefi eld or in the wild
forest or the dwelling place of monsters, giants, pious ascetics: overall there could only
exist colorfully embellished, wonder-fi lled occurrence. Th ere, interruptions, ineff ectual
elements were removed, a context created between what did not belong together, what
lay distant brought close and woven into the presentation, above all, [the human fac-
ulty of] fantasy’s need to see great heroic fi gures in the center be satisfi ed—all this
historically and unhistorically alike, beyond truth and falsity.2 18
It is, of course, not necessary to identify Holtzmann as the source of these prejudices.
Th ere is not a single Western scholar in the period who might not have expressed
similar sentiments regarding the Indians. As a conquered, backward people, it was
evident that the Indians had nothing in terms of scholarship or textual practice to
compare to the European scholars’. From the European perspective, the Indian com-
mentaries and subcommentaries, their sophisticated technical philosophical vocab-
ulary, their robust systems of metacritique and analysis, were worth less than the
refl ections of the least little Western critic. An entire epistemic tradition built up over
centuries of painstaking work was dismissed with a vacuous gesture of critical self-
refl exivity. 219 How could Indians lacking in historical consciousness (so ran the story)
have anything to off er an age that prided itself, above all, on being historical?2 20 And
Das Mahābhārata , 32, where he dismisses Dahlmann’s work with the comment “a scientifi c
monstrosity: to discuss something so undiscussable would be a waste of eff ort”).
216 . “Monumental documents that report of the deeds of ancient kings, such as [existed]
in Egypt or Babylonia, of course, did not exist in the India of the Kurus and Pā ṇḍus and
still did not exist there through long centuries after. And historiography in a scientifi c
sense: how many leagues one was, of course, far from that! What purpose would it have
served anyway for this epoch?” Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata , 11.
217 . Ibid., 12.
218 . Ibid.
219 . See Arbogast Schmitt’s Modernity and Plato: Two Paradigms of Rationality , trans.
Vishwa Adluri (Rochester, NY: Camden House, 2012) for a superb discussion of how the
same problem affl icts the study of ancient philosophy, and not just since the aesthetic
naturalism of the nineteenth century, but already in the Renaissance.
220 . Th e notion that the Indian mind is lacking in historical consciousness or in a sense
of history—indeed, of time, of movement, of change—is a central tenet of modern schol-
arship. It has been used time and again to justify Western “critical” interventions in the
texts of the Indians, teaching their history back to them as it were. Yet, as scholars from
Biardeau to Heesterman have shown, this view rests on an insuffi ciently sophisticated
understanding of the way tradition negotiates change. “Tradition,” writes Heesterman, “is
characterized by the inner confl ict of atemporal order and temporal shift rather than by
resilience and adaptiveness. It is this unresolved confl ict that provides the motive force
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 145
yet, when we look at the concrete details of Oldenberg’s reconstruction it is evident
just how much of Holtzmann’s narrative he has internalized. Consider, for instance,
the following longer passage in which Oldenberg traces the evolution of the epic from
its heroic, knightly beginnings in the northwest to its transmutation into a work of
Brahmanic lore as it moved further east and south:
If the splendor of Janamejaya’s kingdom, for example, led to the fi rst beginnings of
the heroic poem concerning the deeds of his ancestors, as we may suppose follow-
ing what has been said, the continued existence of the princely house will have kept
such beginnings alive at fi rst [and] will have encouraged their development. Unlike
the earlier portions, however, the later, didactic portions of the epic are not as pref-
erentially at home in the Northwest, in the land of Janamejaya. Th eir horizon had
broadened; often, they mention places and people from the East. Herein is betrayed
that the epic had detached itself from its original motherland. It was interwoven all
the more fi rmly with the interests of a stronger, more enduring power than that of
this dynasty [i.e., Janamejaya’s house]. Th is [power] secured the great authority of
the poem far beyond the region and term of the Pān ̣dụ sovereignty. Th is power was
Brahmanism. And one must add, allied with it, a second: the veneration of K ṛ ṣ ṇa. 221
Again like Holtzmann, Oldenberg thought the epic had undergone a change in
authority from the bards to the Brahmans. He noted that the epic began with the
arrival of “a s ūta and son of a sūta [in the Naimi ṣa Forest],” but the Brahmans pro-
gressively became “much more important in terms of their signifi cance for the
Mahābhārata.”2 22 Like Holtzmann Sr., he evoked the contrast between wandering
minstrels and the clergy in the Middle Ages to explain the relation of the bards to
the Brahmans. He wrote, “in terms of their signifi cance for the Mahābhārata, the
great administrators and enlargers of Indian literature are ahead of all these kinds
of narrators [i.e., the sūta s]: the Brahmans. As with the rivalry between the poetry
of the minstrels and the clergy in the European Middle Ages, something similar is
repeated here: thereby, the Brahmans naturally do not neglect to ascribe especially
salvifi c eff ects for the organizers of such recitation to the narratives which they recite
and which are obviously associated with appropriate gifts for them.” 223 Oldenberg
also set forth the Holtzmannian critique of Brahmanic avarice with the words, “one
only needs to look at this miniature epic [i.e., the story of Śuna ḥśepa in the Ṛg Veda]
in order to recognize that a Brahman is its author; it is ceremoniously recited by a
we perceive as the fl exibility of tradition. Indian civilization off ers a particularly clear case
of this dynamic inner confl ict. Th e confl ict is not just handled surreptitiously by way of
situational compromise. Once we look beyond the hard surface of the projected absolute
order, it appears subtly, but no less eff ectively, to be expressed by the same scriptures that
so impressively expound the dharma’s absoluteness.” J. C. Heesterman, Th e Inner Confl ict
of Tradition: Essays in Indian Ritual, Kingship, and Society (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1985), 2.
221 . Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata , 12.
222 . Ibid., 14.
223 . Ibid., 14–15.
146 Chapter 02
priest, who sits on a gold-embroidered mat, and to whom another priest, also sit-
ting on an identical seat, responds with encouraging words. ‘Th en for him (for the
king), not the slightest sin is left. He should give a thousand (cows) to the reciter,
a hundred to the respondent, besides that the two seats; and a white cart spanned
with mule mares is owed to the Hotar (the reciting priest).’ ” According to him “the
Mahābhārata itself provide[d] many [such] proofs of the role that Brahmans played
in such a context. It probably occasionally shines through that wicked people did not
shy away from fi nding a trace of beggarliness in the position of such people [i.e., the
Brahmans] vis-à-vis their wealthy, noble listeners and patrons.”2 24
Like Holtzmann, Oldenberg was convinced that if we could only “go behind this layer
[i.e., “the oldest recognizable layer of the epic text”],” “the most original origin of
the narrative of these knightly battles” would be found “rather among the worldly
singers, for example, from the sūta-caste, than among the Brahmans.” 225 Although
he acknowledged that “in principle, the possibility cannot be disputed that from the
beginning on, Brahmanic eff orts are present,” 226 it is clear that he found Holtzmann’s
thesis of a Brahmanic takeover of the epic to be far more seductive. Echoing the lat-
ter’s views of Brahmanic corruption almost verbatim, he wrote,
Th e domination Brahmanism exerted over the epic, described here, and its connec-
tion to the great possession of this caste, the Veda: is it salutary for the life and
development of this poetry? One will hardly want to answer this question positively.
Th e innocent, joyous pleasure of narration [and] sympathy for heroic knighthood
had to dissipate in the spiritual atmosphere, [it] be[came] alloyed with foreign ele-
ments. Th at very monstrous transformation, which took place later, of the narrative
poem into a great didactic poem or even into a heap of didactic poems, manifestly
has its roots here. 227
Before Holtzmann, Lassen had suggested that Brahmans would have taken over a
K ṣatriya epic and Goldstücker had—reviewing and paraphrasing Lassen—developed
this idea into a comprehensive theory of the epic’s transformation. But the roots
of Oldenberg’s criticisms of the Brahmans, as well as his evocation of the “heroic
knightood,” were specifi cally Holtzmannian. It was Holtzmann who fi rst characterized
the old epic in terms of the innocent, free-spirited nature of the Germanic people and it
was Holtzmann who had fi rst criticized the later epic as possessing a completely dif-
ferent spiritual outlook from the original. Oldenberg, as was practically obligatory for
every Indologist, embellished upon this thesis, adding to it a contrast between prose
and poetic sections of the epic. Opining that “we cannot doubt that the Mahābhārata,
too, in an old stage of its existence had the form of prose-poetry,” he argued that
“the great epic itself includes, among the colorful variety of its component parts,
a great deal of prose-poetry pieces within it that look really strange in the middle
224 . Ibid., 15.
225 . Ibid., 16.
226 . Ibid., 17.
227 . Ibid., 18.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 147
of its [otherwise] consistent poetic form.” 228 Th is contrast built upon Holtzmann’s
thesis, but permitted Oldenberg to bring in his own ideas of poetic composition
into the discussion. (It also probably did not hurt that Oldenberg was recognized
as the authority on Indian meter among German Indologists, so that any discussion
of the epic in terms of its meters eff ectively brought his expertise into play.) Th us,
Oldenberg now declared “one would at fi rst have to be content with the interpreta-
tion that here—regardless of for what reason—poetic narratives have been inserted
as episodes by some redactor of the epic into it.”2 29 And then, somewhat circularly,
he concluded, “thereby we may conclude that the poetic work, of which we have the
remains before us here, was nothing other than an old prose-poetry Mahābhārata.
Th e episodes attest to the existence of the whole, to which they belong.” 230
Finally, echoing Holtzmann’s concluding assessment of the epic, “not without
a justifi ed displeasure against the Brahmans, we set down the old epic. Th ey have
transformed the old heroic poem, the most beautiful spiritual treasure of their race
into a boring Purana that only preaches worship of V ish ṇu , reverence before the
Brahmans, and soulless faith in works.”2 31 Oldenberg also wrote, “we will not hide
ourselves [from the fact] that the loss of the epic in its old form is manifestly one of
the most grievous that the observer of the history of Indian literature has to lament.
Th e narrative of those battles and tragic fates, closer to their origin, not, as we now
have it, covered over by foreign material, will have [once] stood there simply and cer-
tainly, often awkwardly, in its massive size, which we can now only bring closer with
eff ort and through the detours of our imagination.” 232
Th is brief overview of Oldenberg’s Mahābhārata shows how, even when
Indologists overtly rejected Holtzmann’s work, central principles and prejudices
of his approach had, in the meanwhile, become an essential part of their collec-
tive imagination. Oldenberg was well aware of the Christian, medievalizing aspects
of Holtzmann’s work. He accurately diagnosed Holtzmann’s work as having, “full
of enthusiasm for the newly discovered idea of Indo-Germanic tradition, seen
Germanic tribes in the Indians.” And yet, in spite of this insight, he was unable to
free himself from the Freiburg scholar’s infl uence. He thought he had a more scien-
tifi c approach to the epic and yet he was unable to see that when it came to central
aspects of his work, he, no less than Holtzmann, drew on Romantic suppositions.
Like Holtzmann, he too supported a racial reading of Indian history, claiming that
the “oldest period” witnessed “battles in which the land was taken away from the
dark-skinned foes, [and] the shattering of their strongholds. . . .” 2 33 Like Holtzmann,
he too belabored the comparison with the Germanic tribes, claiming that “Th e
228 . Ibid., 22.
229 . Ibid., 22–23.
230 . Ibid., 23.
231 . Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 194.
232 . Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata , 26.
233 . Ibid., 7 and see also Hermann Oldenberg, “Indologie,” Internationale Wochenschrift
für Wissenschaft, Kunst und Technik 1 (1907): 640 (“Mixing with the dark-skinned aborigi-
nes transforms the invaders, causes the Aryan to turn into the Hindu.”) and “Ueber
Sanskritforschung,” Deutsche Rundschau 47 (1886): 395 (“We cannot express the period
148 Chapter 02
memory of all this [i.e., the Āryan conquest of India] had disappeared just as the
memory of Arminius [had disappeared] in Germany.” 234 Like Holtzmann, he too
thought that the Indians, “the greatest narrative people [Erzählervolk] in the world,”
could not be without their own “heroic epic [Heldenepos].” 235 Like Holtzmann, he
made a distinction between the “the India of the Aryan and of the Hindu,”2 36 and
backed up this claim with a theory of how Buddhism would have constituted the
bridge between the two cultures. “Buddhism,” he writes, “has disappeared from its
Indian homeland. What has triumphed is the power we call ‘Hinduism’. Its gods
are the misshapen, wild, cruel, [and] lascivious Hindu gods, at their head Shiva and
Vishnu. Its books are the gigantic epic, the Mahābhārata, and an unsurveyable host
of literature [made up] of epic poems, legendary works, narratives, fairy tales, dra-
mas. Everywhere we fi nd how this people, this faith, this literature, whose familial
context, pointing to the West, clearly appears in the old period, distanced itself ever
further from those origins [in the West] in the course of centuries. A transforma-
tion that aff ects the innermost core of the people, of the soul of the people. Mixing
with the dark-skinned aborigines transforms the invaders, causes the Aryan to turn
into the Hindu.” 237 Like Holtzmann, the story he told of the Mahābhārata was one
of loss and corruption due to the infi ltration of Indo-Germanic/ Āryan culture by
native peoples. And while he sought explicitly to distance himself from his prede-
cessor, he did not notice that his descriptions of the epic shared in the Romantic
revivalism of the latter. “Can one not imagine such gatherings to oneself?” he won-
dered aloud, speaking of the Mahābhārata’s narration. “Th e Ks ̣atriyas decked in
ornaments, [encrusted] with sparkling gemstones and the mass of common people,
which has gathered there, their Indian bodies with their brown faces, all hanging
on to the speaker’s words with passionate interest, accompanying his narration
with their gestures and exclamations—and in the center, he himself, the one who
to which the origin of the ancient Vedic hymns belongs in years and not even in cen-
turies. But we know that these hymns were present at a time when there were still no
cities in India, but only villages and fortresses: at a time when the names of the mighty
tribes, which, in the following period, took hold of the foremost place among the tribes
of India, were not named, as little as the names of the Franks and the Bavarians [were
known] in the Germany that Tacitus describes. It was the time of migrations, of the end-
less back-and-forth feuds . . . it was the time of the battle of the fair-skinned invaders,
who called themselves the Aryans, against the aborigines, the ‘dark-skinned people,’ the
‘unfaithful [ones], who do not off er to the gods’.”).
234 . Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata , 7 and see also the preceding note for his comments in
“Ueber Sanskritforschung.”
235 . Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata , 7. Before Oldenberg, Holtzmann had opined that “lin-
guistics [have] taught us that the Indo-Germanic people were already a cultural people
even before their separation [into their constituent groups, the Greeks, Germans, and
Indians]; the totality of their spiritual achievements and, among them, their historical
recollections as well could not be left to fate in a time that did not know of the use of writ-
ing; rather, we must presume the existence of a specifi c class, determined on an ad hoc and
only ad hoc basis, for the oldest period for each of the Indo-Germanic peoples [Holtzmann
means a bardic class, charged with preserving the recollections of the people].” Holtzmann
Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 42–43.
236 . Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata , 1.
237 . Oldenberg, “Indologie,” 640.
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 149
recites the monotonous singsong of the śloka verses, draped with the holy thread,
the legend-knowing Brahman .” 238 Th e Romantic roots of German Indology would
not become evident until nearly a century later, and then, too, it would be scholars in
the fi eld of German studies who fi rst began to highlight the phenomenon.2 39 But here,
at the transition from the fi rst phase of German Mahābhārata reception (i.e., its recep-
tion in the work of Lassen, Goldstücker, and Holtzmann) to its second, allegedly more
scientifi c phase of reception in the work of Oldenberg, Hopkins, and others, these ori-
gins were still unclear. Th ey would continue to work themselves out for a generation,
through Oldenberg and Hopkins all the way to late twentieth-century authors such
as Fitzgerald and McGrath. Th ey would also shape the “medievalizing” translations of
van Buitenen (for whom the Ks ̣atriyas are “barons”) and his successors. But before we
look at the work of these contemporary scholars it is helpful to return one last time to
German theories of the Mahābhārata, to see how, in the meanwhile, these theories had
developed beyond the work of the two Holtzmanns.
A PROBLEM OF RECEPTION
In the fi rst part of this two-part review of German Mahābhārata interpretations,
we saw how, setting out from the racial theories of Lassen, German Mahābhārata
scholars developed an entire branch of study dedicated to explaining how the
Mahābhārata could have evolved into the text we possess today. In the meanwhile,
it has become clear that this hypothesis entailed not only assumptions about the
epic’s original form or its original possessors, but also about its spiritual outlook,
its sociopolitical signifi cance, and its status in the ethical transformation of the
Indian people. Crucially, it also entailed an assumption of the continuing evolution
of Indian thought via its successive transformations as refl ected in the Mahābhārata
(see chart 2.4 for a comparison of German views of the Mahābhārata). In this read-
ing of history by proxy, while the protagonists on the two sides could change (from
heroic versus priestly in the work of Holtzmann Sr., to K ṣatriyas versus Brahmans in
the work of Goldstücker, and Indo-Germanic versus Brahmanic/Vais ̣ ṇavaite in the
work of Holtzmann Jr.), the basic scheme remained the same: a confl ict between the
rational, secular, and progressive elements of society and its dogmatic, superstitious,
and conservative or traditional elements.
In spite of the fact that this distinction and confl ict was not original to the
Mahābhārata, scholars adopted it as the central principle for criticism of the
238 . Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata , 15–16 (Oldenberg’s emphasis).
239 . See for instance the recently published book by Perry Myers, German Visions of India,
1871–1918: Commandeering the Holy Ganges during the Kaiserreich (New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2013). Myers does not discuss Holtzmann, but see c hapter 4 for a discussion of
how Oldenberg’s critique of the absence of historical consciousness among the Indian peo-
ple until the Buddha functions as an element of his Protestant apologetics. Unfortunately
this book arrived too late for us to take it into substantial consideration for this work.
derapmoc
atarāhbāhaM
eht
fo
sweiv
namreG
4.2
trahC
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 151
Mahābhārata.2 40 Via the work of fi gures such as Oldenberg and Hopkins (who, in
1901, putting a scientifi c spin on Holtzmann’s theories, off ered this account of the epic’s
genesis 2 41 ), it attained canonical status, eventually giving rise by the early twentieth
century to that sham branch of science known as higher criticism of the Mahābhārata.
Beyond the work of Oldenberg, twentieth-century Indologists such as Fitzgerald and
McGrath would also adopt the principle.
Fitzgerald has in recent years revived a form of the Holtzmannian inversion
hypothesis. Arguing that “the narrative of the received MBh text came into being
as a radical transformation of the eschatologically framed war of the Bharata-Kurus
against the Pañcalas,” he claims that “the Pā ṇḍavas were grafted into the Bharata lin-
eage with great eff ort and ingenuity . . . . Th ey are . . . outsiders . . . [who] in terms of the
great war at the center of the inherited narrative . . . reverse the polarity of the heroes
and villains (from the good Bharata-Kurus vs. their enemies, the Pañcālas, to the
other way around: the Pā ṇḍava–Pāñcāla alliance vs. the villainous Kauravas). . . . ” 242
Further echoing Holtzmann’s thesis of the Pā ṇḍavas’ non-Āryan origins, Fitzgerald
also argues that “the ‘germ’ of the new Bhārata ” (i.e., the Mahābhārata) would have
been “the recasting of the old Bhārata with the new Pā ṇḍava heroes, a ‘war-party’ of
the gods born high up in the Himalayas, who descend into the B hārata heartland, take
up a place in the Bharata-Kuru dynasty, and conquer the old Bharatas through an alli-
ance with their old rivals, the Pañcālas (“Pāñcālas” in the M Bh ).” 243 Like Holtzmann,
he sees this new epic as “a symbolic construction addressing certain elements of its
socio-political, cultural context.” “Th e Pā ṇḍavas of the Great Bhārata epic,” according
to Fitzgerald, “may well have been conceived after the historical example of some
240 . Before the Mahābhārata scholars, the biblical critics Semler and Bauer had iden-
tifi ed a distinction between the New Testament and Old Testament/Jewish aspects of
the text (Semler) and between the Judaic-Petrine and Christian-Pauline factions within
early Christianity (Bauer) to launch the method of a historical-critical reconstruction
of the Bible. Following in their wake, the Mahābhārata critics Lassen, Goldstücker, and
Holtzmann cast about in the text for a similar principle of distinction and found it in the
contrast between two (alleged) redactorial agencies: the one Āryan, heroic, and K ṣatriya;
the other indigenous, priestly or sophistic, and Brahmanic. Although they thought they
were developing these categories independently, they were essentially replicating the bibli-
cal scholars’ contrast between Christian and Jewish elements in the text.
241 . Summarizing the scholarly consensus of the epic’s genesis to date, Hopkins pre-
sented the following chronological summary: “Bhārata (Kuru) lays, perhaps combined
into one, but with no evidence of an epic before 400 B. C. A Mahābhārata tale with Pandu
heroes, lays and legends combined by the Puranic diaskeuasts, Krishna as a demigod (no
evidence of didactic form or of Krishna’s divine supremacy), 400–200 B. C. Remaking of
the epic with Krishna as all-god, intrusion of masses of didactic matter, addition of Puranic
material old and new; multiplication of exploits, 200 B.C. to 100–200 A. D. Th e last books
added with the introduction to the fi rst book, the swollen Anuçāsana separated from Çānti
and recognized as a separate book, 200–400 A. D.; and fi nally 400 A. D. and on : occasional
amplifi cations. . . . ” Hopkins, Th e Great Epic of India , 397–98.
242 . Fitzgerald, “No Contest between Memory and Invention,” 110–11.
243 . Ibid., 108. A few pages later, he again returns to the theme of inversion, proposing
that the “the P ā ṇḍava-Bhārata ” (his term) would have been “the old Bhārata recast with
Pā ṇḍava heroes.” Ibid., 112.
152 Chapter 02
band of intruders who barged into the old Bharata-Kuru polity and took it over in
alliance with the Pañcālas.” 244
Another scholar to fi nd words of praise for Holtzmann is Kevin McGrath. In his
Th e Sanskrit Hero: Kar ṇa in Epic Mahābhārata , McGrath writes that “Holtzmann was
one of the earliest western scholars to study the Mahābhārata and successfully estab-
lished the epic as a fi eld of study in the West.”2 45 He continues: “typical of his period
was a search for ‘layering’ in the text, specifi cally for prior layers. Th is term refers to
how the poem, hypothetically, gained in size by accretion over time; additions tended
to produce diff erent cultural levels in the poem, the ‘earlier’ parts typifi ed as k ṣatriya
and the later as brahmin.” “[His] present research,” he declares, “builds upon such
thinking inasmuch as it implicitly pursues that area which Holtzmann and others
denote as ‘prior’: for this would signify the k ṣatriya, and heroic, parts of the poem.” 246
In a footnote on the same page, he further seeks to buttress “Holtzmann’s ‘inversion
theory’ ” by noting that it “receives a certain validation from Patañjali, who, ‘while
commenting on the Vārttika II on Pā ṇini III, 2, 122 gives in his Mahābhā ṣya the exam-
ple d harme ṇa ha sma kuravo yudhyante , “the Kurus fought according to dharma” ’.” 247
(Th e suggestion is absurd in the extreme, because the Pā ṇḍavas are descendants of
Kuru—and hence “Kurus”—no less than the Kauravas. Th at McGrath takes the state-
ment to refer exclusively to the Kauravas is further evidence of how scholars, deter-
mined—against all available evidence—to defend their theory of a heroic epic, resort
to manipulation of texts.) McGrath’s work thus off ers the clearest evidence of the
continuing currency of Holtzmann’s ideas. Whether speaking of Kar ṇa’s “complete
devotion to the honour of k ṣatriya ideals”2 48 or of the “ unevolved quality of Kar ṇa’s
heroism” 249 or of “archetypal k ṣatriya behavior” (apparently, “physical trials and con-
fl ict, lineage dispute, cattle raiding, the capture of brides, weapon lore, the validity of
speech, generosity upon request, and boasting” 250 ), his work is testament of the long
and infl uential R ezeptionsgeschichte of Holtzmann’s ideas in Mahābhārata studies.2 51
244 . Ibid., 112.
245 . Kevin McGrath, Th e Sanskrit Hero: Kar ṇa in Epic Mahābhārata (Leiden: E. J. Brill,
2004), 11.
246 . Ibid., 11–12.
247 . Ibid., 11, n. 39. Although McGrath presents this morsel as a new discovery, the elder
scholar was already aware of it. In fact, he cites this precise passage: noting that Pā ṇini
includes d harme ṇa ha sma kuravo yudhyante as one of his examples, he argued, “[this]
appears to me to indicate that he shared the standpoint of the old poem: the Kurus fought
nobly, and we may add: not, however, the P ā ṇḍavas .” Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und
Kritik , 128. McGrath might have tried actually reading Holtzmann before trying to off er
“validations” of his work.
248 . McGrath, Th e Sanskrit Hero , 4.
249 . Ibid., 4 (emphasis in original).
250 . Ibid., 5.
251 . In its specifi c details as well, McGrath’s study closely shadows Holtzmann. In the
introduction, he announces that his study is based upon “two fundamental assumptions,”
one concerning “the nature of preliterate epic poetry” and the other presuming “a basic
Indo-European (IE) heroic substrate.” Ibid., 1. Both theories, as we now know, can be
substantially traced back to the work of the two Holtzmanns. Especially in the form of a
theory of an Indo-Greek-Germanic substrate, the idea of a common heroic culture linking
all three traditions has direct roots in the work of the elder Holtzmann. In his descriptions
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 153
In spite of Fitzgerald’s and McGrath’s eff orts, however, the Holtzmannian Ur-epic
remained elusive. As far back as they pushed this ideal epic—and in his most recent
iteration McGrath has advanced a date of the Bronze Age2 52 —they were still unable
to fi nd evidence of it and for the simple reason that its origins lay neither in the
fourth century CE nor in the fourth century BCE nor even in the twelfth century
BCE, but in the nineteenth century CE when the thesis was fi rst proposed by Lassen.
Th e idea of an original epic, as we have seen, was a specifi cally German notion
answering to specifi cally German needs. German scholars had deployed the idea in
pursuit of an ideal of a heroic Āryan race. It permitted them to make polemical points
against Roman Catholicism as being essentially alien to the spirit of the German peo-
ple. It permitted them to identify defi ning traits of the “Indo-Germanic” or “Āryan”
peoples—nobility, free-spiritedness, suspicion of priestly authority, a warrior cul-
ture, and so on—in contradistinction to the “Semitic” tribes. It permitted them to
undertake a sustained critique of non-Germanic cultures as well as to issue stern
warnings of what might befall the German nation if it permitted itself to be overrun
by these cultures. Beyond these ends, the theory of a heroic epic had no relevance to
Mahābhārata criticism. Yet, such was the prestige of German Mahābhārata studies
that after the nineteenth century, scholars worldwide joined in the search for the
original. 253 Th eories of an oral bardic tradition or of a heroic warrior epic became
of this presumed “Indo-European . . . heroic substrate” McGrath reverts (whether con-
sciously or unconsciously) to the language of Holtzmann. In his words, what makes Kar ṇa
the ideal character on whom to base so-called Indo-European (by which he basically means
what Holtzmann meant by Indo-Germanic) comparisons is the fact that, “unlike other
heroes in the poem, for some reason . . . Kar ṇa does not appear to have been overlaid with
later doctrinal considerations, specifi cally brahminical or vai ṣ ṇava . Th is is the major reason
he presents an interesting case for study.” Ibid., 3.
252 . Kevin McGrath, Jaya: Performance in Epic Mahābhārata (Boston: Ilex Foundation,
2011).
253 . Besides Fitzgerald and McGrath, Tsuchida has recently argued that “Lassen’s
theory should be evaluated as the fi rst important step in text-historical research on the
Mbh . It is as a continuation of Lassen’s basic study that we are to carry on our investiga-
tions concerning the formation of the narrative structure of the epic.” Ryutaro Tsuchida,
“Considerations on the Narrative Structure of the M ahābhārata ,” S tudies in Indian
Philosophy and Buddhism 15 (2008): 15. In his conclusion he reinforces this estimation. “In
conclusion to our inquiries into the narrative structure of the M bh , we do not propound
any new idea. Our present study has rather the character of reconfi rming and developing
the theory which Christian Lassen already put forward in the middle of the nineteenth
century.” Ibid., 24. Indian scholars, too, joined the bandwagon. C. V. Vaidya in 1907, in a
palpable echo of Lassen, describes the Mahābhārata as “something like a civil war between
the pure Aryans and the mixed Aryans,” won by the latter, “with a counterpart in the Civil
War in America,” while the historians S. P. Gupta and K. S. Ramachandran, confusing tex-
tual investigations with archaeological, proposed a Jaya, a Bhārata, and a Mahābhārata
epic. Chintaman Vinayak Vaidya, Epic India, or India as Described in the Mahābhārata and the
Rāmāya ṇa (Bombay: Mrs. Radhabai Atmaram Sagoon, 1907), 55, cited in Alf Hiltebeitel,
“Th e Mahābhārata and the Stories Some People Tell about It—Part 1,” E xemplar: Th e Journal
of South Asian Studies 1, no. 2 (2012): 11. For Gupta and Kumar’s views, see S. P. Gupta
and K. S. Ramachandran, “Mahābhārata: Myth and Reality,” in Delhi: Ancient History , ed.
Upinder Singh (New Delhi: Social Science Press, 2006), 79.
154 Chapter 02
such an integral part of Mahābhārata studies that scholars who rejected them risked
excommunication. 254
Although we focused specifi cally on Mahābhārata studies in this chapter, the
continued acceptance of these theories hints at a wider problem with the German
reception of Indian texts. It is true that the German reception of the Mahābhārata
had been evangelical in intent. It is true that theories of race, centering especially
on the superiority of the white race, had played a major part in that reception. It is
true that both these had been deployed in an attempt to re-educate Indians as to
how to receive their own texts—specifi cally, to reject the traditional reception of the
epic and to turn away from their traditional authority fi gures and preceptors, the
Brahmans, to new ones: the Western-trained historical critics. But in a sense these
problems could only arise because the German reception emerged in conditions of
intellectual and cultural vacuum. As Ryan has noted, “whereas the reintroduction
of Greek learning in the fi fteenth century was . . . stimulated by the arrival of both
manuscripts and commentators skilled in their exegesis, the nineteenth-century
encounter with Indian literature was limited to the manuscripts alone, and only a
small number at that. As a result, the burden of explanation and commentary fell
upon a select circle of European philologists.”2 55 In spite of building up their own
specializations, German scholars were never able to compensate fully for this lack.
Th eir expertise in the technical manipulation of data could never substitute for the
intimate knowledge of the text a reader trained in the commentarial tradition might
have. As a result, they had to come up with their own ideas of expertise. Th e easiest
way to do so was to propagate the thesis of a peculiar insensitivity to history on the
part of Indians that made them blind to the nature of the epic as a historical tale.
Th is auto-didactism continues to affl ict scholarship in the present, when it is not
further exacerbated by rhetorical warnings against relying on Indian commenta-
tors. 256 Further, because German scholars were not subject to any kind of control
other than having to satisfy their peers (which is not a very eff ective form of control if
all of them share fantasies about hypermasculine Āryan warriors), they could literally
254 . As noted earlier, there were important fi gures outside the German historicist para-
digm. Th e Chicago scholar Wendy Doniger, for instance, is an important example of some-
one who has resisted the “Āryan infl ux and subsequent decline” narrative. Other scholars
such as Don Handelman and David Shulman have produced useful studies on Indian texts
from sociocultural and anthropological perspectives. Th omas B. Coburn has studied the
Mahābhārata in conjunction with the Purā ṇas (see bibliography for full citations). But all
such initiatives were restricted to producing microscopic-scale analyses on sections of the
epic, that is, precisely those parts the German Indologists had termed “late” and “non-
original.” A comprehensive philosophical interpretation of the Mahābhārata could not get
underway until the dominant narrative of the Mahābhārata’s origins as an Āryan, K ṣatriya
text was challenged.
255 . Christopher Ryan, S chopenhauer’s Philosophy of Religion: Th e Death of God and the
Oriental Renaissance (Leuven: Peeters, 2010), 6.
256 . See, for instance, Hanneder, who claims that, “even when the reviewer, who is unfa-
miliar with this fi eld, is not in a condition to off er a proper evaluation of the results of this
work, some critical questions, which came up during reading, are added here. Although [it
is] completely understandable . . . the systematic exclusion of the classical Indian tradition
THE SEARCH FOR GERMAN IDENTITY 155
propound any theory. 257 Being uninformed about the epic, German audiences were
not likely to ask questions of the class of professional (self-appointed) interpreters
of the Mahābhārata. As curators of Indian thought to the German public, the critics
had a carte blanche. Under such conditions, it was unavoidable that Mahābhārata
criticism would attract a whole host of eccentric fi gures, among them individuals
such as the German Johannes Becker, who thought the “Gallic druids and the Indian
Brahmans were branches of a single linguistic tribe that also included Germans,
Slavs, Greeks, Romans, and Persians” and that the Mahābhārata was the last surviv-
ing record of “that ‘large quantity of verses’ of which Caesar speaks when reporting
about the schools of druids, those songs and ballads of which Tacitus and Jordanes
knew, as well as of that ‘large quantity of verses’ which were handed down orally from
singer to singer.”2 58 By the early twentieth century, the ongoing professionalization
of the discipline had, to be sure, reduced the scope for such original outbursts. But
what remained was not necessarily more plausible: it had merely become canonical
by sheer dint of repetition. For this reason, it was important, in the fi rst part of this
work, that we disentangle these complex chains of citation and secondhand citation
and trace their underlying views back to their original authors. By showing how com-
pletely dependent contemporary Mahābhārata scholarship is on the problematic and
unscientifi c views of Lassen and Holtzmann, these two chapters illustrated the prob-
lems with basing interpretations of the Bhagavadgītā on Western scholars’ theories
of the epic as a war narrative. In the next chapter, we shall resume our look at the
German Gītā.
of commentary is potentially a methodological weakness. For, one can hardly encounter a
biased interpretation by native commentators through excluding it; otherwise, one risks
the danger of eliminating the specifi cally Indian ‘horizon of understanding’ along with
the native reception, which [horizon] may possibly preserve something historically cor-
rect [historisch Richtiges].” Jürgen Hanneder, Review of Rājavidyā: Das königliche Wissen
um Herrschaft und Verzicht. Studien zur Bhagavadgītā by Angelika Malinar, Zeitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 151, no. 1 (2001): 240. But if the reviewer is
“unfamiliar with this fi eld,” how then does he know that the interpretations of native com-
mentators are “biased”?
257 . Th at is, at least among themselves. Outside Germany, their hegemony did not go
uncontested. Madeleine Biardeau and the French scholars following in her wake largely
rejected German orthodoxy regarding the Mahābhārata’s origins as a heroic K ṣatriya epic.
Alf Hiltebeitel is another important representative of this tradition and has long argued
that the search for a pre-Brahmanic oral archetype represents a failure to appreciate the
Mahābhārata’s true origins as a Brahmanic composition. See Alf Hiltebeitel, Rethinking
the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education of the Dharma King (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2001) and, for a discussion of Hiltebeitel’s mature view regarding the
epic, see the authors’ introductions to Reading the Fifth Veda: Studies on the Mahabharata.
Essays by Alf Hiltebeitel , vol. 1 (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2011) and W hen the Goddess was a
Woman: Mahabharata Ethnographies. Essays by Alf Hiltebeitel , vol. 2 (Leiden: E. J. Brill,
2011), pp. xi–xxxvi and xi–xxxiii in the respective volumes.
258 . Becker, M ahabharata: Der Große Krieg , ii.
CHAPTER 3
"
Th e Search for the Original Gītā
Every holy scripture is merely a monument of the religion, a memorial to a great spirit that
was there but is there no longer. . . . It is not he who believes in holy scripture who has religion,
but he who does not need one and could himself produce one.
Friedrich Schleiermacher, Ü ber die Religion
INTRODUCTION
Th e preceding two chapters focused on a discussion of German Mahābhārata stud-
ies, especially as these played a role in the induction of historical criticism into the
methodological canon of the Indologists. In this chapter, we look at how, following
its canonization in the work of Lassen, Holtzmann, and others, this method was
in turn transferred to the study of the Gītā and led, by the twentieth century, to a
completely diff erent picture of the text than the one held by an earlier generation of
scholars.
However, besides simply tracing the continuing evolution of the German
response to the Gītā, this chapter also serves broader philosophical perspectives.
First, it allows us to defi ne more precisely what we mean by German Indology. Th e
last chapter was already a step in this direction, but in this chapter we show how
the racial and historicist prejudices of an earlier generation of scholars were sani-
tized and institutionalized in the work of twentieth-century Indologists such as
Richard Garbe, Hermann Oldenberg, and Hermann Jacobi. Th ereafter, in the form
of a claim about the superior critical and methodological consciousness of German
scholarship, these prejudices would become a mainstay of German Indology in the
work of twenty-fi rst-century Indologists such as Heinrich von Stietencron, Angelika
Malinar, and Jürgen Hanneder. Second, by exploring the methods of the Indologists,
this chapter creates a textual basis for the philosophical and scientifi c evaluation of
Indology, as discussed in the two chapters following. Until now, we have only spoken
of the historical-critical method in the abstract. Even though chapter 1 presented
examples of the application of this method to the Mahābhārata, it did not pursue
( 156 )
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 157
the question further. Th is chapter now turns the spotlight on method. Th ird and
most important, this chapter introduces our critique of German claims to possessing
a more “scientifi c” approach to Indian texts. By exposing the myth of the German
approach to the Bhagavadgītā as being more scientifi c (a task this chapter accom-
plishes by showing how, in spite of their claims to controlling and standardizing the
fi eld of interpretation, German scholars left themselves open to the most arbitrary
prejudices), this chapter takes a fi rst step toward exposing Indology as a form of
colonial hegemony. It rejects, with good reasons, German claims to having under-
stood the Gītā better than Indian authors and suggests that the work of a current
generation of German scholars is better understood as a continuing form of scientifi c
apartheid.
Th is chapter is divided into eighteen sections. Following a preliminary section on
the conditions that enabled the reemergence of the Bhagavadgītā in Germany, we
then take a closer look at the Indological Gītā. Specifi cally we focus on six Indological
Gītās: the “pantheistic Gītā” of Adolf Holtzmann Jr., the “theistic Gītā” of Richard
Garbe, the “epic Gītā” of Hermann Jacobi, the “Kṛṣṇa Gītā” of Hermann Oldenberg,
the “trinitarian Gītā” of Rudolf Otto, and the “Āryan Gītā” of Jakob Wilhelm Hauer.
(Interwoven with these are interpretive and contextualizing sections, so that these
six Gītās actually extend across fourteen sections.) To this, under the heading “Th e
Method becomes Autonomous,” we also add a consideration of the “Brahmanic Gītā”
of Georg von Simson. Simson, the latest entrant into the “original Gītā” debate, out-
does his predecessors in proposing that the Bhagavadgītā is not only an interpolation
but a “secondary interpolation” (i.e., an interpolation into an interpolated passage).
He ascribes this textual artifi ce to “the Brahmanic redactors of the Mahābhārata ” who
“felt they had to justify the actions of the Pā ṇḍavas during the battle.”1 As the fi nal
iteration in this tradition of analytic reconstructions of the Bhagavadgītā, Simson’s
“Brahmanic Gītā” represents the crowning moment of German Gītā studies and pro-
vides a suitable vantage from which to look back at this history, a task we undertake
in the fi nal two sections.
THE GĪTĀ REEMERGES
Following A.W. Schlegel’s edition of 1823, nearly three-quarters of a century were to
pass before another Indologist felt confi dent enough to tackle the translation of the
Gītā again (this would be Richard Garbe, who in 1905 opened the fl oodgates to “the
Gītā problem”). Hegel’s critique of the Gītā eff ectively succeeded in closing off Indian
thought as a source of contemporary philosophical inspiration for much of the nine-
teenth century.2 Further, when the Gītā fi nally reappeared in the late nineteenth/
1 . Georg von Simson, “Die Einschaltung der Bhagavadgītā im B hī ṣmaparvan des
Mahābhārata ,” Indo-Iranian Journal 11, no. 3 (1969): 173.
2 . Hegel’s critique is not discussed here, as it would take us far beyond the bounds of this
work and, furthermore, is not germane to our concerns. See however Saverio Marchignoli,
“Canonizing an Indian Text? A. W. Schlegel, W. von Humboldt, Hegel, and the B hagavadgītā ,”
158 Chapter 03
early twentieth century as an object of specialist preoccupation, it was a radically
diff erent text. In place of the “philosophical poem” of which Humboldt had cher-
ished such a high opinion, the Gītā now appeared as a confused and degenerate text,
merely to be analyzed using the methods of “higher criticism.”
Th e fi rst signs of a revival of interest getting underway among Indologists can be
found in two reviews: the fi rst by E. Windisch in 1870 and the second by Böhtlingk
in 1897. 3 Signifi cantly, both focused on the theosophic Gītā: Windisch’s essay was
a review of the Gītās of J. Lorinser and R. Boxberger, and Böhtlingk’s of the Gītās
of J. Lorinser, R. Boxberger, and F. Hartmann.4 Windisch’s review, which eff ectively
broke the omertà among the Indologists on discussing the Bhagavadgītā, took an
extremely negative view of Lorinser’s eff orts. In the fi rst line, he cited Lorinser’s
acknowledgment that he was a “ ‘newcomer’ ([Lorinser’s] preface, p. iii) in the fi eld of
Sanskrit” and argued that this assessment was evident from the “immense number
of sins, both large and small, which he [Lorinser] had made in orthography . . . and
in the separation of Sanskrit words. . . .” 5 Further, he attributed the circumstance
that Lorinser’s “extremely defi cient philological knowledge of the Sanskrit language”
had “done relatively less damage to the material value of the book than one would
expect” to the fact that he “based his work on the translations and clarifi cations of
[the Indologists] Schlegel-Lassen, Burnouf, and Cockburn Th omson, albeit also fre-
quently deviating from these.”6 (Th ese presumably were the passages where Lorinser
went wrong.) Windisch also criticized Lorinser’s theory that “every noble thought
in the Bhagavadgîtâ had its source in Christianity or in the ‘primordial tradition’
[Urüberlieferung].” 7 However, his main contention against the edition was that
Lorinser did not possess an adequate knowledge of Indian thought in general to be
able to arrive at a satisfactory evaluation of the Gītā’s doctrines. “His non-use of
the Indian commentators,” Windisch wrote, “had the consequence that Dr. Lorinser
was not always able to interpret Indian thoughts in the Indian spirit.” Further,
in S anskrit and ‘Orientalism’: Indology and Comparative Linguistics in Germany, 1750–1958 ,
ed. Douglas T. McGetchin, Peter K. J. Park, and Damodar SarDesai (Delhi: Manohar, 2004),
245–70 for an excellent analysis of Hegel’s concerns.
3 . Ernst Windisch, Review of Die Bhagavadgîtâ. Uebersetzt u. erläutert von Dr. F. Lorinser,
Literarisches Zentralblatt 43 (1870): 1165–168 and Review of Bhagavad-Gîtâ oder: Das Lied
der Gottheit. Aus dem Indischen übersetzt von Robert Boxberger, Literarisches Zentralblatt
43 (1870): 1168, and Otto Böhtlingk, “Bemerkungen zur Bhagavadgîtâ,” Berichte über
die Verhandlungen der Königlichen Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Philologisch-Historische Classe 49 (1897): 4–16. Before this, Albrecht Weber had com-
mented that the Bhagavadgītā “can, in any case, only be considered a compilation of texts
that are, in part, completely diff erent from one another,” but as this was his sole comment
on the text, he is not considered here. See Weber, Indische Studien , 394.
4 . Böhtlingk only mentions the former two at the margins and directs the reader’s atten-
tion to Windisch’s review in Literarisches Zentralblatt . He dismissed Hartmann’s eff orts in
a few lines and then went over to his main concern: an engagement with the Gītā edition
of Kashinath Trimbak Telang ( Th e Bhagavadgîtâ with the Sanatsugâtîya and the Anugîtâ , vol.
8 of Th e Sacred Books of the East , ed. Max Müller [Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1882]).
5 . Ernst Windisch, Review of Die Bhagavadgîtâ , 1165.
6 . Ibid.
7 . Ibid., 1166.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 159
he argued that Lorinser “had not taken the genuine yoga literature, above all the
Pâtanjalasûtra with its commentaries into consideration”; whereas “it is of course
necessary to [fi rst] investigate what the relationship of the philosophemes contained
in the Bhagavadgîtâ to this central work of yoga philosophy is.” Windisch also raised
criticisms of Lorinser’s comparisons of the Gītā with the New Testament, of which
he noted that the parallels raised by Lorinser could “fi rst claim attention when it
was demonstrated from a diff erent side that the Bhagavadgîtâ and the Bible stood in
a closer relationship.” 8 Finally, concerning the passages that Lorinser claimed were
evidence of “traces of ‘the primordial revelation’ [Uroff enbarung] or the ‘primordial
tradition’ [in the Gītā],” Windisch argued that Lorinser “ought fi rst to have investi-
gated whether these [passages] can be found already in the Vedas.”9 He concluded
his review by noting that “the present book clearly shows how much the text and the
explanation of the Bhagavadgîtâ are in need of a fundamental revision by specialists.
Th e view advanced by Dr. Lorinser needs to be subjected to a more detailed examina-
tion than is possible here.” 10
Likewise, Böhtlingk, too, was critical of the theosophists’ eff orts. In his fi rst line,
he noted that “after Schlegel’s Latin translation of the Bhagavadgîtâ, which appeared
in 1846,” he had “seen three German translations of the poem: Lorinser’s from 1869,
Boxberger’s from 1870 and Dr. Franz Hartmann’s from 1892. None of these have
contributed to the understanding of the philosophical poem in any way.”1 1 Böhtlingk
was especially critical of the eff orts of Hartmann. Of this edition he noted that
“Hartmann’s translation reads well . . . but will satisfy a philologist as little as the pre-
vious translations [satisfi ed] the scholar just mentioned [i.e., Ernst Windisch].” 12 He
had no patience for Hartmann’s claim that, to understand the Bhagavadgītā correctly,
it was necessary for the reader to transpose himself into the same state as the author
of the text: “Whoever wants to understand the true spirit that the Bhagavadgîtâ
breathes must read the poem not in the false light of a perverse external knowledge
nor even in the smoky light of theological speculation, but in the sunlight of the
divine spirit; with other words: he must have that clear understanding, for whose
attainment the Bhagavadgîtâ is itself the best guide to the path.”1 3 Böhtlingk was
cutting in his response to this idea of divine inspiration as a prerequisite for correct
understanding. In his words, since “this sunlight of the divine spirit did not illumine
[him] while reading the poem, I have to declare that I am not in agreement with
Hartmann’s interpretation.”1 4
Th is negative assessment of the theosophic Gītā by two of the best established
names in Indology in Germany almost certainly played a role in accelerating the
8 . Ibid., 1167.
9 . Ibid.
10 . Ibid., 1167–168.
11 . Böhtlingk, “Bemerkungen,” 1. Böhtlingk mentions an edition of 1892 for Hartmann,
but the earliest year of publication for his translation is 1899. It is possible he was refer-
ring to the translation of excerpts Hartmann published in the journal Lotusblüthen (L otus
Blossoms ), which he published between 1892 and 1900.
12 . Böhtlingk, “Bemerkungen,” 1.
13 . Ibid., 1.
14 . Ibid., 1–2.
160 Chapter 03
rediscovery of the text by Indologists. Both Windisch and Böhtlingk had pointed to
the need for the Gītā to be taken up once more by the specialists; both were equally
adamant that linguistic and philological competence were the key to the proper inter-
pretation and evaluation of the text. Windisch had criticized Lorinser for his lack of
expertise in Sanskrit as well as for his insuffi cient knowledge of Indian texts in gen-
eral. Böhtlingk too, in the main part of his article, focused on specialized questions
of variant readings, style, and meter. He mocked Hartmann’s (theosophy inspired)
idea that the reading of the text ought to serve some higher purpose than a display of
one’s philological erudition. Further, following his devastating review of Hartmann’s
Gītā (a review he concluded by noting that “he did not intend to polemicize, but per-
mitted [himself] to reprint his [i.e., Hartmann’s] commentary on [verse] 1,6” which
he then did with obvious satisfaction 1 5 ), he turned back to the Schlegel edition of
1823, leaving the reader in no doubt as to whom he considered the true experts on
the Gītā. Th ere is clearly a concerted eff ort in these early works to reclaim the Gītā for
the Indologists from the theosophists.
But even prior to Windisch and Böhtlingk, the stage for a revival of interest in
the Gītā had already been set by the philological and historical researches of Lassen
and Holtzmann. As we saw in the fi rst chapter, the two authors had taken a histo-
ricizing approach to the Mahābhārata. Specifi cally, they set aside the text’s mean-
ing for a consideration of its origins, especially as these origins could be used to
confi rm a European narrative of racial decline. Lassen and Holtzmann treated the
Mahābhārata as a purely historical work. To them, it seemed inconceivable that the
text could be regarded as a source of normative values or insights. (In fact, they were
quite dismissive of these aspects of the text, which they uniformly attributed to
Brahmanic malfeasance). Instead, they were only interested in the text as a work
that could illumine specifi c events in Indian antiquity: the incursion of the Āryans,
the struggle for racial supremacy, the defeat of the inferior peoples, and the infi ltra-
tion of pure Āryan customs by the ritualistic worship of the Brahmans. In spite of
slight diff erences in nuance (Lassen, for example, in contrast to Holtzmann, consid-
ered the Brahmans also to be of Āryan origin), the broad outlines of the story they
told were remarkably similar. By shifting attention from the doctrines or contents of
the texts themselves to the information that had been laid down unawares in them,
the two authors set the stage for a renewed engagement with the Gītā. Indian texts
could now be read: (1) as non-self-conscious works (i.e., as containing implicit data
that outweighed in signifi cance their explicit doctrines, rendering the latter super-
fl uous) and (2) as noncontemporaneous works (i.e., as already absorbed within and
superseded by European self-refl exivity). Both these conditions would be crucial in
enabling a new form of engagement with Indian texts in the wake of Hegel’s criticism.
Th e immediate event for the reemergence of the Gītā, however, was Holtzmann’s
reconstruction of the original Gītā. In 1893, as part of his book-by-book analysis of
the Mahābhārata, Holtzmann had published a critique of the Gītā.1 6 In this work, he
15 . Ibid., 2.
16 . Holtzmann Jr., Die neunzehn Bücher des Mahābhārata , 121–67.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 161
asserted that the Bhagavadgītā had originally been a pantheistic poem refl ective of
Indo-German warrior beliefs about courage, the necessity of battle, and the sense-
lessness of the fear of death. Holtzmann therefore argued that one had to distin-
guish between two Bhagavadgītās, “an older and a younger one.”1 7 Th e remainder
of his article was concerned with proposing a reconstruction of this younger Gītā.
Although from a scientifi c perspective completely jejune, Holtzmann’s eff orts at
reconstruction of an original poem made it possible for scholars to now engage with
the Gītā without running up against Hegel’s criticisms. In particular, by transferring
historicist prejudices gleaned from nineteenth-century intellectual life (Comte was
a particular source of inspiration as we show in the fi fth chapter) to Indian texts,
Holtzmann and others created the conditions for a mechanical and unthinking
approach to Indian texts. Th us, in the wake of the pseudohistorical researches of
Lassen and Holtzmann, German translators and commentators of the poem began
to focus exclusively on a narrow set of questions: what was the original Gītā? Which
layers were original to the poem? Was the text’s basic outlook pantheistic or theistic?
Which doctrines had been added to the poem and when and by whom? Unable to see
that the roots of these problems lay not in the text itself, but in the peculiar history
of the German reception of the Gītā, these scholars began to identify the task of
critical scholarship with the resolution of these (pseudo)problems. Further, ignor-
ing the Gītā’s philosophical complexity, they began to propose a number of pseu-
docritical reconstructions, reconstructions that supposedly provided a resolution to
the Gītā problem by disentangling the complex history of the text. Inevitably, these
reconstructions focused on identifying an original or core Gītā, to which then later
elements were supposed to have been added. (At times, these reconstructions could
take fantastic forms, as was the case with Holtzmann who declared that Dro ṇa not
K ṛ ṣ ṇa was the original speaker of the Bhagavadgītā.)
In spite of the many problems with Holtzmann’s approach, by the early twenti-
eth century the Bhagavadgītā was once again fi rmly established as a key Indian text
within the German canon. Holtzmann’s reconstruction of the original Bhagavadgītā
directly triggered Garbe’s edition of 1905 and this edition was, in turn, followed by
four others: Hermann Jacobi in 1918, 18 Hermann Oldenberg in 1919, 19 Rudolf Otto
in 1934,2 0 and Jakob Wilhelm Hauer in 1937.2 1 (Otto in fact produced three works
between 1934 and 1935, all claiming to have found the original Gītā. 22 ) All these
17 . Ibid., 163.
18 . Hermann Jacobi, “Über die Einfügung der Bhagavadgītā im Mahābhārata,” Z eitschrift
der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 72 (1918): 323–27.
19 . Hermann Oldenberg, “Bemerkungen zur Bhagavadgītā,” NG, Philologisch-historische
Klasse (1919): 321–38; reprinted in Hermann Oldenberg, Kleine Schriften , vol. 2, ed. Klaus
L. Janert (Wiesbaden: Fritz Steiner Verlag, 1967), 1459–76. All citations refer to the
1919 text.
20 . Rudolf Otto, D ie Urgestalt der Bhagavadgītā (Tübingen: Mohr, 1934).
21 . Jakob Wilhelm Hauer, E ine indo-arische Metaphysik des Kampfes und der Tat: Die
Bhagavadgītā in neuer Sicht mit Übersetzungen (Stuttgart: Kolhammer, 1937).
22 . A year after his Die Urgestalt der Bhagavadgītā , a work purporting to show that the
“Ur-Gītā” comprised only sections of chapter 2, chapter 10, and the great theophany of
162 Chapter 03
works were, in some way, a response to Holtzmann. Others to pass judgment on the
so-called Gītā problem included E. W. Hopkins (1905) and Moriz Winternitz (1907
and 1909).2 3 Further, in the wake of the German controversy over the original Gītā,
a number of other scholars entered the debate with their own hypotheses (e.g., the
Indian scholar G. S. Khair, who in 1969 published a book purporting to show that the
Gītā had been composed not by one author, but by three authors; according to Khair,
this circumstance accounted for the plurality of views and the inconsistencies in the
poem). 24 In the same year, the German scholar Georg von Simson also published a
widely noticed article in which he advanced an even more audacious claim: not only
was the Bhagavadgītā not original to the Mahābhārata, but also at least two other
books containing the Gītā ought to be excised from the text. Simson’s article rep-
resented the culmination of nearly three-quarters of a century of eff ort by German
scholars to undermine the normative form and extent of the Bhagavadgītā. But it
would not be the last: beyond his work, others such as Angelika Malinar (in 1996 and
2007) and Jürgen Hanneder (with a review of Angelika Malinar’s 1996 commentary
and of Michael Brück’s 2008 edition) would enter the debate.2 5 Drawing on the racial
and historicist prejudices of Lassen and Holtzmann (as well as invoking the alleged
superiority of European critical consciousness), these scholars would argue either
against the Indian commentarial tradition (Malinar) or against the Gītā’s norma-
tive validity (Hanneder) or even against modern Hindu appropriations of the text
(Malinar and Hanneder; the latter also asserts that the Bhagavadgītā fi rst attained
its canonical status in India due to the eff orts of German Indologists). 26
chapter 11, Otto also produced Lehrtraktate der Bhagavad-Gītā (Tübingen: Mohr, 1935).
In this new book, he expanded on this theory of an Ur-Gītā, showing how the poem
was expanded by the addition of eight “Lehrtraktaten” (doctrinal treatises) to a
“Traktatenkranz” (a wreath of treatises). Lehrtaktate was followed by a translation, D er Sang
des Hehr-Erhabenen. Die Bhagavad-Gītā übertragen und erläutert (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer,
1935), essentially a facsimile of Garbe’s edition.
23 . E. W. Hopkins, Review of Die Bhagavadgītā, aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt, mit einer
Einleitung über ihre ursprüngliche Gestalt, ihre Lehren und ihr Alter by Richard Garbe, Journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland (1905): 384–89; Moriz Winternitz,
Review of Vier philosophische Texte aus dem Mahābhārata, 194–202 (Garbe’s theory is
discussed on pp. 196–97) and Moriz Winternitz, Geschichte der indischen Literatur , vol.
1: Einleitung—Der Veda—Die volkstümlichen Epen und die Purā ṇen (Leipzig: Brockhaus,
1909), 373–91.
24 . Gajanan Shripat Khair, Quest for the Original Gita (Mumbai and Delhi: Somaiya
Publications, 1969). Khair writes that “when a critical study of the text was attempted
[by the Western Orientalists], diffi culties arose about the diversity of doctrines and
their coherent interpretation. Th en arose the theory of interpolations, fi rst advanced by
Humboldt in 1826, and pursued thereafter by many other critics” and he then quotes the
views of von Humboldt, A. Weber, Adolph Holtzmann, E. W. Hopkins, Richard Garbe,
Rudolph Otto and M. Winternitz as evidence of the consensus that the Bhagavadgītā is a
composite work. See ibid., 12 and ibid., 12–14.
25 . See Jürgen Hanneder, Review of Bhagavad Gita. Der Gesang des Erhabenen , edited
and translated by Michael von Brück, M arburger Forum , 9.4 (2008); http://www.
philosophia-online.de/mafo/heft2008–4/Han_Bhag.htm. Th e review of Malinar is the one
cited earlier.
26 . “What will perhaps not be so clear to the reader is that the Bhagavadgītā originally
attains its present stature at the [same] moment in time as it is received in the West. Th e
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 163
THE PANTHEISTIC GĪTĀ OF ADOLF HOLTZMANN
In 1892 Adolf Holtzmann Jr. built on his ideas of an original epic by publishing
what was to be the most comprehensive review of German Gītā scholarship to date.
Among German editions or reviews, Holtzmann listed Othmar Frank’s 1821 edition,
Schlegel’s 1823 Latin edition and his 1826 response to Langlois (originally published
in the J ournal Asiatique , the original venue of Langlois’ criticisms and reprinted as
an independent work in 1846), and Humboldt’s 1827 defense of Schlegel’s edition.
Holtzmann also mentioned Lassen’s 1846 edition (a revised edition of Schlegel
1823).2 7 Among German translations, he listed F. Majer’s 1802 translation (of
Wilkins’ edition), F. Schlegel’s 1808 translation of excerpts from the Bhagavadgītā,
C. R. S. Peiper’s 1834 translation, F. Lorinser’s 1869 translation and both R. Boxberger’s
1863 and 1870 translations. 28 Finally, as regards commentaries or interpretations,
he listed the introduction and notes to the text in Schlegel 1823 (expanded in Lassen
1846), Humboldt’s two essays on the Gītā (1826 and 1827), Hegel’s 1827 review,
F. Lorinser’s 1869 introduction and appendix to his edition, and C. Felsch’s 1888 29
article. 30
Holtzmann was thus well informed about the history of the German recep-
tion of the Gītā. He had consulted almost all the major editions available and was
aware of the main debates concerning the reception, translation, and interpreta-
tion of the poem. However, his own work was to take the German reception of the
Gītā in a strikingly new direction: a reconstruction of the so-called older Gītā. As
this idea was to have a long and powerful W irkungsgeschichte in German Indology
(there is not a single German Gītā commentary in the period that does not in some
way weigh in on the question of the Gītā’s oldest layers), it is worth looking at how
Holtzmann arrived at the idea. Prior to Holtzmann, scholars had noticed changes of
infl ection in the poem and some had gone as far as to suggest heterogenous compo-
sition (e.g., Lorinser, who attributed the noblest passages of the poem to Christian
infl uences, specifi cally, the New Testament). However, Holtzmann was probably the
fi rst to actually attempt a reconstruction of the supposed original. In part, he was
supported here by his ideas about an original Indo-Germanic heroic epic, which we
have seen in the second chapter. As with the epic, Holtzmann wished to distinguish
original heroic elements from later Brahmanic or theistic additions. But Holtzmann
also drew upon a second source for his thesis of the Gītā’s revision: this was the work
German reader should therefore not see himself as an ethnologist, who, in amazement,
encounters another country and its religion for the fi rst time, rather, he holds here in his
hands the result of long discussions and interactions between his own [culture] and Indian
culture.” Hanneder, Review of Bhagavad Gita. Der Gesang des Erhabenen , edited and trans-
lated by Michael von Brück.
27 . Holtzmann Jr., Die neunzehn Bücher , 129.
28 . Ibid., 133.
29 . C. Felsch, “In welchem Verhältnisse steht die Moral der B hag. zur Moral der Inder
um die Zeit der Entstehung dieses Gedichtes?,” Zeitschrift für exakte Philosophie XVI
(1888): 369–412.
30 . Holtzmann Jr., Die neunzehn Bücher , 150–53.
164 Chapter 03
of von Humboldt, who in his 1826–27 essay had already pointed to the the varia-
tion in the Bhagavadgītā’s style and argumentation. For Humboldt, this variation
was not necessarily a sign of revision. As he noted, “it is a wise man here who speaks
out of the fullness and enthusiasm of his knowledge and his feeling, not a philoso-
pher trained in a school who distributes his material according to a specifi c method
and arrives at the fi nal conclusions of his teaching along the thread of an artifi cial
chain of ideas.” “Rather, this [teaching] unfolds like an organism of nature itself.”3 1
Humboldt emphasized that in spite of the Bhagavadgītā’s seemingly disorganized
presentation, the poem had a clear structure that revealed itself upon a careful explo-
ration of the text. 32 He further suggested that there were good reasons for its recur-
sive (and, perhaps to Western ears, repetitive) style, which was necessitated above all
by its pedagogic aim and context. 33
Holtzmann, however, setting out from his a priori ideas of the Mahābhārata’s
history, was adamant about the possibility of identifying similar changes to the
Bhagavadgītā. Invoking Humboldt’s views of the poem in support, he argued that
the Bhagavadgītā was a composite work made up of diff erent historical layers. Th us,
he cited Humboldt’s comment (made toward the end of his 1827 essay) that “the last
chapter begins with the question of the advantages of the disdain for action and the
rejection of its fruits as though it were a completely new question, [even though] it
was already discussed in the fi rst [few] chapters.”3 4 Holtzmann also wrote, apparently
quoting Humboldt, that “ ‘the fi rst eleven chapters enclose the doctrine completely’;
others could follow on the eighteenth chapter, but if the poem were to conclude
with the eleventh, it would hardly ‘appear defi cient’.” 35 (In actuality, what Humboldt
had written was: “the fi rst eleven chapter enclose the doctrine completely . . . if the
conclusion appended to the end of the eighteenth chapter (from śloka 63 onwards)
31 . Humboldt, “Über die unter dem Namen Bhagavad-Gîtâ bekannte Episode des
Mahâ-Bhârata II,” 325.
32 . “In every chapter, in fact in most of them a number of times, the respective indi-
vidual sentence is immediately linked to the concluding sentence, and one can overview
the whole in a simple and brief glance. Unconcerned with whether what is said was already
fully clear from the preceding [section], the poet expresses his meaning fully in each major
passage, and [yet] in each such passage a clear idea is combined with an enigmatic one. Th e
poet them returns sooner or later to the latter. Th us, the whole is not composed bit by bit
from parts, but can be compared to a painting that one sees at once, albeit veiled in mist
and where a gradually increasing illumination chases away the mist until fi nally every form
shines forth in defi nite clarity.” Ibid., 325–26.
33 . “Hereby repetitions are unavoidable; indeed, material that has been touched upon
many times is either carefully developed in each passage or displayed from a new side or
in a new connection. Th is repetition with the intent of inculcating [the doctrine in the
listener] cannot surprise us in a poem which throughout is exhortatory and urges toward
composure, fi rm belief and action. Nonetheless, in spite of all the looseness of the context,
everything proceeds toward the fi nal goal on a natural path—one that is not intentionally
thought through, but determined by the emotional state of the teacher and the impression
brought about in the student.” Ibid., 326.
34 . Humboldt, “Über die unter dem Namen Bhagavad-Gîtâ bekannte Episode des
Mahâ-Bhârata II,” 326.
35 . Holtzmann Jr., Die neunzehn Bücher , 151.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 165
were to follow after the fi nal verse of the eleventh chapter, I believe that the poem
would hardly appear defi cient.”3 6 ) Holtzmann also cited two other comments of
Humboldt’s: “the second [chapter], perhaps the most beautiful and sublime of them
all, already presents the basic principles of the entire system” and “one can with great
probability assume the existence of insertions and additions. . . . ” (although he then
left out the caveat that “one is not in a position to identify them individually”).3 7
Holtzmann interpreted these comments as evidence that Humboldt in 1827 had
already come close to the view he, Holtzmann, held. According to him, Humboldt had
“recogniz[ed] that the work had undergone a revision,”3 8 but he greatly expanded the
scope of these revisionistic tendencies in the poem. He drew attention to the fact that
in the preamble to the Gītā in the Bhī ṣmaparvan, “a dialogue between Duryodhana
and D ron ̣a is announced and begun, only to be then interrupted almost as soon as it
is begun and replaced by a dialogue between K ṛsh ṇa and A rjuna .”3 9 “Such hints,” he
argued, “must always be taken seriously.” “It appears to me not inconceivable that in
the old non-Vishnuistic B hagavadgītā the learned Brahman D ro ṇa was the speaker [of
the Bhagavadgītā] and that he then, in the Vishnuistic revision [of the poem], had
to make place for K ṛsh ṇa .” 40 Further, he argued that the philosophical dialogue that
follows had “something disconcerting [about it] for our tastes.” Even though “the old
epic poet has the right to deal as he likes with place and time,” argued Holtzmann, “if
an original refl ection (one much shorter than the one now present) about the sense-
lessness of fearing death were to have its place anywhere, it would be here.” In support
for his thesis of an original shorter Gītā centering on ideas of the nullity of the fear of
death, he off ered a comparative perspective. He argued that the reason “the ancient
Indians feared death as little as the ancient Germans” was because they shared a
common belief that “death on the battlefi eld opened the gates of heaven to them [i.e.,
to the fallen warrior].” According to him, “the poet of the old B hagavadgītā, ” whom
he “consider[ed] to be identical with the poet of the older Mahābhārata ,” “found this
belief already in place [among the Indo-Germanic warriors] and gave expression to it.”
But, he argued, K ṛ ṣ ṇa also “placed another element [drawn] from the outlook of his
age alongside it: pantheism [or] the idea of the eternally existent world soul, which
only changes its [external] manifestations, which are a matter of indiff erence.” In his
opinion, these two principles (fearlessness of death and pantheism) were respon-
sible for the basic texture of the ancient epic Bhagavadgītā. In the course of its his-
tory, however, a third element was added to the poem: the philosophy of y oga . Writes
Holtzmann: “thus in the second chapter . . . in which with verse 6.26.11 . . . the actual
didactic poem begins, K ṛsh ṇa’s answer addresses both these points, but it also places
36 . Humboldt, “Über die unter dem Namen Bhagavad-Gîtâ bekannte Episode des
Mahâ-Bhârata II,” 327.
37 . Holtzmann, Die neunzehn Bücher , 151; Holtzmann cites pp. 47 and 53 as the source,
but this is incorrect: in the original edition they are 48 and 54 and in the 1906 reprint
pp. 328 and 334 (the caveat is also on 334).
38 . Holtzmann Jr., Die neunzehn Bücher , 151.
39 . Ibid., 153.
40 . Ibid., 153–54.
166 Chapter 03
a third way of looking at things, one from the perspective of immersion [Vertiefung]
( yoga ), alongside.”4 1 Th e contrast between these three principles was explicated by
Holtzmann as follows:
You are a warrior; for a warrior there is nothing better than a just battle, which opens
the gates of heaven for him; either triumph and rule the earth or fall [in battle] and
attain eternal glory; cowardice and dishonor, however, are worse than death—with
these words K ṛsh ṇa makes use of the fi rst perspective, that of the old heroic age. For
this heroic outlook, battle for heroes is an end in itself and not a means: ‘fi ght for
the sake of fi ghting’. Th at glory is much higher than life is also the opinion of K ar ṇa ,
the representative of the old heroic age.4 2
Likewise of the pantheistic outlook he wrote:
K ṛsh ṇa illumines Arjuna’s reluctance to murder [his relatives] just as emphatically
from the second, pantheistic perspective (specifi cally, right at the beginning of his
speech in the current form of the poem): you lament for those who are not to be
lamented; the wise person laments neither the living nor the dead. Never did either
you or I exist nor will [there be a time] when either of us will not exist. As we pass
from youth to old age, so also do we pass from one existence to the other.4 3
Holtzmann continued in this fashion until verse 2.30. To him, it was clear that these
verses were evidence of a pantheistic outlook in the Gītā, either introducted into the
poem at the same time as the heroic outlook or at a later stage, but in any case com-
prising an independent layer. Finally, he wrote of the third, meditative or philosophic
outlook:
Th ereafter K ṛsh ṇa discusses his topic, the folly of fearing death, from a third angle,
from the perspective of the doctrine of immersion. However, we already see here
that the B hagavadgītā is not a work of systematic philosophy. [For,] in this third
section, K ṛsh ṇa contradicts what he had said in the fi rst two; there [he said]: “rule
the earth”, here [he says]: “give up every wish”; there [he said]: “your reward will be
heaven”; here [he says]: “you should not strive for heaven and its rewards”.4 4
Holtzmann also cited Humboldt’s view of the second chapter as “the most beauti-
ful” but with the additional observation: “he could perhaps also have added: the
oldest.” According to Holtzmann, the second chapter of the Bhagavadgītā “pre-
sented the main thoughts of the whole poem; the following chapters only discuss
individual aspects in more detail and clear away seeming contradictions or possible
objections.”4 5 Th us, he pointed to the fact that in the third chapter Arjuna raises the
41 . Ibid., 154.
42 . Ibid., 154–55.
43 . Ibid., 155.
44 . Ibid., 155.
45 . Ibid., 156.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 167
question of the seeming contradiction between the imperative to perform one’s duty
and the imperative to abstain from action. Chapter 3, however, was still considered
by him to have been part of the original Gītā.
On the other hand, Holtzmann took a negative view of chapter 4. Noting that
the fourth chapter “marks a new beginning,” he argued that “perhaps the additions
already begin from here,”4 6 a view he justifi ed with the following consideration:
When K ṛsh ṇa now declares that what he is presenting is ancient wisdom, albeit wis-
dom that has been forgotten in the course of time, and that he is now revealing this
wisdom anew to Arjuna , this sounds suspicious; a teaching that is introduced in this
manner is still unknown and new. 47
Holtzmann also argued that the fourth chapter was distinguished from the preceding
chapters “in a remarkable way” in that “K ṛsh ṇa from now on identifi es himself with
the world soul, the Self, and calls himself the unborn Lord of all beings.” 48 Although
he does not explicitly develop his criticism here, it is clear that this identifi cation of
K ṛ ṣ ṇa with the world soul would, from his perspective, have amounted to a Brahmanic
imposition of (theistic) ideas of divinity upon a (pantheistic) Indo-Germanic out-
look. On balance, however, he had mixed feelings about chapter 4, since the chapter
also refers to a lineage of kings (the Ik ṣvāku dynasty) as the fi rst recipients of this
wisdom, a fact he immediately seized upon as support for his thesis of an original
warrior Gītā. In his words,
It is noteworthy that here not priests but kings are mentioned as the old guardians
of the Bhagavadgītā [actually K ṛ s ṇ ̣a says nothing of the sort] and, as Madhusūdana
[i.e., K ṛ ṣ ṇa] notes, the sun god is the origin of the warrior caste. Th e old poem was
part of royal and courtly poetry; the new ‘revelation’ in contrast describes a revision
and a continuation along lines favored by the worshippers of V ish ṇu. 49
Holtzmann continues with a summary of chapters 5 to 11, but as these do not play
any role in his reconstruction of the pantheistic original, we omit a discussion here.
Of chapter 12 he noted that it “discusses the question of which path leads more
directly to the goal of fi nal liberation, immersion in the (impersonal) all being or
devotion to the (personal) K ṛsh ṇa ” and then he argued, “thus here a decision should
be made between the older pantheism and the younger service of Vish ṇu .”5 0 Noting
that K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s answer is that both paths lead to the goal, but the latter is more secure,
Holtzmann argued that “this is the point that raised the Bhagavadgītā to [the status
of] the central book of the newer Vedantism; the concept of bhakti , the main prin-
ciple of the Bhāgavata and other Vishnuistic sects.” In contrast, he argued that the
46 . Ibid., 157.
47 . Ibid.
48 . Ibid.
49 . Ibid.
50 . Ibid., 159.
168 Chapter 03
thirteenth chapter was “completely pantheistic and did not mention K ṛsh ṇa .” 51 He
summarized but did not comment on chapters 14–18.
Based on this examination of the Bhagavadgītā’s chapters and contents,
Holtzmann concluded that “we do not have a systematic philosphical work before
us here. Th e second chapter already contains the complete material of the poem;
the doctrines presented there are then repeated, added to, and illumined from new
perspectives.” “Our work,” he further wrote, “demonstrates a closed philosophical
system as little as the older U panishad ; in particular [it does not have] a fi xed philo-
sophical terminology. . . . We have poetry before us, not a philosophical treatise.” 52
Following this analysis of the poem’s character, Holtzmann then returned to his the-
sis of the Bhagavadgītā’s genesis. In his words,
It is not believable that one and the same poet could have such a diff erent stance
toward the doctrine of the three gu ṇas , which he [i.e., the poet of the Gītā] rejects in
the second and fourteenth chapters, whereas he makes them the key and basis for
his entire presentation in the last two chapters. Even more conspicuous is the fact
that the theological idea of the poem contradicts itself: on the one hand, [we have]
the pantheistic and utterly impersonal world soul; on the other, the utterly personal
and realistic K ṛsh ṇa-Vishn ̣u , [who is] incarnate as a man—and we are supposed to
believe that both these are the same thing. 53
Holtzmann’s solution to the (presumed) contradiction was characteristic of his
approach:
We can [he wrote] only help ourselves out [of this predicament] with the supposition
that we have a Vishnuistic revision of a pantheistic poem before us. We must distin-
guish between an older and a younger Bhagavadgītā— the older was a pantheistic
philosophical-poetic episode of the old, genuine Mahābhārata . Th e [latter’s] theme was
the worthlessness of the fear of death from the perspective of a pantheistic worldview, a
worldview that had been the common possession of the cultured at the time. 54
To which he added parenthetically, “we mean the time in which the older U panishad
and the emergence and growth of the older Buddhism belong.”5 5
Unsurprisingly, the story Holtzmann recounted about the evolution and growth of
the Bhagavadgītā was essentially identical to the one he told about the Mahābhārata.
Indeed, the basic idea underlying the former could be found in (and was taken from)
the latter:
Th e old heroic legend knew of a diff erent motive for scorning death: the certitude
of immortality in I ndra’s heaven. Our poet [Holtzmann means the poet of the Gītā]
51 . Ibid., 160.
52 . Ibid., 163.
53 . Ibid.
54 . Ibid., 163–64.
55 . Ibid., 164.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 169
retained this motif, but, as a true poet, he also placed another motif alongside it,
one more common for his time and its worldview: pantheism; just as the poet of the
Nibelungenlied in order to explain Kriemhild’s actions replaces the motif of blood
vengeance, which was no longer common, with that of fi delity to her spouse. 56
Even so, it is not easy to determine precisely what Holtzmann means. At times, he
seems to have in mind a poetic composition that embroidered upon a prevalent ide-
ology (and thus presented fi ctional characters in a fi ctional setting espousing histori-
cally accurate views). At other times, he seems to think there was an actual epic confl ict
(whether between Indo-Germans and Indo-Germans or possibly between Lassen’s white
Āryans and black Dravidians is irrelevant for our purposes here) and that the poet took
up this historical incident in order advance certain philosophical views (thus presenting
real characters in a real setting espousing the poet’s personal views). For instance, in
the very next line after the passage quoted here he presents a completely diff erent (and
contradictory) view of the Bhagavadgītā’s origins:
Precisely in this place was the best opportunity for a brief conversation about death
and its insignfi cance and the poet used this opportunity in order to give his pantheistic
worldview the noblest expression. Th e speaker, however, was not K ṛsh ṇa but a hero of
the Kauravas , perhaps D ro ṇa .5 7
Apparently unaware of the contradiction between these two views, Holtzmann contin-
ued with his reconstruction. According to him, “the manifest opposition to sacrifi ce and
penitence and to the superstitious reverence of the Veda , which are rather a hindrance to
the attainment of peace of mind, are rooted in this old pantheistic poem, from which the
second chapter in particular, with its simple style, [and] powerful and clear language,
has probably been taken word for word.” 58 In contrast, he argued of the later poem (the
second or third depending on how we read him) that
t he younger B hagavadgītā makes K ṛsh ṇa the speaker and identifi es him straightaway
with the world soul. Th is revision emerges in a period when the Brahmans found it
opportune to reconcile their polytheism with the folk religion in order to be able to take
up the battle against Buddhism. In the B hagavadgītā that is now present to us, we likely
see the sole large piece of the [original] Mahābhārata which has remained unchanged
since the Brahmanic revision, perhaps three or four centuries AD. To be sure, V ish ṇu
has already been identifi ed with K ṛsh ṇa and thus with the world soul, but he is still
in the background and the arrogance of the Brahmans is still far from manifesting as
sublimely as it does in the present form of the Mahābhārata ; there is more talk of the
duties of the priests than of their rights. [And] the language is clear and perspicuous,
pure and old-fashioned [alterthümlich]. 59
56 . Ibid.
57 . Ibid.
58 . Ibid.
59 . Ibid., 164–65.
170 Chapter 03
Indeed, Holtzmann cited the Bhagavadgītā (at least the parts of it he considered “old”)
as the paradigm of what a prerevision, historic heroic epic might have looked like:
It appears to me that the Bhagavadgītā shows us what the M ahābhārata after the fi rst
Brahmanic revision would have looked like in terms of its content and language, and it
is possible that the powerful verses of the second chapter are preserved to us [precisely]
as the fi rst poet of the Mahābhāratac omposed them. 60
Holtzmann’s reconstruction of the Bhagavadgītā ends here, but his ideas of an origi-
nal Gītā, of a Brahmanic revision of the poem, and of the possibility of being able to
separate out the “heroic” and/or “epic” portions of the poem from its “pantheistic,”
“theistic,” “Brahmanic,” “K ṛ ṣ ṇaite” and “ritualistic” portions was to be hugely infl u-
ential upon a generation of scholars. Hopkins adopted Holtzmann’s views as his own,
even presenting what was, in fact, a highly tenuous suggestion as settled fact in his
1895 text, Th e Religions of India . “Th is Divine Song (or Song of the Blessed One) is at
present a Krishnaite version of an older Vishnuite poem, and this in turn was at fi rst
an unsectarian work, perhaps a late Upanishad. . . . Th e impersonal ‘Th at,’ i .e. , absolute
being, brahma , changes almost at once to the personal He (ā tmā as Lord). As shows
the whole Song, b rahma throughout is understood to be personal.” 61 Within twelve
years of Holtzmann’s work, Richard Garbe also responded with his own reconstruc-
tion and thereafter the debate raged for nearly a quarter of a century among German
Indologists. Garbe and Jacobi, for instance, would duel it out between 1921 and
1922 in the pages of the D eutsche Literaturzeitung and in 1919 Hermann Oldenberg,
the self-appointed arbiter of Indology, would enter the debate as well. Beyond the
early twentieth century and in large part through its canonization in the work of the
German scholars, Holtzmann’s thesis of a pantheistic Gītā that had undergone a the-
istic revision at the hands of Brahmans was to leave a complex legacy to Bhagavadgītā
studies in the late twentieth and early twenty-fi rst century. Only rarely would schol-
ars completely turn away from the premises and problems of the German approach,
as, for example, the French Sanskritist Émile Senart did, when in the introduction
to his translation of the Gītā he noted, “Eff orts have been made to distinguish pieces
of diff erent origin; attempts that are ephemeral as well as arbitrary.”6 2 For the most
part, however, scholars took the Holtzmannian legacy of German Gītā studies seri-
ously, as Malinar, for instance, does when she writes of Holtzmann’s Brahmanic
revision hypothesis that, “although it has been questioned and debated, this recon-
struction remained infl uential in subsequent discussion, especially with regard to
the view that the theism of the B hG is part of an epic redaction aimed at fi ghting
60 . Ibid., 165 (this would be the Buddhist poet, but why he would have composed a poem
encouraging Arjuna to do battle, Holtzmann did not explain).
61 . Hopkins, Th e Religions of India , 389.
62 . Émile Senart, L a Bhagavadgîtâ. Traduite du sanscrit avec une introduction (Paris: Éditions
Bossard, 1922), cited and translated in Frits Staal, Exploring Mysticism (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1975), 86. Staal refers to the introduction as the source, but does not supply
a page number.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 171
Buddhism and giving theological support to ‘folk’ religion as expressed in devotional
or b hakti practices.” 63
PANTHEISM AND THE BHAGAVADGĪTĀ
Even before Holtzmann, Western readers of the Bhagavadgītā had been perplexed
by its philosophical complexity. In his review of Schlegel’s edition, Langlois had writ-
ten: “Je ne trouve pas dans son [Vyāsa’s] poème cette unité de doctrine qui annonce
qu’un livre a été conçu par une même tête et exécuté en entier par le même ouvrier.” 64
Nor was the thesis of the Gītā as a work of pantheistic philosophy new. Although he
did not use the term itself, Humboldt’s paraphrase of certain verses into terms com-
monly associated with pantheism suggests that he saw proximity between the Gītā’s
doctrines and the pantheism of Spinoza. 65 Hegel in contrast did use the term in his
review and he intended the characterization to be heard with its full negative force as
evidence that Indians lacked a concept of subjectivity. According to him, the mono-
theism of the Bhagavadgītā (but also of Indian religion in general) was “eben so wes-
entlich Pantheismus, denn wenn das Eine auch als W esen oder als die Abstraction des
Allgemeinen bestimmt wird, ist es um dieser Abstraction willen die Unmittelbarkeit ,
und darum allerdings als das S eyn der Dinge , immanent und identisch mit ihnen,
das Geschöpf insofern nicht von Schöpfer unterschieden; allein dieß immanente
Seyn ist darum nicht die concreten und empirischen Dinge und deren Endlichkeiten,
sondern vielmehr nur das Seyn ihres Daseyns, die unbestimmte Identität.” 66
Th ereafter Lorinser had made the term a central principle of his explanation of the
Bhagavadgītā, and especially his conviction that the poem, although it combined a
theistic Sām ̣khya philosophy with a pantheistic Vedāntic philosophy, could gain the
“appearance of a spiritual monism” only through the infl uence of “Christian ideas.” 67
Pantheism, furthermore, had been a consideration (and source of anxiety) for
Europeans interested in Indian thought since at least 1808 when Schlegel had made
it a central topic in his D ie Sprache und Weisheit der Indier . Schlegel had argued that
the Bhagavadgītā featured pantheism “as a mere theory and sentiment [blos Denkart
und Gesinnung],” 6 8 as compared to the more fully developed scientifi c system found,
for example, in Chinese thought. Nonetheless, he thought that even in its relatively
63 . Angelika Malinar, Th e Bhagavadgītā: Doctrines and Contexts (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2007), 21.
64 . Langlois, “Bhagavad Gītā id est thespesion melois . . . traduit par M. A. G. de Schlegel,”
114.
65 . A typical example is his commentary on verses 10.39 and 18.46, which he summa-
rized with the words: “Wie Gott Alles hervorgebracht hat, so ist er auch Alles, und Alles ist
in ihm.” “Über die unter dem Namen Bhagavad-Gîtâ bekannte Episode des Mahâ-Bhârata
I,” 199.
66 . Hegel, “Ueber die unter dem Nahmen Bhagavad-Gita bekannte Episode des Mahabharata;
von Wilhelm von Humboldt,” 64–65 (all emphasis Hegel’s).
67 . Lorinser, Die Bhagavad-Gita , 117, n.1.
68 . F. Schlegel, Die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier , 247.
172 Chapter 03
less developed form, pantheism was already a sign of degeneracy in Indian thought.
According to him, Indian philosophy could be divided into two main periods: “fi rst,
the system of emanation, which ultimately degenerated into astrological supersti-
tion and indiscriminate [schwärmerischen] materialism; and the doctrine of the
two principles [i.e., Sām ̣khya], whose system of dualism was later transformed to
pantheism.” 69 He continued: “Th e human mind has never fallen further in Oriental
philosophy than when it fell into pantheism, which is as pernicious for morality as
materialism, and, simultaneously, is also destructive of the imagination [Fantasie].”7 0
In the descending scale along which he arranged philosophical systems, Schlegel thus
thought pantheism to be at the lowest end of the scale. It was a perversion of the doc-
trine of emanation—there are suggestions he identifi ed emanation with the original
pure revelation—and, moreover, was morally suspect, leading to materialism, super-
stition, and an unbridled (and perhaps, for European tastes, monstrous) aesthetic
imagination.
When Schlegel used the word “pantheism,” however, he was not doing so as a way
of explicating Indian texts (in particular, the Bhagavadgītā). Rather, his central con-
cern was to use Indian texts as a vantage point from which to critique the Protestant
Reformation. Notes Benes:
Schlegel’s search for the divine in India aimed to reverse the process of rational-
izing religion and naturalizing God that supposedly began with the Protestant
Reformation. In his view, ancient Indians had preserved traces of original revela-
tion, but the force of reason within Indian religion and philosophy had wildly dis-
torted God’s word until it culminated in pantheism. By equating the pantheism of
ancient India with that pantheism of which contemporary Protestant theology was
accused after the Spinoza controversy, O n the Language and Wisdom of the Indians
upheld Catholicism as the religion maintaining the truest ties to original revelation.
Recourse to India likewise allowed Schlegel to resuscitate the ancient Germanic
tribes as worthy rivals of the classical Greeks, rather than primitive, nomadic inhab-
itants of the northern forests. 71
A comprehensive account of the history of the concept of pantheism in nineteenth-
century German philosophy remains beyond the scope of this book. 72 Nonetheless,
it is important to understand that when Bhagavadgītā scholars invoked the term to
explain the poem’s philosophy, they were implicitly drawing upon a long standing tra-
dition. P antheism in the nineteenth century was a loaded word; it had played a major
role in one of the central intellectual events of late eighteenth-century Germany and
leading lights such as Goethe, Kant, Herder, and Johann Georg Hamann participated
69 . Ibid., 253.
70 . Ibid.
71 . Benes, I n Babel’s Shadow , 73–74.
72 . See, however, Park, “A Catholic Apologist in a Pantheistic World,” for a brief and yet
comprehensive look at this question especially as it pertains to the German reception of
Indian thought.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 173
in this event. Frederick Beiser in fact considers the so-called pantheism controversy
between F. H. Jacobi and Moses Mendelssohn to have been, next to the publication of
Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason in 1781, “the most signifi cant intellectual event in late
eighteenth-century Germany.” 73 Th e origins of the debate lay in a controversy sur-
rounding Spinoza’s philosophy, which, since it professed materialism and atheism,
was considered to be both irreligious and seditious. In the early eighteenth century,
the Irish thinker John Toland popularized “pantheism” as a term for the belief in the
co-substantiality of the universe with God (though the term was probably fi rst used
by Joseph Raphson who in his D e spatio reali of 1697 “distinguishe[d] it from materi-
alism and atheism”7 4 ). As such, the charge of having pantheistic sympathies could be
a powerful instrument for delegitimizing or damaging a philosopher or a school. Th e
actual pantheism controvery erupted when minor philosopher F. H. Jacobi (almost
certainly not without personal animus) disclosed to Elise Reimarus (daughter of
the Hamburg Orientalist Hermann Samuel Reimarus) that Lessing, Enlightenment
philosopher and establishment fi gure, had in his last days revealed to him that he
was a committed Spinozist. Jacobi’s disclosure was, as Beiser notes, “disingenu-
ous.” 7 5 He plainly wanted to put Mendelssohn (who was at the time writing a tribute
to his friend Lessing) in an awkward position and to discredit the Enlightenment.
Revealing, under the “rose of friendship” as he put it in his letter to Reimar, discom-
fi ting facts about one of the leading lights of the Enlightenment was surely a good
way to place the entire tradition on the defensive.
Returning to Schlegel and Holtzmann now, we fi nd that the question of whether
the Bhagavadgītā professes a pantheistic outlook is immaterial to the text itself. 76
It was, rather, a question that had specifi c intellectual, religious and political reso-
nances in Germany of the Goethezeit. To raise the question of the Gītā was already to
73 . Frederick C. Beiser, Th e Fate of Reason: German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987), 44.
74 . Ann Th omson, Bodies of Th ought: Science, Religion, and the Soul in the Early Enlightenment
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 54.
75 . Beiser, Th e Fate of Reason , 62.
76 . Indeed, “pantheism” is a misnomer even when applied to ancient Greek (i.e., Platonic
and Aristotelian) philosophy. Th e term’s roots lie in a Stoic misinterpretation of the
Platonic doctrine of ideas, namely, that every individual object is a perfect realization of
its idea. Such a view is far from what Plato and Aristotle held. For them, the idea was a
conceptual state of aff airs: individual objects realize this state only to a lesser or greater
degree depending upon the suitability of their material conditions. Ideas thus always tran-
scend the totality of their manifestations. In contrast, the Stoic view leads to an imma-
nentization of transcendence, since the idea, even though it transcends every individual
manifestation, is nonetheless immediately present in them. It is this immanentization of
a transcendental condition that is responsible for the pantheistic confusion, as though
God himself would be immediately present in each and every one of the objects of his cre-
ation. For a discussion of the origins of the pantheistic confusion, see Arbogast Schmitt,
“Symmetrie im Platonismus und in der Stoa. Ein antiker Gegensatz und seine Nivellierung
in der Renaissance,” in Platon, Plotin und Marsilio Ficino. Studien zu den Vorläufern und
zur Rezeption des Florentiner Neuplatonismus, International Symposium, Vienna, October
25–27, 2007 , ed. Maria-Christine Leitgeb, Stephane Toussaint, and Herbert Bannert
(Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2009), 13–50.
174 Chapter 03
prejudice signifi cantly its reception. 77 Th e “original Gītā” debate, insofar as it rested
on the question of the Gītā’s pantheism, was largely a problem of the Germans’ own
making. Th e various reconstructions proposed were, in turn, German solutions to a
German problem; it was only logical that Western and Indian scholars would later
reject German claims of having evolved a superior approach to the Bhagavadgītā.
It is unclear how much Holtzmann knew of this background. On the whole, we do
not have much evidence of a good grasp of European intellectual history in his case
(this would also true of most Indologists after Holtzmann). But it is clear that in tak-
ing up the pantheism theory and tying it to a theory of the Indo-Germanic origins
of the Bhagavadgītā, he was setting the stage for a charged debate. In keeping with
his irrationalist strain, however, he reversed the Schlegelian scheme, according to
which pantheism was a sign of philosophical and moral enervation. Schlegel wished
to show that it was the Protestant Reformation that had led Europe to pantheism
and he used his bipartite analysis of Indian intellectual history to off er a salient
example. In contrast, Holtzmann made pantheism the hallmark of the free-thinking,
crude and passionate Indo-Germans and claimed that it was the sophistic morals of
the Brahmans that had sapped the Indo-Germanic spirit. Th is diff erence in views is,
of course, easily explained: the neo-Catholic Schlegel was interested in a critique of
Indian pantheism as a way of demonstrating the superiority of Catholicism; from his
perspective, the theism of Catholicism was preferable to the materialism, natural-
ism, and atheism of Protestantism. In this context, Indian pantheism could be used
to make polemical points about German Protestantism. In contrast, the Protestant
Holtzmann was interested in a critique of Indian theism as a way of demonstrating
what could happen when unscrupulous priests seized control over a people; from his
perspective, the pantheism of the Germanic peoples was preferable to the ritualism,
ceremonialism, and papism of Catholicism. Indian pantheism could be used to make
polemical points about Roman Catholicism.
While pantheism had already been activated as a way of making points for or
against competing versions of Christian faith by European intellectuals before
Holtzmann, the Indologist gave a new twist to this practice of using Indian texts as
a foil for European anxieties. Schlegel had, to be sure, already used his translation
of the Gītā in order to frame the poem in a certain light. Herling, who examines
Schlegel’s translation in detail in his book, suggests that Schlegel was motivated by a
concern “not only to establish the presence of a philosophical dualism in the Gītā but
also to show how a pantheistic teaching is consistently interpolated within the text.”
“Schlegel,” he argues, “seems to be suggesting, through his translation, that dual-
ism has indeed become philosophically abstract and indeterminate by the time of
the G ītā , and this development paved the way for pantheistic interventions.”7 8 What
77 . Among the criticisms Schlegel raised of pantheism was that it “necessarily abolishes
the distinction between good and evil, regardless of how much it may protest in words
against this . . . ” so that to argue that the Bhagavadgītā was pantheistic was mutatis mutan-
dis to argue that it was an unethical or even blasphemous book. F. Schlegel, Die Sprache und
Weisheit der Indier , 229.
78 . Herling, Th e German Gītā , 147–48.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 175
was specifi cally new about Holtzmann’s work, however, was the way he brought the
complexity of the Bhagavadgītā as well as the question of its alleged pantheism into
relation with a historicist account of the epic’s evolution and the latter, in turn, into
relation with the task of reconstruction. Schlegel had merely opined that there was
a history of ideas in India to be recovered through reading its texts. 79 Holtzmann,
however, went much beyond that. First, he was of the opinion that the prototypical
historical text could i tself be recovered through a reconstruction of the available texts .
Second, he explicitly tied the scholarly task to a recovery of the characteristics of
the ancient Indo-Germanic peoples. Th ird, if Schlegel had used nebulous ideas of the
original revelation to defi ne the critical project, Holtzmann was drawing on a much
richer vocabulary of the original heroic epic culture to enable his reconstruction.
Holtzmann’s project was greatly facilitated by the thoroughgoing historicization
the Mahābhārata had undergone meanwhile. As we have seen in the fi rst chapter, in
his writings on the Mahābhārata he explicitly turned away from literary interpreta-
tion to historical reconstruction. In place of the text’s own doctrines or purport, he
focused exclusively on what the text could tell him about Indian history. Th is history,
moreover, was largely a fetish history, constructed according to his own ideas of a
heroic age. Holtzmann was ultimately only interested in using the text to confi rm his
ideas: of the Indo-Germanic peoples, of warrior ethics, of corruption by the priests,
and so on. Th e history he aspired to was not an objective history, but an a priori
history that could let him account for certain events in his contemporary situation
(e.g., the dangers to the German people posed by unbridled priests). By historicizing
the Mahābhārata, Holtzmann laid the foundation not only for later German views
of the Indian people (for example, the pervasive misidentifi cation of Germans with
heroic ideals to be seen in the work of later Indologists such as J. W. Hauer), but also
for an interpretive matrix later scholars could draw on (as Hopkins, for example, did
when he distinguished between “epic” and “pseudoepic” 80 ). In various forms and out-
growths, these historicist categories would defi ne German scholarship on the epic
and, beyond it, on Indian texts in general. As we shall see, this was to be especially
true of the German reception of the Bhagavadgītā.
79 . Likewise, though cited by Holtzmann as support for his views, von Humboldt had
merely speculated about the possibility of changes. Humboldt, in fact, had argued that
the possibility of there being changes in the Bhagavadgītā could not be satisfactorily
settled and, what is more important, had pointed out that the very question was prob-
lematic, since it would undermine the possibility of a consistent interpretation such as
his own. Humboldt, “Über die unter dem Namen Bhagavad-Gîtâ bekannte Episode des
Mahâ-Bhârata I,” 333 and 334. Holtzmann, however, rejected these considerations. For
him, the possibility of a recovery of a heroic Indo-Germanic antiquity and, coupled with
it, a new sense of Germany’s spiritual and political mission were ultimately too seductive.
Further, textual criticism, as he noted in the fi rst chapter of his 1892 book, promised to
keep a generation of German scholars profi tably employed.
80 . See his Th e Great Epic of India , cited earlier. Hopkins uses the term throughout, but
does not provide a defi nition. Although this work is cited by most scholars as the source
of the term, it is actually introduced earlier in his “Th e Social and Military Position of the
Ruling Caste in Ancient India,” 57–376, although used there in a more restricted sense
as referring to the “the part of this Epic embraced by the twelfth and thirteenth books.”
Ibid., 57, n.
176 Chapter 03
THE THEISTIC GĪTĀ OF RICHARD GARBE
Richard Karl von Garbe (1857–1927) was the fi rst scholar to enter the “original Gītā”
debate with an edition published in 1905 (2nd revised edition in 1921). 81 Garbe was
the son of a landed factory owner and thus at fi rst glance an unlikely fi gure to enter
the debate. 82 Yet as the successor to Rudolf von Roth’s chair at Tübingen, Garbe was
also the senior fi gure in Germany on the history of religions in India. It was thus
unlikely that he could stay out of the debate long, especially as Holtzmann’s con-
tentions regarding the relative antiquity of the pantheistic perspective directly chal-
lenged his teacher’s prestige (Rudolf von Roth had focused mainly upon the Veda,
considered until then to be the oldest part of the Indian canon). Garbe thus occu-
pies a crucial place in the history of the Indological Gītā. First, with his criticisms
of Holtzmann, he brought the latter’s work to a larger audience. Second, his edition
was to be hugely infl uential on the next half century of German Gītā scholarship.
His student, Rudolf Otto, dedicated his own reconstruction and translation of the
Gītā to Garbe and almost every fi gure in German Bhagavadgītā studies in the early
twentieth century (and beyond it) took a stance on his thesis that the Bhagavadgītā
was originally theistic in spirit. Garbe is also important, because, as was mentioned
earlier, he gives voice to the awareness of a break with the Romantic tradition.8 3 Even
though this break had occurred much earlier (e.g., in the work of Bopp), Garbe thus
became a signpost for a new, more positivist phase in the German reception of the
Bhagavadgītā.
Before we look at the main problems with his interpretation of the text, let us
look at the basic contours of his reconstruction. Garbe accepted Holtzmann’s thesis
of a contradiction between the text’s so-called pantheistic and theistic elements and
argued that “as a matter of fact, our inquiry, which aims to distinguish the older and
younger components of the Gita from each other, must set out from this contra-
diction.” 84 “But,” he argued, “in my opinion, it [our inquiry] may not be conducted
along the lines Holtzmann’s was” and he stated: “Th e entire character of the poem is,
according to its nature and its structure, overwhelmingly t heistic .” 85 “A personal god,
K ṛ ṣ ṇa, appears in the form of a human hero, presents his doctrines, demands besides
the fulfi llment of duty, above all, faithful love to him and surrender of the listener,
reveals himself then out of especial grace in his heavenly, though still humanlike,
81 . Garbe was ennobled in 1909 and thereafter styled himself “Richard von Garbe.”
Hereafter, this chapter follows the preference for referring to him as “Richard Garbe.”
82 . See Angelika Malinar, “ ‘K ṣatriya-Glaube’ und ‘Opferwesen’: Richard Garbe und die
indischen Religionen,” in Indien-Forschung im Zeitenwandel. Analysen und Dokumente zur
Indologie und Religionswissenschaft in Tübingen , ed. Heidrun Brückner, Klaus Butzenberger,
Angelika Malinar, and Gabriele Zeller (Tübingen: Attempto Verlag, 2003), 122.
83 . “Th e period, in which the Bhag., because of the sublimity of its thoughts and ideas, stim-
ulated nothing but enthusiasm and fascination in Europe, are long past. We have . . . become
more sober and critical and do not close our eyes to the obvious failings and weaknesses of
the poem.” Garbe, Die Bhagavadgîtâ , 11–12.
84 . Ibid., 14.
85 . Ibid. (Garbe’s emphasis).
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 177
form, and promises the believer that, as a reward for his love for god, he will enter
him after death, [i.e.,] will attain the presence of god.”8 6 Garbe acknowledged that,
“ alongside this god, who has been made as personal as possible and who dominates
the entire poem, we occasionally fi nd as highest principle the impersonal, neutral
Brahman, the Absolute.” 87 He also conceded that the two doctrines, “the theistic
and the pantheistic,” “interpenetrated each other[,] . . . at times follow[ing] each
other completely without mediation, at times in loose connection.” But he cautioned
against viewing the one as a “lower, exoteric [doctrine] and the other as a higher,
esoteric doctrine.” He rejected that the worship of K ṛ ṣ ṇa was an exoteric doctrine
intended for lay readers, expressing the insight into Brahman in simpler, more
accessible form. Rather, “the two forms of faith are dealt with almost throughout as
though there were absolutely no diff erence between them, neither according to value
nor according to content.” 88
Against Humboldt’s theory that the Bhagavadgītā was the work of a poet, who
spoke from out of the fl ow of his imagination, Garbe argued that the poem was “not
a ‘work of art created by the synoptic vision of a genius’. ” In his opinion, although
“the swing of enthusiasm [could] be felt at times,” the Gītā’s sentiments were “not
infrequently” “hollow, empty words.” “[A] thought that has already been expressed
often is repeated; at times the linguistic expression is completely inadequate.” Garbe
therefore argued for viewing the Gītā as a “rather artifi cial didactic poem” created
to enable the “dissemination of specifi c religious [and] philosophical thoughts.” In
order to resolve these contradictions (i.e., between the Bhagavadgītā’s theistic and
pantheistic strains and between its poetic and less poetic, more doctrinal passages),
Garbe advocated a method of historical comparison. In his opinion, the only way to
account for the dissonance was to assume that “one of the two contradictory doc-
trines placed in the mouth of Krishna, the personal god” was “a later ingredient.” And
then he argued: “when this is so, will we really be able to seriously doubt that it is the
pantheistic doctrine that has to be excised and not, as Holtzmann thought, the theis-
tic?” 8 9 He countered the objection that “the I ndians did not see a contradiction in [the
Gītā’s] combination of theism and pantheism,” with the words: “Th e identifi cation
of K ṛ ṣ ṇa with Brahman, his interpretation as the All-Soul belongs to a later period
than the original Bhagavadgîtâ, a period that is dominated by syncretic tendencies.
We can demonstrate this from the Bhagavadgîtâ as h anded down. ”9 0 Garbe thus prob-
lematically placed an a priori theory of the Bhagavadgītā (the apparent contradic-
tion between the Gītā’s pantheism and theism, we must remember, arose only for
German readers in light of a late eighteenth-century controversy) above its reception
in the Indian tradition. Moreoever, he failed to see that his proposed means of dem-
onstrating the Gītā’s lack of unity was circular. If what is at stake is whether K ṛ ṣ ṇa
was identifi ed with Brahman at a later stage, then this identifi cation cannot itself be
86 . Ibid., 14–15.
87 . Ibid., 15 (Garbe’s emphasis).
88 . Ibid., 15.
89 . Ibid., 16.
90 . Ibid., 17 (all emphasis Garbe’s).
178 Chapter 03
used as evidence that it occurred at a later stage. Th e idea of identifi cation is itself
in question and no amount of fudging the question of whether it happened earlier
or later will get us over that problem. An Indian reader, for instance, would not say
K ṛ ṣ ṇa was “identifi ed” with Brahman; for him, K ṛ ṣ ṇa is Brahman. Th e remainder of
Garbe’s reconstruction also shared in this circularity. Stating that “K ṛ ṣ ṇa, as is well
known [bekanntlich], is held to be the All-Being only in the more recent portions of
the Mbh.; the Gîtâ, however, does not belong to the later insertions,”9 1 Garbe sug-
gested that this demonstrated the impossibility of K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s (pantheistic) identifi ca-
tion with Brahman being original to the poem. As he put it, “even in the revised
form in which it is present to us now, the Bhag. is rightly considered one of the older
episodes of the Mbh.; indeed, Holtzmann would like to ‘assign the oldest portions of
the Bhag. without hesitation to the old poem [i.e., Holtzmann’s old heroic epic]’.”9 2
And since he had stated that K ṛ ṣ ṇa “as is well known” is identifi ed with Brahman only
in the more recent portions of the Mahābhārata, he considered it settled that the
Bhagavadgītā could not have been pantheistic.
Th e circularity of this argument escaped Garbe. In the absence of evidence for
the relative dates of diff erent sections of the epic, any claims about what the older
epic or the older Gītā contained were fated to be circular. Garbe, of course, lacked
sensitivity to these problems. For him, it was a settled matter that the Gītā, being
partly pantheistic and partly theistic, was a composite text; the question could only
be, which was more original. And since he, no less than Holtzmann, considered it a
relatively straightforward matter to identify the “older” layers of the Bhagavadgītā,
he thought he could confi dently demonstrate that “the identifi cation of K ṛ ṣ ṇa with
Brahman . . . belongs to a later period than the original Bhagavadgîtâ.” Th us even
though Garbe and Holtzmann were at odds with each other over the character of
the original Gītā (each for reasons having to do with the uses to which he wished to
put a history of religions in India), they still shared certain basic assumptions about
epic scholarship, above all, that the age of passages could be determined on the basis
of a priori ideas of antiquity. For Holtzmann, these ideas had to do with his inter-
est in a heroic Indo-Germanic people. For Garbe, they had to do with his interest in
demonstrating a rationalistic core to Indian thought. And yet, for all their diff erence
on this one point, the story they told about the epic was remarkably similar. For
both, the epic was a composite text. For both, the epic had originated in heroic circles
(Indo-Germanic for Holtzmann; K ṣatriya for Garbe). For both, the epic had under-
gone a process of decline. For both, this decline was to be attributed to the Brahmans
(they merely diff ered on the question of whether the Brahmans had corrupted the
text through their theism or their pantheism). And for both, the question could be
settled simply by taking a look at the text itself. As an example of this reconstructive
method, let us look at some of Garbe’s arguments.
91 . Ibid.
92 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 179
Garbe presented eight main arguments for seeing the Bhagavadgītā as a
theistic work:
1. He cited Gītā 7.19, which says, “ ‘At the end of many lifetimes, the sage approaches
me with the thought “Vâsudeva is everything.” Such a noble-minded one is very
hard to fi nd’ ” and interpreted this passage as evidence that “K ṛ ṣ ṇa is very rarely
interpreted as the All (or as Brahman), but rather almost always as a personal
god.” “Does not the redactor,” asked Garbe, “tell us in clear language here, that the
equation of K ṛ ṣ ṇa with Brahman was originally unfolding in his time ?”9 3
2. He argued that “K ṛ ṣ ṇa in the Gîtâ is at fi rst only sparsely identifi ed with Brahman.”
“At times the terms K ṛ ṣ ṇa and Brahman are placed close to each other as distinct
[terms] so that we almost have the impression that the redactor shied away from
asserting the identity of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa and Brahman too forcefully in light of the evi-
dently theistic character of his original.” 94
3. Garbe further pointed out that in verse 8.1, “Arjuna asks ‘what is this Brahman?’
and K ṛ ṣ ṇa does not respond in verse [8.]3 with ‘I am it,’ but ‘Brahman is the
imperishable highest.’ ”9 5 He took this as evidence that K ṛ ṣ ṇa, at least in the origi-
nal poem, was distinct from Brahman.
4. Garbe claimed that “K ṛ ṣ ṇa and Brahman are expressly distinguished from each
other. Th ey are not only two here, but also throughout the poem as a whole (ignor-
ing precisely the passages where the Vedântic redactor completely identifi ed and
mixed the two notions with each other).” 96
5. According to him, “in the old poem, K ṛ ṣ ṇa referred to himself—and Arjuna to
K ṛ ṣ ṇa—as an individual, a person, a specifi c divinity; [whereas] in the ingredi-
ents of the revision the neutral Brahman appears as the highest concept and is
occasionally equated with K ṛ ṣ ṇa.” 97 From this he concluded: “in a nutshell: t he
old poem proclaimed a [religion of] K ṛ ṣ ṇaism philosophically founded on the basis of
Sâm ̣khya-Yoga; the elements of the revision preach Vedântic philosophy .”9 8
6. Garbe also cited the general opinion, “known since a long time,” “that the doc-
trines of Sâm ̣khya-Yoga are the foundations of the philosophical observations of
the Bhag. and Vedânta steps back signifi cantly next to them.” 99 As further evi-
dence, he cited the fact that the former are frequently mentioned in the poem “by
name”; in contrast, “Vedânta only occurs once ( vedântak ṇt , 15.15) and that, too,
in the sense of an Upani ṣad!”1 00
93 . Ibid., 18 (Garbe’s emphasis). Garbe’s translation in the original reads: “Am Ende von
vielen Existenzen naht der Erkennende sich mir mit dem Gedanken ‘Vâsudeva ist das All.’
Solch ein Hochsinniger ist sehr schwer zu fi nden.”
94 . Ibid., 19.
95 . Ibid., 19.
96 . Ibid., 20.
97 . Ibid., 20.
98 . Ibid., 20 (Garbe’s emphasis).
99 . Ibid., 20–21.
100 . Ibid., 21. Garbe footnotes this line with the words “in general, Vedânta consistently
has this meaning in the Mbh.” Ibid., 21, n. 1.
180 Chapter 03
7. “If we keep in mind the irreconcilable opposition of Sâ ṃkhya-Yoga and Vedânta,
which can only be eliminated by distinguishing between old and new, the Vedântic
components of the Bhag. once again appear as nonoriginal.” “Irrespective of
whether we examine the Gîtâ from the religious or the philosophical side, in both
cases we gain the same result.” 101
8. He concluded with the triumphant declaration: “It became clear to me that in
the wake of this excision [i.e., in Garbe’s reconstruction], no real gap arises in the
Bhag.; rather, t he context, which is now interrupted, is restored in several passages .”1 02
In spite of the name “critical method,” however, there is really nothing critical
about Garbe’s eff orts. Th e problems with his arguments are many; we present a
few here:
1. As regards the fi rst argument, Garbe confused a statement made in the con-
text of a doctrine of metempsychosis with a statement made in historical
time. Whereas the passage explicitly refers to the “many lifetimes” ( bahūnām ̇
janmanām , Bhagavadgītā 7.19a) required to arrive at the insight “Vāsudeva is
everything” (v āsudeva ḥ sarvam iti , 7.19b), Garbe took it to refer to the passage
of years necessary before the poet or redactor could assert the identity of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa
and Brahman.
2. Arguments 2, 4, 5 and 7 are all circular, since they invoke either the early or
late passages of the poem as support for Garbe’s thesis, when what is at stake
is precisely whether different passages of the Bhagavadgītā are of different
ages.
3. Th e question “what is this B rahman ?” ( kim ̇ tad brahma ) can simply be a request
for clarifi cation about the nature of Brahman rather than a request for identi-
fi cation. Especially as a philosophical concept, introduced by kim ̇ (what) rather
than ka ḥ (who), the passage seems to require the kind of conceptual explanation
K ṛ ṣ ṇa provides rather than the kind of demonstrative response Garbe imag-
ines. Further, Arjuna’s initial question is followed by a series of others, all of
which request information about various entities and are introduced by the
same interrogative: k im ̇ . In van Buitenen’s translation, these verses read: “What
is that b rahman ? What is the individual self? What is act, Supreme Person?
What is called ‘elemental,’ and what ‘divine’?” (k im ̇ tad brahma kim adhyātmam ̇
kim ̇ karma purus ̣ottama | adhibhūta ṁ ca kim ̇ proktam adhidaivam ̇ kim ucyate || ,
Bhagavadgītā 8.1). Only in the second verse do we get an interrogative pro-
noun (k a ḥ ), which van Buitenen rightly renders as “who.” Arjuna asks, “Who
in this body is the ‘sacrifi cial’ one, and how is he so, Madhusūdana [an epithet
of K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s]?” to which Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa responds, “I myself am the ‘sacrifi cial’ here in this
body, O best of the embodied.” Clearly Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa is fully capable of distinguishing
between interrogative pronouns.
101 . Ibid., 21.
102 . Ibid., 22–23 (Garbe’s emphasis).
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 181
4. Regarding Garbe’s fi fth and sixth arguments, since he does not clarify his
sources, it is unclear who (besides himself) is supposed to hold this thesis.
Garbe’s work on Sām ̣khya is similarly biased so that citing it here is not reliable
evidence. 103 Further, vedānta in vedāntak ṛt (15.15c) is not used in a terminologi-
cal sense as the designation of a school; Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa only states that he is the maker
of the Vedānta, that is, the concluding portion of the Veda or, on an alterna-
tive reading, that he puts an end to the knowledge of the Veda (cf. yāvān artha
udapāne sarvatah ̣ sa ṁplutodake | tāvān sarves ̣u vedes ̣u brāhman ̣asya vijānata ḥ || ,
Bhagavadgītā 2.46).
5. Contrary to Garbe’s eighth argument, there were many instances in which he com-
pletely shattered the connections between individual verses and/or chapters. For
instance, the opening verses of chapter eleven depend on the concluding verses
of chapter ten. In chapter ten, verses 19–42 Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa presents a list of his divine
manifestations (of the Ādityas he is Vi ṣ ṇu; of the Vedas, he is the Sāmaveda; of
the Rudras, he is Śa ṃkara, and so on.) and concludes by saying:
I am whatever is the seed of all creatures, Arjuna. Not a being, standing or moving,
can exist without me. Th ere is no limit to my divine ubiquities, enemy-burner: the full
extent of my ubiquity I have here merely indicated. Whatever beings have transcend-
ing power, luster and might, know that each and everyone of them has its source in a
particle of my splendor. But what is the point to you of knowing this much, Arjuna?
I support this entire universe with but a single portion of mine! (Bhagavadgītā
10.39-42.)
In chapter 12, Arjuna resumes the conversation, stating: “Th is ultimate mystery
bearing upon the soul, which you have propounded to me as a favor, has dispelled
my delusion. I have heard from you in all detail the becoming and unbecoming of
the creatures, lotus-eyed one, and your own indestructible greatness. Now I wish to
set eye on your real, supernal form, just as you have described yourself, sovereign
lord, Supreme Person! If you think that I shall be able to look upon it, lord, master
of Yoga, display to me your imperishable person” (Bhagavadgītā 12.1–3). In Garbe’s
reconstruction, however, chapter 10 ends with verse 11 (“Residing in their own very
being I compassionately dispel the darkness of their ignorance with the shining
lamp of knowledge”) thus leaving chapter 12 hanging in the air. In similar fashion,
although he implied that his emendations to chapter 2 (deletion of verses 17 and
72) restored the original context, he actually disrupted the text, since the truth of
verse 17 is assumed in verse 18 while verse 72 is the necessary and logical conclu-
sion to Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s description of the man of stable disposition ( stithaprajña ) beginning
with verse 55. Verse 72, furthermore, caps this train of thoughts and chapter 2 as a
whole; it describes the state of the man established in Brahman (e ṣā brāhmī stithi . . . ).
Without it, there is a very real sense of something missing. Verse 71, with which
103 . See Nicholson, U nifying Hinduism , 67–68 and see also the extended argument
from 70–74.
182 Chapter 03
Garbe concludes the chapter, is very much like the preceding verses; it is a descrip-
tion of the man of stable disposition, but does not step outside these descriptions
to provide a refl exive summary of the entire section (as verse 72 does). Evidently,
Garbe’s main reason for rejecting it is that it contains the word “Brahman” and thus
was unpalatable to him. Later scholars from Jacobi to Oldenberg, too, would point
out that Garbe’s version of the Gītā was not more consistent than the original, but he
remained oblivious to these criticisms.
On the whole, then, Garbe’s reconstruction was logically and epistemologically
fl awed. He misused the available evidence, citing selectively from the text in pur-
suit of rhetorical and ideological ends. And some of his arguments were simply non-
sense. 104 Yet, drawing on these arguments, he proposed a radically pared Gītā as the
original. “In this way, of the 700 verses of the Bhag., 170 fall out of consideration; if
[however] one subtracts the 24 verses at the beginning and end of the poem, which
in any case do not belong to the genuine Gîtâ, then 146 or more than a fi fth of the
whole [do not belong to the original poem.” 105 He was careful to note, however, that
he did not harbor “the delusion” that he had succeeded in eliminating “a ll the non-
genuine portions of the Bhag. in this manner,”1 06 for, “there could still be some other
verses that were added at the time of the revision, verses of which not a word was
to be found in the original poem.” “But,” he added, “we lack the resources to be able
to recognize them and I do not wish to commit myself to mere assumptions[!] .” 107
Garbe found additional support for his reconstruction in a literary consideration.
He cited Winternitz’s view of the original Bhagavadgītā as having been the work of
a true and great poet and then noted, almost bashfully, that he (i.e., Winternitz)
had pointed out that “among the 170 or so verses” excised by Garbe as non-genuine
“for their Vedântic or orthodox Brahmanic character,” he could fi nd “at most ten or
twelve . . . with some poetic merit.” 108 Although he himself had not undertaken “this
aesthetic refl ection” in his fi rst edition, Garbe confessed that, “following Winternitz’
104 . Evidently, neither Garbe nor Winternitz (who echoes him on this point, writ-
ing: “when one, along with Garbe, eliminates all the verses that represent the standpoint
of the Vedānta and of the orthodox Brahmanic religion, not only does a gap not arise
anywhere in the text, but rather, not infrequently the uninterrupted context is restored
through the exclusion of the verses printed in small font”; Winternitz, Review of Vier phi-
losophischen Texte aus dem Mahâbhârata , 196) seemed to realize that the argument that no
gap arose upon elimination could be extended ad absurdum: theoretically the Bhagavadgītā
could be reduced to any two well-connected verses. As a criterion for the elimination of
verses, the requirement “no gap may arise” suff ers from ativyāptido ṣa (it is overly broad or
overly generic).
105 . Garbe, Die Bhagavadgîtâ , 24.
106 . Ibid. (Garbe’s emphasis).
107 . Ibid.
108 . Ibid. Th e reference is to Winternitz’ review of Deussen and Strauss, cited ear-
lier. In his Indien und das Christentum: Eine Untersuchung der religionsgeschichtlichen
Zusammenhänge (Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1914), Garbe accepted Winternitz’ suggestion
that “at least another 200 verses” ought to be eliminated, dropping the entire twelfth, thir-
teenth, fourteenth, fi fteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth chapters and all but 12 verses of
the eighteenth (for a total of 218 additional verses). See ibid., 232. n. 1 and see charts 3.1
and 3.2 comparing Garbe’s two Gītās.
Ch. 1 119
Ch. 2 17 72
Ch. 3 9–18, 23
Ch. 4 24, 3132, 3435
Ch. 5 67, 10, 1622, 2426
Ch. 6 27–32
Ch. 7 7–11, 14–15, 19, 25–26, 29–30
Ch. 8 14, 2028
Ch. 9 16, 1612, 29
Ch. 10 12–42
Ch. 11 7, 13, 1516, 1819, 3740
Ch. 12 None
Ch. 13 2, 4, 12–18, 27–28, 30–33
Ch. 14 26–27
Ch. 15 1215
Ch. 16 None
Ch. 17 23–28
Ch. 18 4546, 5054, 7478
Graph of the
Bhagavadg-t1 a-0
, showing
Garbe2 ’0
s deletions of
the3 0
text in
40 50 60 70
--
pursuit of an “original” Gta. At a little over 73.8% of the text, chapter
10 undergoes the most loss (31 of a total of 42 verses deleted). In
all, Grabe excises 172 verses of the text and keeps 528 or about three-quartes (75.43%) of the text.
In this graph, each unit on the bottom scale is equal to one verse; white portions indicate Garbe’s
Strikethrough numbers indicate deleted verses
Chart 3.1
Garbe’s deletions and the fragmentation of the text
Ch. 1 119
Ch. 2 17, 72
Ch. 3 918 23
Ch. 4 24, 31–32, 34–35
Ch. 5 67, 10, 1622, 2426
Ch. 6 2732
Ch. 7 7–11, 14–15, 19, 25–26, 29–30
Ch. 8 14, 2028
Ch. 9 16, 1619, 29
Ch. 10 1242
Ch. 11 7, 13, 15–16, 18–19, 37–40
Ch. 12 120
Ch. 13 134
Ch. 14 1–27
Ch. 15 120
Ch. 16 124
Ch. 17 128
Ch. 18 1–55, 67–78
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Garbe’s revises G-ta, incorporating the suggestions made in Winternitz 1907 (see Garbe 1914). The
Bhagavadg-ta has shrunk to less than half (49.57%) of its original length (an additional 175 verses deleted).
In this graph, each unit on the bottom scale is equal to one verse; white portions indicate Garbe’s
Strikethrough numbers indicate deleted verses
Chart 3.2
Garbe’s second attempt at isolating a “theistic Gītā”
5451
morf
redlibtopstspaP
eTh
:snamharB
eht
drawot
rocnar
’stsigolodnI
eht
rof
enot
eht
gnitteS
:2.3
dna
1.3
egamI
sih
rof
rehtuL
nitraM
yb
redlE
eht
hcanarC
sacuL
fo
pohskrow
eht
morf
denoissimmoc
snoitartsulli
enin
fo
seires
a
morf(
)muesuM
hsitirB
eht
fo
noitcelloc
;5451
fo
”ycapaP
eht
fo
noitcipeD“
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 185
hint,” he was “convinced that the Bhag. as reconstructed by [him] signifi cantly
exceed[ed] the transmitted text in poetic beauty and coherence.” 109
Although Garbe disagreed with Holtzmann’s reconstruction of the original
Gītā, his views of the poem’s origins were thus remarkably similar to those of the
Mahābhārata scholar. In fact, it seems that for all their diff erences, he had been
heavily infl uenced by ideas of a Ks ̣atriya religion—ideas that can ultimately be traced
back to the work of Lassen and Holtzmann. For instance, Garbe wrote, “in the time
when the Ks ̣atriyas had a prominent role in the formation of spiritual life in India—
in my opinion, they were the leaders [of their people]—the militant warrior K ṛ ṣ ṇa,
the son of Vasudeva and Devakî, founded a monotheistic religion. Th is religion fi rst
spread among the members of his tribe, the Yâdavas, Sâtvatas or V ṛ ṣ ṇis, and then
spread beyond the boundaries of the tribal community.” 110 As evidence for this the-
ory, Garbe pointed to the “older portions” of the Mahābhārata, where K ṛ ṣ ṇa “played
a role . . . as a warrior, a counselor, and the proclaimer of religious doctrines.” Garbe
also defended the tribal origins of the god K ṛ ṣ ṇa on the grounds that his “patro-
nym Vâsudeva (in a broader sense and earlier than the personal name) appears as
a name for god, at fi rst especially among the tribe to which K ṛ ṣ ṇa, according to the
epic, belongs.” “Th is circumstance,” he argued, “is of especial signifi cance because the
divinization of the founders of sects is common practice in India today and not just
fi rst . . . since the Neo-Brahmanism of the 12th century AD.” Holtzmann had earlier
suggested that Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa was the leader of a tribe, who had later undergone a process
of apotheosis and identifi cation with the Brahmanic deity Vi ṣ ṇu. Garbe agreed with
this assessment, but added that K ṛ ṣ ṇa was also the founder of a religion. “From the
tangle of sagas, legends, and myths that cover over the character of K ṛ ṣ ṇa” he wrote,
“[the fi gure of a] victorious hero, who was simultaneously the successful founder of
a religion reveals itself as the kernel [of truth at the heart of these legends].”1 11 He
rejected Holtzmann’s thesis that “two diff erent individuals were united in the [char-
acter of] K ṛ ṣ ṇa of the epic,” arguing that “the contradictions [in K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s depiction in
the epic] were explained completely satisfactorily by the revision of the old Kuru epic,
for which K ṛ ṣ ṇa was a man full of malice and deceit, into the present Pâ ṇḍava epic,
which glorifi es K ṛ ṣ ṇa as a friend and helper.”1 12 In his opinion, an “impartial histori-
cal observation of the sources shows that K ṛ ṣ ṇa in the most ancient period was a man
and later—in a continual development—became a demigod, god, and All-Being.”1 13
He criticized the view that K ṛ ṣ ṇa was an incarnation of God as an “inversion of the
real relationship” and a “myth of transformation,” arguing instead that, “in our case,
euhemerism is the correct view.” 114
Concerning the religion (allegedly) founded by K ṛ ṣ ṇa, Garbe argued that the “orig-
inal essence” of this religion was that it was “popular, independent of both the Vedic
109 . Ibid., 24–25.
110 . Ibid., 27.
111 . Ibid., 28
112 . Ibid., 28–29.
113 . Ibid., 31.
114 . Ibid., 31.
186 Chapter 03
tradition and Brahmanism, and that it probably emphasized the moral side from the
beginning, which had been lacking in Brahmanic religion and philosophy.” 115 And
then he noted: “ K ṛ ṣ ṇaism was by nature an ethical K ṣatriya religion .” 116 In defense of
this view, Garbe cited Mahābhārata 6.3044 and 6.3045. He argued that as both these
passages address Madhusūdana (i.e., K ṛ ṣ ṇa) as the “refuge of the noble r oyal sages,
who do not waver in battle and work to fulfi ll all their duties,” there was reason for
thinking that the origin of the “Bhâgavata religion” was to be found in “K ṣatriya
circles.”1 17 He also cited Bhagavadgītā 4.1, a passage already cited by Holtzmann
as evidence of the heroic origins of the Bhagavadgītā, but noted in a footnote that
Holtzmann had gotten it wrong: it was not that kings rather than priests had been
the old guardians merely of the Bhagavadgītā; rather, they (i.e., the kings) had been
the “old guardians of the Yoga doctrine presented in the Bhag.” 118
In many respects, then, the story Garbe recounted of the Gītā was the same as
that recounted by Holtzmann. He shared the latter’s view of the epic as originally
the property of the K ṣatriya caste, and of the Bhagavadgītā (or at least its oldest
portions) as a faithful facsimile of the ideology of the old epic. In fact, since he
cited Holtzmann’s work throughout rather than Lassen’s (the other possible can-
didate from whom he could have acquired his ideas of heroic epic), there is good
reason for thinking that, for all his narcissism of small diff erences, he was actually
a Holtzmannian critic. And, though he disagreed with Holtzmann on minor details,
he also signifi cantly carried forward the Holtzmannian project of establishing an
ancient Indo-Germanic warrior tradition (e.g., by introducing a theory of “K ṛ ṣ ṇaism”
as an ethical warrior religion). Like Holtzmann, he thought that “a historical core” lay
“buried” in the story of “K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s participation in the battle of the Pâ ṇḍavas with the
Kauravas” 119 and, again like Holtzmann, he thought that this core could be unearthed
by historical scholarship. Here too, there were no surprises about his solution: like
Lassen and Holtzmann before him, he turned to the names of the characters Arjuna
and K ṛ ṣ ṇa to understand their historical relationship. Writes Garbe:
Earlier, I resolutely combated the theory of K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s mythic origin. When I fi rst con-
sidered its likelihood, I was for a time in doubt about whether it was not, after all,
correct given Arjuna’s name. Th e two names K ṛ ṣ ṇa and Arjuna, black and white,
spontaneously generate the impression that they are allegorical or naturalistic. But
such impressions based on the etymology of names have too often led to error and
caused allegorical or other deep explanations, when the simplest and most natu-
ral interpretation was in order. . . . When two people with these names are found in
a close relationship, this is certainly conspicuous. But we do not, for that reason,
115 . Ibid., 32
116 . Ibid., 32 (Garbe’s emphasis).
117 . Ibid., 32–33 (Garbe’s emphasis). In the original, Garbe’s translation reads: “Du,
O Madhu-Töter, bist die Zufl ucht der edlen k öniglichen Weisen, die in den Schlachten nicht
weichen und sich der Erfüllung aller Pfl ichten befl eißigen.”
118 . Ibid., 33, n. 1.
119 . Ibid., 34.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 187
have to see in them a personifi cation of day and night and so on; rather, there are
two simple possibilities of explanation. E ither the character of Arjuna was freely
invented as a counterpart to K ṛ ṣ ṇa at a time when the latter was already a legend-
ary fi gure; in such cases, the [common] folk loves a parallel between the names, and
especially in this case the name Arjuna would have had a twofold justifi cation for the
hero, in whom the lineage of the Pâ ṇḍavas, that is, of the sons of the White One was,
so to speak, individualized. Or , there really existed a friend and follower of K ṛ ṣ ṇa
among the Pâ ṇḍavas with the name Arjuna.1 20
We have discussed the problems with Lassen’s and Holtzmann’s pseudohistorical
approach at length in the earlier chapters and know by now that this approach is based
on very fl imsy grounds. Th e names of characters in the epic resist historical attribu-
tions. Th e color white, for instance, has philosophical resonances: in the Nārāya ṇīya
of the Mahābhārata, white is the color of the pure souls who worship Nārāya ṇa;
Sām ̇khya frequently uses the colors white, black, and red as a means of classifying
pure, impure, and mixed souls. But from Lassen to Schroeder, the Mahābhārata critics
insisted that it was the central principle for an interpretation of the Mahābhārata. 121
Garbe, too, cited Lassen, but questioned his simplistic identifi cation, noting that in
the Mahābhārata Arjuna, too, was frequently referred to as “dark-skinned.”1 22
Garbe interpreted the Bhagavadgītā as a doctrinal text, specifi cally, as “ the textbook
of the Bhâgavatas .”1 23 He suggested that “the doctrines of the genuine Bhagavadgîtâ ”1 24
could be reduced to twelve as follows:
1 . “God is . . . a conscious, eternal, and all-powerful being, the ‘endless great lord of
the world’ (X.3).”1 25
2 . “He is not only diff erent from the ephemeral world, but also from the imperish-
able spirit of all beings (XV.17–19), hence spirit in a diff erent and higher sense
than as the Âtman of all beings.” 126
3 . “When it is said in VII.4–5 that God possesses two natures, a higher spiritual one
through which the world is preserved and a lower, material one which consists of
everything that, according to Sâ ṃkhya belongs to Prak ṛti, this is not to be under-
stood as though matter constitutes half of his [i.e., God’s] essence. Rather, what
is meant is that matter does not unfold independently, following its own drives,
but rather, under God’s guidance; with other words: that God is eff ective in matter
and acts through it.” 127
120 . Ibid., 36–37 (Garbe’s emphasis).
121 . See Lassen’s writings, cited earlier. Schroeder’s comments can be found in his
Indiens Literatur und Cultur in historischer Entwicklung: Ein Cyklus von fünfzig Vorlesungen
(Leipzig: Haessel, 1887), 457–79.
122 . Garbe, Die Bhagavadgîtâ , 36, n. 1.
123 . Ibid., 52 (Garbe’s emphasis).
124 . Ibid., 56 (emphasis in original).
125 . Ibid., and cf. also ibid.“Herr der Wunderkraft” for y ogeśvara .
126 . Ibid.
127 . Ibid.
188 Chapter 03
4 . In spite of the Sā ṁkhya origins of this doctrine, the “interpretation of the spiri-
tual principle in the Bhag. is essentially diff erent as compared to the Sâ ṃkhya sys-
tem, [it is] not exclusively philosophical, but rather overwhelmingly religious.” 128
5 . Garbe argued that this confusion of philosophical systems was responsible for
the fact that “now one [and] now the other perspective was advanced.” Further,
since “at times,” the “ideal of quietism was practically placed above that of
activity,” “all sorts of inconsistencies and unclarities arose, inconsistencies and
unclarities that could have been avoided by decisively rejecting the quietistic
perspective.”1 29
6 . “In general [, however,] in the view of the Bhag., salvifi c knowledge [erlösende
Erkenntnis] is not restricted to the distinction between matter and spirit; rather,
this distinction may only be regarded as a precondition for k nowledge of God ,
which, in truth, fi rst leads man to the highest salvation [Heile].”1 30
7 . According to Garbe, the imperative to act only in the spirit of selfl essly perform-
ing one’s duty “necessitated a rejection of Vedic ritual [Werkdienstes], which
[rejection] is expressed without any reservation in the original Gîtâ.” “All cere-
monies of Brahmanic ritual[,] serv[ing] only personal desires,” are “in sharp con-
trast to the ethical ideal of the Gîtâ.” 131 Th e Gītā, he argued, expressed “open
sarcasm of the promises of the Veda, which relates only to the material world
and off ers only transient reward.”1 32
8 . Translating bhakti as “faithful and trusting love of God [gläubigen und vertrauen-
svollen Gottesliebe],” Garbe argued that it was “the most important demand”
the Bhagavadgītā made of “the individual in search of salvation.” 133 According to
him, “from love of God arose the knowledge of God [ Gotteserkenntnis ] (XVIII.55),
and it caused the faithful [der Gläubige] to direct all his works toward God and
leave the success to him.”1 34
9 . Th e Bhagavadgītā, according to him, did not describe “the condition of the saved
soul” as the “extinction of consciousness for all eternity.” Rather, it understood
salvation as “a condition of blissful peace of the individual soul which continues
to exist [after its death] albeit in the presence of God.” Garbe argued that this
“view originated in the oldest period of the Bhâgavata religion and had always
been a pillar of this faith; that is why even after its embellishment with elements
of Sâ ṃkhya-Yoga it could not be displaced by the contrary doctrine of the two
systems [i.e., of Sā ṁkhya and Yoga].”1 35
10 . In support of his thesis that salvation in the Bhagavadgītā originally did not
imply loss of selfhood but eternal existence as a distinct self in the presence
128 . Ibid., 59.
129 . Ibid., 60.
130 . Ibid., 61 (Garbe’s emphasis).
131 . Ibid.
132 . Ibid., 61–62.
133 . Ibid., 62–63.
134 . Ibid., 63 (all emphasis Garbe’s).
135 . Ibid., 63.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 189
of God, Garbe cited verse 7.23. Th is verse, he argued, was evidence that “merg-
ing into the Devâs (or Pitaras [s ic ] and Bhûtâni IX.25) can simply imply contin-
ued conscious existence of an individual being.” Garbe argued that where the
text spoke of “merging into K ṛ ṣ ṇa (or God),” “because of the parallelism and the
agreement of the expression (y â with the accusative),” “nothing else” was to be
“understood under this merging [than the “continued conscious existence of an
individual being” already seen in the case of merging into the Devās, etc.].” 136
11 . Further, he pointed out that, verse 14.2 described the saved as mama sādharmyam
āgatā ḥ. Th e expresssion sādharmya , he argued, did “ not mean unity, oneness,
identity ( aikya, aikâtmya, tâdâtmya ), but qualitative equality .” “From this it fol-
lows that salvation according to the Bhag. is to be thought of as the elevation of
the soul to an existence similar to God’s, [and] as continued individual existence
in the presence of God.” 137
12 . Garbe also extended these refl ections concerning the Bhagavadgītā to the
Mahābhārata as a whole. He argued that these doctrines (i.e., concerning the
theistic nature of worship and the personal nature of salvation) were present not
only in the Bhagavadgītā but were “also presented in other passages of the Mbh.”
Indeed, he claimed that the Bhagavadgītā was “the source from which these doc-
trines ha[d] poured themselves into other portions of the epic. . . . ” 138
Earlier we had seen that Garbe’s arguments for the theistic Gītā as being the orig-
inal were quite jejune. Why then insist on a reconstruction of “the d octrines of the
genuine Bhagavadgîtâ ” 139 based on those very same arguments? Clearly, something
else was at stake in this reconstruction than substantive considerations. What made
Garbe insist on portraying the Bhagavadgītā as a rational, monotheistic faith with
Christian ethical overtones?
To understand what was at stake for Garbe in this reconstruction, we must turn
back to the pantheism controversy of late eighteenth-century Germany. Th ough it
has received little attention from historians, this controversy was the central source
of infl uence on German Indology in the twentieth century. In its continuing evo-
lution, German scholarship on the Bhagavadgītā after the mid-nineteenth century
is best understood as a series of responses to this controversy. Although it origi-
nated in a debate between F. H. Jacobi and Moses Mendelssohn, the pantheism con-
troversy quickly became a salient concern of Indian studies in Germany after the
publication of Schlegel’s Die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier in 1808. Th ough osten-
sibly a work on Indian philosophy, Schlegel’s book was in reality a broadside against
Protestantism in which Schlegel used Indian thought as a means of exploring the
decline into pantheism. In the story he told, pantheism emerged from an exces-
sive (and hubristic) rationalism. “Pantheism is the system of pure reason; thus it
already marks the transition from Oriental philosophy to European philosophy. It
136 . Ibid., 64.
137 . Ibid., 65 (Garbe’s emphasis).
138 . Ibid.
139 . Ibid., 56 (emphasis in original).
190 Chapter 03
fl atters man’s conceit as much as his indolence. Once this great discovery is made,
this all-encompassing, all-destroying and yet so easy science and rational wisdom,
namely, that all is one, there is no need of further search and inquiry; everything that
others know or believe in through other means is only error, deception or incapac-
ity of reason just as all change and all life is an empty appearance.” 140 It is not hard
to see that with this critique Schlegel was targeting Kant’s declaration that reason,
when it searches for answers to questions of God, freedom, or Being, brings itself
into so-called antinomies of reason, and Schlegel’s book was also understood as a
critique of Enlightenment philosophy. Th e severity of the reaction to the book may
be assessed from Goethe’s comment to Reinhard that he could see “the wretched
devil and his grandmother with all his eternal stinking retinue painted black into the
book.” Indeed, Goethe claimed he could actually detect the “church which alone can
ensure salvation [die allein seeligmachende Kirche]” in Schlegel's work.1 41
It is in the context of this debate that the German argument about the original
Gītā now needs to be located. As the recognized experts on Indian texts by the
late nineteenth/early twentieth century, Indologists were uniquely well placed to
respond to Schlegel’s views. Almost a century of professionalization of the dis-
cipline had left all authority over Indian texts consolidated in their hands and
they were not averse to using this authority in defense of the establishment’s
view. Schegel’s interpretation was especially vulnerable on philological grounds.
Th e Indologists, most of whom benefi ted from a better knowledge of Sanskrit,
could provide expert testimony on the Bhagavadgītā. Even if they did not engage
with Schlegel explicitly, every new reconstruction purporting to show panthe-
ism was a later corruption implicitly undercut his argument. Further, by activat-
ing their new method of historical-critical research, they could show that it was
Catholicism not Protestantism that represented a danger to Germany. Lassen,
Holtzmann Sr., and Holtzmann Jr. had each argued a version of the theory.
Irrespective of whether they titled their protagonists Āryans (Lassen), Germanic
tribes (Holtzmann Sr.), or Indo-Germans (Holtzmann Jr.), the story they told was
essentially the same each time: priests running amok were a threat to the state
and/or the German people.
As we have seen, the central fi gure in this Protestant nationalist revival was Adolf
Holtzmann Jr. However, his wild excesses and lust for barbarity made him unsuitable
as a spokesperson for Protestantism. He had put in place the essential elements of
the anti-Catholic rhetoric, but he had misjudged the political brisance of declaring
the Germanic people to have been pantheistic. As an irrationalist, Holtzmann wished
to turn Protestantism away from its Enlightenment heritage back toward a primitive
Indo-Germanism. Garbe correctly detected the political risks of the Holtzmannian
project and entered the debate to defend the ancient Germanic peoples as the epit-
ome of rational, monotheistic faith. By attacking Holtzmann, he shifted the balance
of the debate back to a critique of Schlegel’s view of the Protestant Reformation as
leading to pantheism. In his description of the original K ṛ ṣ ṇa cult, Garbe deliberately
140 . Schlegel, Die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier , 243.
141 . Cited in Struc-Oppenberg, “Einleitung,” ccxxvii.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 191
struck a Christian note. It was true, as Holtzmann (and all Germans since Luther)
had suspected, that priests were responsible for the corruption of religion. But that
corruption led to pantheism rather than theism. Th ere could be no risk of the turn
to Germanism leading to pantheism, Garbe was able to assure the establishment. On
the contrary, the Germanic religion was “b y nature . . . an ethical K ṣatriya religion .”1 42
By entering the “original Gītā” debate at the turn of the century, Garbe was
able to restore the pantheism controversy once again to its original form: was it
Protestantism or Catholicism that led to pantheism? Holtzmann’s tolerance of pan-
theism and his view that the dangers of Catholicism were to be sought rather in its
imposition of theistic ideas upon the Germanic peoples was shown to be a minority
view. Garbe pruned back Holtzmann’s Romantic excesses and once again rendered the
Bhagavadgītā safe for the German public. As long as they read it in his sanitized edi-
tion, readers of the poem were at no risk of developing pantheistic sympathies. And
as long as they remembered that it was ancient India and not contemporary India that
was the model and objective, there was no danger of Indology inculcating politically
seditious views in them. Th e Bhagavadgītā was set for its meteoric rise in Indology.
Turning back to Garbe’s Gītā interpretation, we can now see why Garbe inter-
preted the Bhagavadgītā as he did. Th e Indian poem was to be shown to be conso-
nant with Protestant values. Garbe argued that the Bhagavadgītā espoused a rational
monotheistic religion eschewing both ceremonialism and good works. Th e poem’s
ethics were based on an ideal of selfl ess duty; salvation, in the original Gītā, consisted
not in extinction or merger of the self into pantheistic Brahman, but in the continued,
eternal, and eternally self-conscious existence of souls. It was only later, with the rise of
the priesthood, that pantheistic doctrines infi ltrated the text. Th ough Garbe was clearly
reinterpreting the Gītā along Christian lines, his idea of Christianity was specifi cally a
Protestant one. It was an austere religion based on the promise of eternal salvation,
eternal self-consciousness, and a rejection of a philosophical “quietism.”
Th ough his ideas of the historical and heroic origins of the epic were not origi-
nal, Garbe played a key role in establishing a state-supported, dogmatically orthodox
Indology. He added a further layer to the existing German mythology of the epic and
made this mythology productive for German apologetic purposes. Garbe essentially
accepted and canonized Holtzmann’s ideas (except for the charge of ancient pantheism).
But by adding his ideas of the euhemeristic rise of K ṛ ṣ ṇa to a god, he created a further
layer in support of German ideas of epic. Further, by off ering a pseudoscientifi c thesis of
how “Kr ̣ ṣ ṇaism” had originated as an ethical warrior religion, he endowed Holtzmann’s
anti-Brahmanism with an air of scientifi c legitimacy. Nowhere would his commitment
to Protestant orthodoxy be more evident than in his ideas of “Bhāgavata religion.”
IDEAS OF BHĀGAVATA RELIGION
As the senior scholar of the history of Indian religions after Roth’s death in 1895, Garbe
was a respected voice on ancient Indian religions. At the time of his Gītā translation, he
142 . Garbe, Die Bhagavadgîtâ , 32 (Garbe’s emphasis).
192 Chapter 03
had already published an edition of the Vaitāna Śrautasūtra, 143 a three-volume edition
of the Āpastamba Śrautasūtra,1 44 two volumes on the philosophy of Sā ṁkhya,1 45 and the
introductory Th e Philosophy of Ancient India and Beiträge zur indischen Kulturgeschichte
(the former being a collection of three papers published in Th e Monist between 1892
and 1893).1 46 Garbe had also published (in 1894) the highly polemical roman à clef titled
Th e Redemption of the Brahman , in which he made clear his low opinion of Brahmans,
whom he portrayed as corrupt, superstitious, intolerant, illiberal, and inhumane.1 47
Garbe was thus considered an expert on Indian religions and his pronouncements on
the Bhagavadgītā carried weight, the more so as he specifi cally took up questions of the
religious outlook of the text.1 48
In his reconstruction of the original Gītā, Garbe not only attempted to address
questions of the poem’s genesis and growth but also attempted to off er the reader
a kind of synopsis of Indian religious views. In his introduction to the poem, he
ascribed the “philosophical foundation” of the “Bhâgavata religion” to a “truly Indian
tendency to fuse religion and philosophy.”1 49 It is not clear what Garbe meant by
“truly Indian” or whether we are to take the statement positively or negatively. It
is possible that “truly” here meant “old” or “intrinsic,” since he also attributed the
philosophical enrichment of Bhāgavata religion to “the strong speculative character
of the K ṣatriya caste.” 150 In any case, Garbe argued that at a certain stage “an interest
in philosophical questions seized wide sections of the population in ancient India”
and that, in order to satisfy this longing for philosophical answers, the Bhagavadgītā
turned to “the two oldest systems that India had produced, Sâ ṃkhya and Yoga.”1 51
According to Garbe, this turn to the older philosophical traditions was necessitated
143 . Richard Garbe, V aitāna Śrautasūtra: Das Ritual des Atharvaveda (Strassburg: K. J.
Trübner, 1878).
144 . Richard Garbe, Th e Śrauta Sútra of Ápastamba, belonging to the Taittiríya Samhitá with
the Commentary of Rudradatta , vols. 1–3 (Calcutta: Asiatic Society, 1882–1902).
145 . Richard Garbe, D ie Sâ ṃkhya-Philosophie: Eine Darstellung des indischen Rationalismus
nach den Quellen (Leipzig: H. Haessel, 1894) and Sām ̣khya und Yog a (Strassburg: K. J.
Trübner, 1896).
146 . Richard Garbe, Th e Philosophy of Ancient India( Chicago: Open Court, 1899) and B eiträge
zur indischen Kulturgeschichte (Berlin: Gebrüder Paetel, 1903)
147 . Richard Garbe, Th e Redemption of the Brahman (Chicago: Open Court, 1894). Th e original
of this work had appeared two years earlier under the title of “Die Erlösung des Brahmanen.
Eine Erzählung von Richard Garbe” in the I llustrierte Deutsche Monatshefte (1892): 201–31. For
a discussion, see Kaushik Bagchi, “An Orientalist in the Orient: Richard Garbe’s Indian Journey,
1885–1886,” J ournal of World History 14, no. 3 (2003): 281–325 and also see Vishwa Adluri
and Joydeep Bagchee, “Th e Redemption of the Scientist: Richard Garbe as a Chronicler of
India,” in Transcultural Encounters between Germany and India: Kindred Spirits in the Nineteenth
and Twentieth Centuries , ed. Joanne Miyang Cho, Eric Kurlander, and Douglas T. McGetchin
(New York: Routledge, 2013), 68–83.
148 . Garbe’s place in the history of the Tübingen chair is discussed in Junginger, Von der
philologischen zur völkischen Religionswissenschaft , 33–47 and also see the bibliography of
his writings on pp. 335–37.
149 . Garbe, Die Bhagavadgîtâ , 37.
150 . Ibid.
151 . Garbe, Die Bhagavadgîtâ , 37–38.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 193
by the fact that “brahmanic pantheism or Brahmanism, the doctrine of Brahman
or the All-One . . . was not consonant with the monotheism of the Bhâgavatas.” As a
result, the Bhāgavata sect, seeking to satisfy the longing for philosophical answers
that had erupted in India, was forced to turn its “gaze” to “the two philosophical
systems, which arose ‘in the freer atmosphere of the less brahmanized foreign coun-
try ’ . . . Sâ ṃkhya and Yoga.” Th ese systems according to Garbe were exoteric to “the
so-called middle country ( madhyadeśa , the region around and north of Delhi) . . . the
homeland of brahmanic culture and power,” the seat of Brahmanic pantheism no less
than of Bhāgavata religion. 152 Th rough this marriage of convenience the Bhāgavatas
were able to enter the Indian mainstream.
Garbe proposed the following dates for the Bhāgavata religion: “ In the fi rst
period . . . from indeterminate beginnings to 300 B C, ” the Bhāgavata led “a special
existence outside of Brahmanism.” According to Garbe, “all the religion historical
processes discussed in this chapter [i.e., in his Gītā introduction] . . . the foundation
of a popular monotheism by Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa Vâsudeva, its philosophical embellishment with
Sâm ̣khya-Yoga, the divinization of the founder [of the religion], and . . . the deepen-
ing of the religious sentiment through the demands of bhakti ” were to be found in
this period. 153 “Th e second period was characterized by the Brahmanization of the
Bhâgavata religion and the identifi cation of K ṛ ṣ ṇa with Vis ̣ ṇu.” 154 Garbe declared: “the
popularity of the sagas and legends woven around K ṛ ṣ ṇa must have stimulated
the interest of the Brahmans, but a foundation for the identifi cation of K ṛ ṣ ṇa with
Vi ṣ ṇu only became available once K ṛ ṣ ṇa was fi nally elevated from a tribal hero to a
god.” He resolutely combated the suggestion that this identifi cation could have taken
place right away, that is, in a single step from folk hero to identifi cation with the
Brahmanic Vis ̣ ṇu rather than via the intermediate step of elevation from folk hero to
a god. Instead he argued that, in the case of “the popular fi gure of the powerful and
energetic K ṛ ṣ ṇa,” it was not so easy for the Brahmans to “assimilate” him to their god
Vi ṣ ṇu. “Th e Brahmans knew quite well from the ancient lore that he had rejected the
authority of the Vedas in his doctrines and had fought against the Brahmanic sacrifi -
cial system, the great source of income of the priesthood. . . . ” 155 And yet, for this very
reason, as he progressively became more of a threat to Brahmanic tradition, it was
essential to assimilate K ṛ ṣ ṇa into their religion. Garbe wrote:
How then can we doubt that the Brahmans reluctantly, but with an eye to their own
advantage, drew the Bhâgavatas to their side in order to combat Buddhism more
successfully? Could they have done this with apparent justifi cation more likely once
K ṛ ṣ ṇa Vâsudeva had become a character among the Bhâgavatas that demonstrated
an inner kinship to the Brahmanic Vi ṣ ṇu [or prior to this, when he was but a folk
hero]? 156
152 . Ibid., 38 (all emphasis Garbe’s).
153 . Ibid., 45–46 (Garbe’s emphasis).
154 . Ibid., 46 (Garbe’s emphasis).
155 . Ibid.
156 . Ibid., 46–47.
194 Chapter 03
As Garbe imagined the process of Brahmanic assimilation, the priests incorporated
the semidivinized aspects of the folk hero K ṛ ṣ ṇa into their pantheistic god Vi ṣ ṇu.
When it came to aspects not so easily assimilable to their god (e.g., K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s “human-
ity and warrior nature [Kriegertum] as it lived on in the epic sagas”), they invoked
“their convenient Avatâra theory.”1 57 Th ough originally a K ṣatriya and a man, K ṛ ṣ ṇa
could now be declared to be the off spring or incarnation of the Brahmanic god. Garbe
placed this second period of the Bhāgavata religion “from 300 BC until the beginning
of our calendar [i.e., 1 AD]” and declared that, “at any rate, the original Bhagavadgîtâ
belongs in this period, because in it [i.e., in the original Gītā] Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa is not as yet
identifi ed with Brahman but repeatedly referred to as Vi ṣ ṇu. . . . ”1 58 He placed “t he
third period of the Bhâgavata religion” in the period from “the beginning of our cal-
endar [1 AD] to the middle of the 11th century AD,” a time that, he argued, was
“characterized by the identifi cation of K ṛ ṣ ṇa-Vis ̣ ṇu with Brahman. . . . Th e revision
of the Bhagavadgîtâ was undertaken in the early stages of this period.” 159 Finally,
he also argued for a “ fourth period ,” a period that saw the “systematization [of the
Bhagavadgītā] by Râmânuja in the 11th century.”1 60 We also fi nd somewhere between
the third and the fourth period the emergence of an “erotic understanding of K ṛ ṣ ṇa.”
Garbe argued that alongside the “pantheistic understanding of god, which was imple-
mented ever more systematically,” this was the second trait that characterized the
Indianization (Brahmanization?) of the original Ks ̣atriya folk hero. “Quite in keeping
with the metaphysical-sensuous double-nature of the Indian,” this understanding
consisted mainly in a “description of his love games with the female cowherds” but it
also “simultaneously exhibit[ed] a mystical element.” 1 61 Concluding, he declared that
Bhagavadgītā’s “signifi cance for the history of religion” lay precisely in the fact that it
was “n ot a priestly product.” 162 As a work in which “the Veda and Brahmanic ritual are
rejected and the cunning greed of the Brahmans is castigated,”1 63 he argued that the
Bhagavadgītā could off er a glimpse into “the original non-Vedānticized” worldview of
the Indians. 164
In a second article published in 1909 in James Hasting’s Encyclopaedia of Religion
and Ethics Garbe further expanded on these views. 165 He also expanded the polemi-
cal scope of his work by focusing on a deconstruction of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s claims to divinity.
Advocating a theory of the “historical development of K ṛ ṣ ṇa,” Garbe claimed that
K ṛ ṣ ṇa in the Mahābhārata appeared “at one time as a human hero, at another as
157 . Ibid., 47.
158 . Ibid., 48.
159 . Ibid. (Garbe’s emphasis).
160 . Ibid., 49 (Garbe’s emphasis).
161 . Ibid., 48.
162 . Ibid., 51 (Garbe’s emphasis).
163 . Ibid.
164 . Ibid., 52 (Garbe’s emphasis).
165 . Richard Garbe, “Bhagavad-Gītā,” in E ncyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics , ed. James
Hastings, vol. 2 (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1909), 535–38.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 195
semi-divine (a phenomenal form of Vi ṣ ṇu), or again as the one only [ sic ] God, . . . who
fi nally is identifi ed with Brahman, the All-Soul.” 166 From this, he concluded that
it may be assumed as probable that K ṛ s ṇ ̣a was originally the leader of a warrior and
pastoral tribe of non-Brāhman race, and that he lived long before the Buddha. He
became the eponymous hero of his people, not only because of his prowess in war, but
also probably because he was the founder of the religion of his race—a religion inde-
pendent of the Vedic tradition and monotheistic, in which a special stress was laid on
ethicalr equirements. Th e adherents of this religion were called “Bhāgavatas,” adopting
other names later on. As the form of K ṛ ṣ ṇa within the race to which he belonged was
advanced from the position of a demi-god to that of a god (identifi ed especially with
the god of the Bhāgavatas), Brāhmanism claimed as its own this popular and powerful
representation of the Deity, and transformed it into an incarnation of Vis ̣ ṇu. 167
In contrast to Holtzmann, who had identifi ed the earliest stage of the Bhagavadgītā
with Indo-Germanic culture, Garbe was more interested in the second stage of this
development, which he represented as a vigorous grassroots theism with pronounced
ethical and pietistic contours. According to him, identifying the hero K ṛ ṣ ṇa with their
god was a way for “Brāhmanism” to “gai[n] over [ sic ] the entire religious community of
the Bhāgavatas, and the latter (a still existing sect . . . ) were merged in Brāhmanism.”1 68
Th e Bhagavadgītā, though “originally a text-book of this sect,” thereafter gained “a posi-
tion of such signifi cance for the whole of Brāhman India that in recent years educated
Hindus [were able to] . . . put it forward as a rival to the New Testament.”1 69
As a Protestant, Garbe could hardly permit the comparison to stand. Th us he
argued that “it has long been known that we do not possess the Bhagavad-Gītā in
its original form, but in a form which is the result of essential modifi cations. Th e
doctrines, which are here put into the mouth of K ṛ ṣ ṇa, present a remarkable combi-
nation of pantheistic and monotheistic ideas, of philosophical thoughts, and of pure
and deeply religious faith in God.”1 70 Further, he activated a form of Schlegel’s theory
that Indian thought, though containing traces of the original revelation, had under-
gone a progressive degeneration. As he described the Gītā,
A personal God, Kr ̣ s ṇ ̣a, manifests himself in the form of a human hero, propounds
his doctrines, and demands of his hearer not only the exact fulfi lment of duty, but
before everything else faith and love and resignation [renunciation?], of which he
is himself to be the object. By a special act of grace he then reveals himself in his
superhuman but still bodily form, and promises to the faithful, as reward for his
love to [s ic ] God, admission after death to His presence, and the prize of fellowship
with Him. 171
166 . Ibid., 535.
167 . Ibid. (Garbe’s italics).
168 . Ibid., 535–36.
169 . Ibid., 536.
170 . Ibid.
171 . Ibid.
196 Chapter 03
But whereas Schlegel attributed this degeneration to rationalistic currents reminis-
cent of Protestantism, Garbe blamed it upon Brahmanism. According to him, the
introduction of “the supreme fi rst principle the neuter impersonal Brahman, the
Absolute” alongside a “deity” who was “conceived in as personal a manner as possible”
and who “dominate[d] the entire [old] poem,” was responsible for the rise of ideal-
istic and pantheistic doctrines. 172 He expressed the contrast between the rational
and monotheistic doctrines and these later additions as follows: “At one time K ṛ ṣ ṇa
says of himself that he is the one sole supreme God, the creator and ruler of the
universe and of all things therein; at another he sets forth the Vedāntic doctrine of
the Brahman and of m āyā , the cosmical illusion, and proclaims that the supreme end
of man is to transcend this cosmical illusion and become one with Brahman.” More
or less paraphrasing the views of his 1905 text, he argued that “these two doctrines,
the theistic and the pantheistic, are interwoven with one another, sometimes fol-
lowing one another more closely and without a break, sometimes more loosely con-
nected.” “Yet the one is not announced as the lower exoteric doctrine, and the other
as the higher exoteric; nor is it in any way preliminary to knowledge, or a type of the
truth, and the pantheism of the Vedānta the truth itself. . . . the two forms of belief
are throughout treated entirely as though there were no distinction at all between
them, whether as regards contents or value.”1 73
Garbe also resolutely contested the view of the Bhagavadgītā as a uniform text.
He noted that though “the attempt has been made to explain away the contradictions
of the Bhagavad-Gītā, on the theory that no defi nite system is here intended; that
the whole is the work of a poet, who gives utterance and shape to his thoughts as
they occur to him, without heeding the anomalies which are involved in detail,” “the
fundamental contradiction which permeates the Bhagavad-Gītā cannot be set aside
by an appeal to its poetical character.” “It can be explained only on the hypothesis
that one or other [s ic ] of the heterogenous doctrines propounded by K ṛ ṣ ṇa must be
a later addition.” He cited Holtzmann’s views of the Gītā as “originally a poem of
a purely pantheistic nature, which was later modifi ed and adapted in the interests
of the Vis ̣ ṇu-Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa cult,” but declared that “his theory also, however, is mistaken;
precisely the reverse seems to be the fact.” In place of the Holtzmannian hypoth-
esis, he repeated his conviction that, “the entire character of the poem in design and
execution is so overwhelmingly theistic, that we must suppose it to have been from
the very beginning of a purely theistic character, and to have been adapted later in
a pantheistic sense from the standpoint of the Vedānta philosophy.” 174 He argued
that the “real facts” of the Bhagavadgītā were that “in the ancient poem a K ṛ ṣ ṇaism
based upon the Sā ṇkhya-Yoga philosophy is set forth; in the additions of the recension the
Vedānta philosophy is taught ,” and, based on these facts, justifi ed his attempt in his
172 . Ibid. (all italics Garbe’s).
173 . Ibid.
174 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 197
1905 edition “to determine the original form of the poem, and to separate the addi-
tions of the Vedāntic recension.”1 75
It is not necessary here to trace the remainder of Garbe’s views. Th ey are, in any
case, essentially the same as those expressed in his 1905 text. It was more important
for our purposes to show how the reconstruction undertaken in that text, though
allegedly scientifi c being based on a disinterested contemplation of the text, could
be activated to make polemical points about Indian religions. Garbe’s thesis of the
so-called Bhāgavata religion was in fact a way of buttressing Christian ideas of salva-
tion and faith, as his analysis of the “p ractical part” of the Bhagavadgītā’s doctrines
especially shows. According to him, in the Bhagavadgītā,
two ways of salvation are contrasted with one another, one of which consists in
withdrawal from the life of the world, and seeking after knowledge, the other in acts
conformable to duty and free from desire. Although the second way is repeatedly
described as superior (iii. 8, v. 2, xviii. 7), and, to judge from the whole tenor, is to
be regarded as the true ethical ideal of the poem, the author has nevertheless not
ventured to reject the way of salvation by renunciation of the world, and abstract
knowledge. Th e conception that deliverance from the cycle of existence was to be
won by meditation in complete isolation from the world, had been for centuries so
deeply rooted in all thoughtful circles among the Indian peoples that it could no
longer be seriously assailed. No course remained open but to concede a place to the
two ways side by side with each other, and to teach that both right action and the
knowledge which implies non-action or abstinence from works lead to salvation.
From the fact that in the Gītā now one and now the other standpoint is adopted,
and at times the ideal of quietism is placed unreservedly above that of activity (vi.
3), all sorts of inconsistencies and ambiguities have arisen, which a decided rejec-
tion of the quietistic standpoint would have avoided.1 76
Th e Bhagavadgītā does not pose these two approaches as contradictory, or, indeed,
as alternatives, the practice of knowledge being conducive to the practice of action
and vice versa, but from Garbe’s Christian, Protestant perspective it was important
to emphasize that only one could be “the true ethical ideal of the poem.” As with the
pantheism controversy, a problem internal to Christian faith was used to radically
simplify the Bhagavadgītā’s complex philosophical project. Historical reconstruction
in this case became a convenient tool for defl ecting the philosophical and epistemo-
logical challenge to Protestant ideas of salvation. Especially in light of Luther’s rejec-
tion of the t heologia gloriae of the ancients, the concept of jñāna yoga represented a
major challenge to Garbe and other Indologists. 177 Its explosive potential could only
be defused by insisting that it was not part of the original “revelation” of the Gītā;
175 . Ibid. (Garbe’s italics).
176 . Ibid., 537.
177 . Th e main source texts for Luther’s understanding of the term are the “Disputation
against Scholastic Th eology” (1517) and the “Heidelberg Disputation” (1518). For a dis-
cussion, see Jos. E. Vercruysse, “Luther’s Th eology of the Cross at the Time of the Heidelberg
198 Chapter 03
a corruption introduced into the Bhāgavata religion no less than the introduction
of Neoplatonic and Aristotelian ontology into Christianity represented a corrup-
tion of the latter. It was also important to Garbe to reject the law and the concept
of good works. He claimed that the “view of the Bhagavad-Gītā” was that “saving
knowledge is not limited to the discrimination of soul and matter”; “this discrimina-
tion” was but “a condition preliminary . . . to the k nowledge of God .”1 78 In his opinion, it
was this latter knowledge “that fi rst really opens the way to the highest salvation.”1 79
Garbe thus advocated a strongly theistic reading of the Bhagavadgītā, whose central
precepts were:
1. “Th e rejection of the Vedic conception of the merit of works” (a view that he
argued was “expressed in the original Gītā without any limitation”). 180
2. Th at “all the ceremonies of the Brāhmanical ritual minister, indeed, throughout
to individual desires, and therefore stand in sharp contrast to the ethical ideal of
the Gītā.” 181
3. “Indiff erence toward the prescriptions of the Vedic ritual is therefore also a pre-
liminary condition for the attainment of salvation.”1 82 “ ‘Abandon all sacred rites,’
it is said in xviii. 66; and similarly, in ii. 42–45, unconcealed contempt is expressed
for the promises of the Veda, which take account only of the material world and
off er only transitory reward (cf. also ix. 20, 21).” 183
Summing up, he noted:
We now come, fi nally, to the most important demand which the Gītā makes upon
those men who stand in need of deliverance. As is well known, the poem is the
anthem in praise of bhakti , or believing and trustful love to [s ic ] God. With unerring
certainty love to [s ic ] God leads to the goal alike by the way of knowledge and by
that of unselfi sh performance of duty. Th e entire poem is full of this thought, and
it was composed with a view to its exposition. From love to [ sic ] God knowledge of
God arises (xviii. 55), and in consequence the believer refers all his deeds to God and
leaves their results to Him. 184
Garbe’s translation of the Indian b hakti (to worship, to adore) with “believing and
trustful love” was characteristic of his highly Christianizing interpretation. A few
lines later he also spoke of the “believer” (for b hakta ?). As with Holtzmann, who
expressed suspicion of salvation through good works, he placed faith in opposition
Disputation,” G regorianum 57, no. 3 (1976): 523–48 and “ ‘Th eologia crucis ’ — ‘ Th eologia gloriae ’
bei Martin Luther: Eine terminologische Untersuchung,” L uther-Bulletin 10 (2001): 27–40.
178 . Garbe, “Bhagavad-Gītā,” 537 (Garbe’s italics).
179 . Ibid.
180 . Ibid.
181 . Ibid.
182 . Ibid., 537–38.
183 . Ibid., 537.
184 . Ibid., 538.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 199
with knowledge and with good works. He insisted that the Bhagavadgītā advocated
the abandonment of sacred rites and placed no trust in the merit of works. 185 Th is
view, however, was at odds not only with the text (thus necessitating a pseudocritical
reconstruction to excise those parts of the text not consonant with his theory) but
also with the Indian commentarial tradition (which he did not cite). Śa ṁkara, for
instance, in his commentary on the Bhagavadgītā, argues that the “dharma, charac-
terized by action and enjoined for diff erent castes and stages of life, even though it
is meant for achieving prosperity and attaining heaven, etc., yet, when performed
with the attitude of dedication to God and without hankering for (selfi sh) results
leads to the purifi cation of the internal organ.” Indeed, he notes that “in the case of a
person with a purifi ed internal organ it [i.e., action] becomes the cause even of fi nal
Liberation, by becoming the means for the attainment of fi tness for steady adherence
to Knowledge ( jñānani ṣtḥ ā ) and the rise of Knowledge.” 186 Śa ṁkara’s comments are
important insofar as he was a critic of the ritual portion of the Veda (the karmakā ṇḍa )
and yet he considered action a necessary prerequisite for salvation. His commen-
tary on the Bhagavadgītā makes it amply clear that, in the Indian tradition, b hakti
(irrespective of whether we translate it as “belief” or as “devotion”) functions in the
context of social and ritual aspects of religion (performed for the sake of c ittaśuddhi ).
Further, bhakti does not represent a genufl ection out of faith alone before a deity
characterised as absolutely other, but has to be accompanied by active striving for
knowledge. In contrast, Garbe’s Christianizing interpretation dissolved the triadic
relationship of bhakti, jñāna , and k arma . Even though he argued that “with unerring
certainty love to [s ic ] God leads to the goal alike by the way of knowledge and by that
of unselfi sh performance of duty,” he transferred the salvifi c moment from the latter
two to the former.1 87 For him, only the latter was ultimately effi cacious in ensuring
185 . Ibid., 537–38.
186 . Swāmi Gambhīrānanda, trans., B hagavad Gītā: With the Commentary of Śa nk̇ arācārya
(Kolkota: Advaita Ashrama, 2006), 6–7.
187 . Th e insistence upon the exclusivity of faith as a means to salvation is problematic
even within the Christian tradition. As the historian Philip Schaff notes, “Th e most impor-
tant example of dogmatic infl uence in Luther’s version is the famous interpolation of the
word alone in Rom. 3:28 ( allein durch den Glauben ), by which he intended to emphasize his
solifi dian doctrine of justifi cation, on the plea that the German idiom required the inser-
tion for the sake of clearness. But he thereby brought Paul into direct verbal confl ict with
James, who says (James 2:24), ‘by works a man is justifi ed, and not only by faith’ (‘n icht
durch den Glauben allein ’). Th is verse from the book of James does not confl ict with Paul’s
letter to the Romans. Sola Fide as in Romans talks about faith at the point of accepting
Jesus as Lord, while James talks about works as defi ned by faith in other words, works
that fl ow from Christians as a result of this faith. It is well known that Luther deemed it
impossible to harmonize the two apostles in this article, and characterized the Epistle of
James as an ‘epistle of straw,’ because it had no evangelical character (‘ keine evangelische
Art ’). He therefore insisted on this insertion in spite of all outcry against it. His defense is
very characteristic. ‘If your papist,’ he says, ‘makes much useless fuss about the word s ola,
allein , tell him at once: Doctor Martin Luther will have it so, and says: Papist and donkey
are one thing; s ic volo, sic jubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas . For we do not want to be pupils
and followers of the Papists, but their masters and judges.’ Th en he goes on in the style of
200 Chapter 03
salvation. It would take a Catholic scholar, the Bonn Indologist Hermann Jacobi, to
shift the argument for the original Gītā back to pantheism.
THE EPIC GĪTĀ OF HERMANN JACOBI
Born in Kiel to Friedrich Heinrich Otto, owner of a steam mill and mill con-
structor, Hermann Jacobi (1850–1937) was a member of Germany’s privileged
Bildungsbürgertum (the educated middle class) which had benefi ted most from the
educational reforms of Wilhelmine Germany. Jacobi studied mathematics, Sanskrit,
and comparative linguistics between 1868 and 1872 in Berlin and Bonn. A stu-
dent of Albrecht Weber’s and Johannes Gildemeister’s, he completed a Habilitation
(post-doctoral dissertation) in Sanskrit and comparative linguistics in Bonn.
Following initial appointments at Münster (1876) and Kiel (1885), he received the
prestigious chair at the University of Bonn in 1889, albeit not without political
machination on his part. 1 88 Jacobi remained at Bonn till the end of his life, becoming
professor emeritus in 1922. He died in 1937. 189 Unusually among the Indologists,
Jacobi was Catholic, a fact that also made itself felt in his interpretation of the Gītā.
Jacobi’s response to the “original Gītā” debate came in two parts: the fi rst was
an article on the Bhagavadgītā in the Z eitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft in 19181 90 ; the second a review of Garbe’s translation and reconstruction
of the Bhagavadgītā (1st ed. 1905; 2nd rev. ed. 1921) in the Deutsche Literaturzeitung
in 1921. Th e latter led to an acrimonious response from Garbe and a series of
articles by the two followed between 1921 and 1922. 191 In this section, we fi rst look
foolish boasting against the Papists, imitating the language of St. Paul in dealing with his
Judaizing opponents (2 Cor. 11:22 sqq.): ‘Are they doctors? so am I. Are they learned? so
am I. Are they preachers? so am I. Are they theologians? so am I. Are they disputators? so
am I. Are they philosophers? so am I. Are they the writers of books? so am I. And I shall
further boast: I can expound Psalms and Prophets; which they can not. I can translate;
which they can not. . . . Th erefore the word a llein shall remain in my New Testament, and
though all pope-donkeys ( Papstesel ) should get furious and foolish, they shall not turn it
out.’ ” Philip Schaff , H istory of the Christian Church , vol. 6; M odern Christianity: Th e German
Reformation (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1901), 361–63.
188 . See Indra Sengupta, “State, University, and Indology,” 295–96. Jacobi, second-
favorite for the chair of Indology in Bonn, convinced Kultusminister Althoff to appoint him
to the prestigious chair in return for ensuring that Oldenberg received his former position
in Kiel.
189 . Th e biographical information in this section is taken from Bernhard Kölver, “Jacobi,
Hermann,” in N eue Deutsche Biographie , vol. 10 (Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 974), 228–29.
190 . Jacobi, “Über die Einfügung der Bhagavadgītā im Mahābhārata,” 323–27.
191 . Th e debate was triggered by Jacobi’s review of the second revised edition of Garbe’s
1905 translation of the Bhagavad Gītā, published in the Deutsche Literaturzeitung in
December 1921 (Hermann Jacobi, “Die Bhagavadgītā,” review of Die Bhagavadgîtâ , by
Richard Garbe, Deutsche Literaturzeitung 42, no. 50/51 [1921]: 715–24). In February
1922, Garbe responded in the pages of the same magazine with a sharp rejection of
Jacobi’s criticisms (Richard Garbe, “Noch einmal das Bhagavadgītā-Problem,” D eutsche
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 201
at his reconstruction of the original Gītā before focusing in the next on his debate
with Garbe over the Gītā’s pantheism.
Jacobi’s 1918 article did not cite any secondary literature, but the infl uence of
Holtzmann on this essay is palpable. In the main, Jacobi set out from a distinction
between an original epic and later didactic accretions, an approach by now famil-
iar to us from the work of Lassen and Holtzmann. Lassen had not addressed the
Bhagavadgītā directly, but Holtzmann in 1893 had already opined that there was
something “disconcerting” 192 about the philosophical dialogue that follows on the
opening of the battle. His proposed solution to this diffi culty, we may recall, was that
originally, the Bhagavadgītā only contained a brief meditation on the “senselessness
of fearing death.”1 93 Th ereafter, he suggested, the Germanic warriors, their mettle
sharpened, would have rejoined battle. Holtzmann also advocated that the second
chapter in particular, “with its simple style, [and] powerful and clear language,”
would have been the kernel of this message.1 94 Although he was unclear on whether
the Gītā ended here or with chapter 3, he clearly imagined a brief battlefi eld enco-
mium as the original Gītā.
Following in Holtzmann’s wake, Jacobi too argued for a shorter poem. Calling the
Bhagavadgītā “the textbook of the Bhāgavatas” (a title already applied to the poem by
Garbe, although Jacobi did not cite him), he argued that the poem was “closely con-
nected with the genuine epic insofar as it contains the religious [and] philosophical
teachings which K ṛ ṣ ṇa conveys to Arjuna before the two armies at the outbreak of
the great war.”1 95 “And yet,” he argued, “there can be no doubt that the philosophical
poem does not belong to the original epic .”1 96 His reasoning was as follows:
What epic poet would completely neglect to take into consideration the epic situa-
tion described by him in order to place a philosophical conversation spanning over
six hundred and fi fty verses in the mouths of two of his heroes at a moment when
the opposed armies are about to begin their attack. 197
Jacobi’s ideas of “epic poet” or “epic situation” were clearly infl uenced by the work
of Lassen and Holtzmann. Like them, he believed that the Mahābhārata would have
been centered around epic heroes and that the epic’s theosophic refl ections were later
additions. He argued that “the question [for scholarship] can only be what belongs
Literaturzeitung 43, no. 6 [1922): 97–104). Two months later, Jacobi responded to
Garbe’s response (Hermann Jacobi, “Weiteres zum Bhagavadgītā-Problem,” Deutsche
Literaturzeitung 43, no. 14 (1922): 265–73), and, in July 1922, Garbe fi nally closed the
book on the debate with his “Mein Schlußwort zum Bhagavadgītā-Problem” (“My Last
Word on the Bhagavadgītā-Problem”; D eutsche Literaturzeitung 43, no. 28 [1922]: 604–5).
192 . Holtzmann Jr., Die neunzehn Bücher , 154.
193 . Ibid., 164.
194 . Ibid.
195 . Jacobi, “Über die Einfügung,” 323.
196 . Ibid. (Jacobi’s emphasis).
197 . Ibid.
202 Chapter 03
to the r eal epic and how the d idactic text is connected with it.” 198 Jacobi asserted that
“the latter was not inserted [into the original epic] as an independent text, but most
likely composed or revised keeping in view the context in which it now appears.” Like
Holtzmann, he was inclined to see the fi rst chapter, which “describes the situation
at the beginning of the confl ict,” as “belong[ing] undoubtedly to the genuine epic.”1 99
But in contrast to Holtzmann, who had suggested that the additions to the Gītā
began from the fourth chapter onward,2 00 Jacobi favored an even shorter (and even
more “epic”) Gītā. According to him, the “insertion must be sought in the second
chapter.”2 01 Th is chapter, he implied, held the key to understanding how the expan-
sion of the original epic poem into a didactic, philosophic work might have taken
place. First, he argued that, following the fi rst chapter in which Arjuna expresses
despair at having to kill his relatives, in chapter 2 “K ṛ ṣ ṇa speaks to Arjuna to pluck
up his courage.” “Arjuna repeats in a forceful way the doubts already expressed in the
fi rst chapter (4–6). His decision is not to fi ght: na yotsya iti Govindam uktvā tū ṣ ṇī ṃ
babhūva ha (9b).” Jacobi argued that the interpolations already began from this point
onward. Of verses 7 and 8 he argued that “they were in contradiction to this deci-
sion [expressed in verse 9] inasmuch as in them Arjuna requests K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s instruction
and advice: y ac creya ḥ syān, niścita ṃ brūhi tan me; śi ṣyas te ’ha ṃ śādhi mā ṃ tvā ṃ pra-
pannam (7b).” 202 According to him, both verses had been interpolated into the text
“manifestly” with the intent of “preparing [the ground] for the long philosophical
instruction.”2 03
Concerning the further course of the poem, Jacobi recommended recurring to
verse 2.2, which he argued off ered a guideline for a reconstruction of the original. In
his words:
He [i.e., K ṛ ṣ ṇa] had described Arjuna’s cowardice ( kaśmala ) in verse 2 as a nāryaju ṣṭa,
asvargya , and a kīrtikara . Th ese three points appear in his speech, it is oriented
according to them.2 04
Based on his intuition that chapter 2 would originally have been restricted to a dis-
cussion of these three points (which van Buitenen translates as “unseemly to the
noble,” “not leading to heaven,” and “dishonorable”), Jacobi off ered the following
reconstruction of the original poem:
1 . “ Asvargya is dealt with in 31–33: the warriors gain heaven when they fulfi ll their
duty to battle.” 205
198 . Ibid. (Jacobi’s emphasis).
199 . Ibid.
200 . Holtzmann Jr., Die neunzehn Bücher , 157.
201 . Jacobi, “Einfügung,” 323.
202 . Ibid.
203 . Ibid., 324.
204 . Ibid.
205 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 203
2 . “[Verses] 34–36 elaborate on akīrtikara : everyone would criticize him, if he were
not to fi ght.”2 06
3 . “Th e fi rst point anāryaju ṣṭa must then relate to the fi rst part of K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s dis-
cussions.”2 07 Jacobi translated this word as “recommended by the ignoble
[Niedrigdenkenden]” and argued that such a thought “is expressed in the fi rst
verse of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s speech [when he says]: aśocyān anvaśocas tva ṃ prajñāvādā ṃś ca
bhā ṣase | gatāsūn agatāsū ṃś ca nā ‘nuśocanti pa ṇḍitā ḥ ||. ”2 08
Jacobi thus advocated a radically pared second chapter built up around verses 1–6
and 9 (introductory), 31–33 (dealing with the fi rst of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s reprimands), 34–36
(the second reprimand), and 11 (the third reprimand). Following verse 12 (he also
included verse 12 as part of the continuation of the third reprimand though he did
not explicitly clarify why he considered it to belong to the original Gītā), he excluded
verses 13 to 17 on the grounds that “the following [text] as it now stands, reads like a
description of the doctrine of the immortality of the soul, [and] not as an elaboration
of the point referred, as it ought to.” He also claimed that “the length of this passage
was suspicious,” since it encompassed “19 verses as compared to the 3 or 4 verses
dedicated to the other two points.” “Th ree verses (19, 20, and 29) are evidently quota-
tions from Kat ḥ a Up. 2, 19; 2, 18; 2, 7.”2 09 Th ereafter, he argued, “verse 37 [already]
brings the conclusion to K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s argument.” “Th e following verse,” he argued, “which
prescribes indiff erence to success is in a certain sense contradictory to verse 37,” and
he suggested that it had “manifestly” been inserted “in order to lead to the subject of
practical philosophy ( yoga ) dealt with in 39ff ., namely, the necessity of acting without
interest in success.” “What was previously dealt with ought to belong to the specula-
tive philosophy (s ā nk̇ hya ), but this applies only to the doctrine of the eternity and
immutability of the soul!” “Th e interpolator disregarded this in order to be able to
insert the didactic poem.” 210
Even though Jacobi’s reasons for excising specifi c passages were ad hoc, he argued
his reconstruction succeeded in better restoring the poem’s contexture. In the actual
poem, verses 7 and 8 are the crux of the dialogue, since they mark the point when
Arjuna, realizing the futility and tragic nature of human action, turns to K ṛ ṣ ṇa, the
immortal principle, for guidance. In verse 7, Arjuna states that his mind is over-
whelmed by pity and he therefore fi nds himself unable to fi ght. Verse 7 looks for-
ward to his conclusion in verse 9, where he declares he will not fi ght. Even though he
appeals to K ṛ ṣ ṇa for advice in verse 7, this need not imply a contradiction with verse
9. In the dialogue that unfolds between the two protagonists, they go back and forth
over the same ground many times with K ṛ ṣ ṇa constantly encouraging, censuring, or
206 . Ibid.
207 . Ibid.
208 . Ibid. Jacobi does not translate the lines; van Buitenen’s translation reads: “You sor-
row over men you should not be sorry for, and yet you speak to sage issues. Th e wise are
not sorry for either the living or the dead.”
209 . Ibid.
210 . Ibid.
204 Chapter 03
educating Arjuna. Likewise, in verse 8, Arjuna expresses his sense that nothing on
earth will compensate him for the crime he is about to commit. Th ereafter, following
on this realization of war as a zero-sum game, in verse 9 he states his objection to
fi ghting. Verses 7 to 9 thus clearly present a consistent train of thought. Jacobi, how-
ever, claimed that his reconstruction represented an improvement over the original.
As justifi cation, he advanced the following considerations:
If we only consider the verses essential to elaborate the ideas announced by K ṛ ṣ ṇa,
which verses already reveal this [i.e., that they are essential] through their form or
their relationship to the context of the passage, as being genuine, then the following
train of thoughts results, as the reconstruction of the piece below shows. One sees
that the inserted verses only introduce superfl uous details concerning the nature
of the immortal soul [into the text]. However, this was already assumed as known
and it [i.e., the poem] is only concerned with the consequences of this assumption
in Arjuna’s case. 211
Concluding his reconstruction, he argued:
1 . “K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s speech probably ends with verse 37 as the three points announced in
verse 2 are exhausted.”2 12
2 . “Th is was probably then followed by Arjuna’s agreement, which now stands at the
end of the poem (18, 73).” 213
3 . “Th e description of the battle beginning with 6.43.6ff . then joined itself.” 214
In all then, Jacobi’s arguments yielded an epic Gītā of only 23 verses (in addition
to the opening chapter 1). In addition to the verses we have already seen earlier
(1–6, 9, 11–12, 31–33, 34–36, and 37), he also added verses 10, 18, 25–27, 30, and
chapter 18, verse 73. Th is constituted the essential outline of the epic Gītā postulated
by him, though he was modest enough to acknowledge that his reconstruction was
only an “approximate reconstruction of the text so far as our material permits.” He
pointed out that “in the redaction of the Bhagavadgītā,” “some verses could have
been left out and others changed with regard to wording.” 215
In the second half of the article, Jacobi then listed all the verses considered genu-
ine by him, although he did not indicate changes of speaker between verses 1 and
3 and between verses 4 and 37. As verses 1–3 stand in his reconstruction, they are
all spoken by an anonymous speaker, even though there is a change in perspective
between verse 1 (spoken by Sam ̣jaya referring to K ṛ ṣ ṇa in the third person in the
actual Gītā). More problematically, he also changed the epithet “Arjuna” in verse 2.2d
to “Acyuta,” even though the speaker is (or ought to be) K ṛ ṣ ṇa. To be sure, Arjuna is
211 . Ibid.
212 . Ibid.
213 . Ibid., 324–25.
214 . Ibid., 325.
215 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 205
also called occasionally called Acyuta in the Mahābhārata (for instance, at 1.218.39),
but these are theologically loaded passages; in the Bhagavadgītā itself, Arjuna is
never called Acyuta and the three times the name occurs it refers unambiguously to
K ṛ ṣ ṇa (see Bhagavadgītā 1.21c, 11.42c, and 18.73c). It is possible that Jacobi, having
eliminated most of the poem (and perhaps not even having bothered to read it from
end to end), was unaware of these occurrences. Likewise, as verses 4–37 stand in his
reconstruction, they are all spoken by Arjuna, including verse 10 which in the actual
Gītā once again marks a shift of speaker to the narrator Sa ṁjaya.
Jacobi does not cite the edition he is relying upon, so it is nearly impossible to
determine whether the error is in his source or was due to his own oversight. In
any case, this carelessness combined with his jejune and self-referential arguments
do not inspire much confi dence in his abilities as a scholar and a critic. As a literary
critic as well, he leaves much to be desired. For instance, concluding his survey of
genuine, epic verses with the words “the epic text in which the didactic text of the
Bhagavadgītā was inserted may have looked roughly like this,” he argued, “one can-
not read the verses following verse 39 without sensing the great diff erence in tone
and style of expression.” “One steps into a fairly dry didactic poem.” Jacobi admitted
that in spite of all diff erences in style, the Bhagavadgītā was “so closely joined to the
epic that it appears to have been composed or revised keeping in view the actual
situation.” He argued that if one accepted the latter, then “one must assume that the
original Bhagavadgītā already existed in the form of a dialogue between Vāsudeva
and Arjuna at a time when they were not considered epic heroes but divine beings.”
Further, he argued that “as the position of both names in the compound shows,
Vāsudeva must have stood higher than Arjuna.” “Both must have had something in
common, otherwise they would not appear in the epic so closely associated with each
other. Perhaps it was the circumstance that Arjuna, too, is a govinda .” 216
As Jacobi imagined the process, there probably existed “an older poem which, for
the purpose of its insertion in the epic, only required minor changes. In the course of
this insertion, the opportunity for additions and deletions arose in order to bring the
text into accord with the views of the redactors at the time.”2 17 Th is poem, according
to Jacobi, would have been religious in character, since it knew of Arjuna and K ṛ ṣ ṇa
as “divine beings” rather than “epic heroes.” Th is religious poem, perhaps already
in circulation among the Bhāgavatas, was then taken up and taken over by epony-
mous redactors of the epic, who adapted it to their purposes. Alternatively, writes
Jacobi, “if one does not wish to make this assumption, then the redactors of the
MBh. must themselves have composed the text of the Bhagavadgītā or, at least, have
charged an eminent Bhāgavata with it [i.e., with its composition].”2 18 In this case,
the Bhagavadgītā would have been fi rst composed for the Mahābhārata, either by
the same eponymous redactors or someone commissioned by them. Irrespective of
which of the two solutions we prefer, Jacobi argues that “in conclusion, it must be
mentioned that the text of the Bhagavadgītā, after it was incorporated into the MBh.
216 . Ibid., 326.
217 . Ibid., 327.
218 . Ibid.
206 Chapter 03
cannot have undergone large additions; rather, deletions; for the number of verses is
currently exactly 700 whereas according to 6.43.4 it must once have been 744. . . .” 219
It is not necessary here to dwell at length on Jacobi’s reconstruction, since our
main purpose is to see how he responds to the pantheism controversy. Nonetheless,
it is important to note the enormous complication this last section of his essay intro-
duces into the “original Gītā” debate. In the fi rst part of his article, Jacobi set out
from a Holtzmannian perspective: he argued that the original Gītā would have been
much shorter and referred to the “epic situation.” He considered it inconceivable that
an “epic poet” would have inserted a philosophical poem of over 700 verses at such a
crucial moment (i.e., when both armies are amassed for battle) and, like Holtzmann,
he argued that the kernel of the poem must have lain in an encouragement to battle.
He further saw this encouragement to lie in those parts of K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s speech addressing
the three fl aws of cowardice (it is “unseemly to the noble,” “does not lead to heaven,”
and is “dishonorable”) and he reconstructed the entire poem around these three sec-
tions (adding only a brief introduction and a one-verse conclusion). It is clear that
what Jacobi was, in eff ect, doing was reconstructing the original epic poem addressed
to the heroic Indo-Germanic warriors, exactly as this had been proposed by Holtzmann .
His epic Gītā essentially fulfi lled the expectations placed on the old Indo-Germanic
Gītā by Adolf Holtzmann.
And yet, following this reconstruction of the Holtzmannian original, we fi nd a
curious turn to a religious Gītā. In this poem, Arjuna and Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa are “divine beings”
rather than “epic heroes.” Contrary to Holtzmann’s theory of a folk hero who was
later divinized, Jacobi argues the inverse view: Arjuna and K ṛ ṣ ṇa are fi rst “divine
beings” and later become “epic heroes” (probably at the time of the insertion of the
Bhagavadgītā into the epic). As evidence that the Indian tradition fi rst knew of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa
and Arjuna as divinities, Jacobi cited Pā ṇini sūtra 4.3.98 ( Vāsudevārjunābhyā ṃ vuñ
[ sic ]) and noted that Pā ṇini “still knew of them [i.e., K ṛ ṣ ṇa and Arjuna] as a divine
pair, who were worshipped.”2 20 He further laid out two scenarios to explain how this
inverse euhemerization might have occurred: either the Bhagavadgītā was already in
existence as a religious poem and then adapted by unnamed redactors to suit an epic
Mahābhārata, or, these selfsame redactors either composed the Bhagavadgītā them-
selves or commissioned an “eminent Bhāgavata” to compose it for them. Whichever
scenario we opt for, however, Jacobi argues that the Bhagavadgītā’s insertion into
the epic would not have required expansion, but rather elimination of religious and
philosophical details, both so as to reduce its length and so as to make it suit the
epic context. Th ere is clearly a lot of confusion in Jacobi’s mind about whether the
Bhagavadgītā originally existed in the form of a brief epic Gītā (for which he has cre-
ated an entire reconstruction) or in the form of a longer religious Gītā (which, accord-
ing to his theory, must be earlier but according to his reconstruction, later). Added
to this fundamental confusion, there is a second one. If the fi rst of the two scenarios
for a religious Gītā that Jacobi lays out is correct, then a longer poem was already
219 . Ibid.
220 . Ibid., 326.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 207
in existence at the time the redactors of the Mahābhārata began to cast about for
materials to include into the battle narrative of the sixth book (the Bhī ṇmaparvan).
Since these redactors (Holtzmann’s Indo-Germans?) were in pursuit of a heroic epic,
it makes sense to think that they would have cut out the religious and philosophi-
cal aspects of this original poem. (However, it makes no sense to imagine that the
very same materials would later have found their way back into the poem, unless we
want to imagine the Mahābhārata, as Oldenberg explicitly does, as a work in tension
between “old and new India, [between] the India of the Aryan and of the Hindu” 221 )
But the second scenario is simply absurd: why would epic redactors either write or
commission someone to write a full-fl edged Bhagavadgītā only to then cut this work
down to size? And, moreover, if their concern was to obtain a small, nontheological
and nondoctrinal text, why approach an “eminent Bhāgavata” with the task?
Th ese fundamental confusions in Jacobi’s work suggest that he was far more
ambiguous about the Holtzmannian narrative than appears at fi rst. Although he
accepted the elder scholar’s ideas of heroic epic (even reconstructing the latter’s epic
Gītā in the process), he ultimately turned to a diff erent source for explaining the
dialogue between K ṛ ṣ ṇa and Arjuna. Instead of claiming that Brahmans took over
a heroic poem, he now seemed to think that unnamed epic redactors took over a
religious poem centering on the worship of Vāsudeva and made it serviceable to their
ends. Signifi cantly, he broke with dogmatic orthodoxy precisely on the question of
K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s divinity. Indologists from Holtzmann to Hopkins had advanced the theory
of the euhemerization of K ṛ ṣ ṇa as a central element of their Protestant critique
of Indian faith. In the name of critical scholarship, they had put in place a pseu-
dohistorical account of his divinization (based on a postulation of a fi ctionalized
Indo-Germanic tribal culture) as a way of undermining the religious and philosophi-
cal reception these texts enjoyed in India. Jacobi, writing at the turn of the century,
went along with their views of a heroic culture. Yet, when it came to the question of
K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s divinity, he turned against them. For him, it was more important to argue
that K ṛ ṣ ṇa was originally a god and later became a man. Even though he explained
this process historically via reference to Pā ṇini rather than philosophically or the-
istically via reference to the concept of avatāra , the idea of incarnation was clearly
present somewhere at the back of his concerns. (It is not implausible that Jacobi was
aware that Holtzmann and Hopkins’ historicization of K ṛ ṣ ṇa was implicitly based on
an earlier historicization: the historicization of Christ undertaken by the Protestant
critics F. C. Bauer and David Friedrich Strauß.) Nowhere will this be clearer than his
defense of the Gītā’s pantheism against Garbe.
DEFENDING PHILOSOPHICAL PANTHEISM
In his reconstruction of the original Gītā, Jacobi had not cited any secondary lit-
erature, though the infl uence of Holtzmann on this work is evident. It is not so
221 . Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata , 1.
208 Chapter 03
easy to determine whether he had, by this point, already read Garbe’s commen-
tary on the Gītā. On the one hand, he does not mention Garbe nor does he allude
to the debate over the Gītā’s pantheism between Holtzmann and Garbe. On the
other, it is hardly likely he could have been unaware of the work of Garbe, the
fi rst Indologist to address the Bhagavadgītā in nearly eight decades. Garbe was the
authority on the religions of India. His edition was the fi rst Bhagavadgītā transla-
tion by a German Indologist since A.W. Schlegel’s 1823 edition. It had been widely
reviewed and discussed,2 22 above all by Kurt Klemm in the Z eitschrift der Deutshen
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft in 1906.2 23 Further, if, as seems likely, Jacobi knew
of Holtzmann’s views, he could hardly have been unaware of Garbe’s debate with
the latter.
However, as things stand, the fi rst recorded reaction by Jacobi to Garbe’s views
we possess is his 1921 review of the 2nd revised edition of Garbe’s 1905 transla-
tion of the B hagavad Gītā . Published in the Deutsche Literaturzeitung in December
1921, Jacobi’s review was especially critical of Garbe’s attempted separation of the-
istic from pantheistic elements. In February 1922, Garbe responded in the pages of
the same magazine with a sharp rejection of Jacobi’s criticisms. Two months later,
Jacobi responded to Garbe’s response, and, in July 1922, Garbe fi nally closed the
book on the debate with his “Mein Schlußwort zum Bhagavadgītā-Problem” (“My
Last Word on the Bhagavadgītā-Problem”). We shall look at these four exchanges in
order, beginning with Jacobi’s review from 1921.
Jacobi’s review begins as we might expect it to begin: with a defense of the “epic
situation” as the central fact and the central motivation of the poem. He writes:
No one doubts that the Bh.g. did not belong to the original Mahābhārata. For this
didactic poem, which encompasses more than 600 strophes, occurs in the [epic]
poem at the precise moment when the armies of the Kurus and the Pā ṇḍavas stand
arrayed for battle before each other; no real poet would have destroyed the tense
atmosphere [created] by the depiction of this situation by [inserting] a long lecture
on philosophical and religious doctrines. Guided by K ṛ ṣ ṇa, Arjuna’s battle-chariot
is at the head of the Pā ṇḍava ranks. He [i.e., Arjuna] sees his relatives among his
enemies and despairs at the thought of having to kill them. K ṛ ṣ ṇa comforts him and
admonishes him to perform his duty as a warrior; after all, he kills only the bodies,
the souls are immortal (a doctrine that at that time fi rst gained widespread accep-
tance). After this original speech of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s, which encompassed about 20 verses,
the younger didactic poem was then inserted; in the course of this poem reference
is made several times to the situation depicted. It is thus composed for the passage
where it has been inserted and from this one can see that the Mahābhārata at the
222 . See Garbe’s foreword to the second edition (p. 3, n. 1). Among those to respond
to his edition were Schroeder (1912), Hopkins (1905), Oldenberg (1919), M. Winternitz
(1907 and 1909), F. Otto Schrader (1910), all cited earlier.
223 . Kurt Klemm, “Indologie,” Z eitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 60
(1906): 275–83 (the review of Garbe is on pp. 280–81). (Jacobi himself had an article in
this volume.)
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 209
time no longer possessed a purely epic character but had already developed a pro-
nounced didactic character.2 24
Following a brief summary of Garbe’s views, 225 he then addresses what is, for him,
the crux of the matter: the divinity of K ṛ ṣ ṇa. In his words,
It is, however, a well-known fact that not only in the Bh.g. but also in some por-
tions of the Mahābhārata and the Purān ạ s, K ṛ ṣ ṇa appears as a human—all too
human—hero and he is not for that reason considered to be any less a god, [indeed,]
the highest god. He is verily a god b ecome human, and his appearance as such says
nothing about how the Indians conceived of divinity beyond its becoming human
[Menschwerdung]. Its representation could therefore have been just as likely theis-
tic as pantheistic. 226
Garbe had simplistically advocated a theistic reading of the Bhagavadgītā as an ele-
ment of his defense of German religious orthodoxy. He had entered the pantheism
controversy (or, to be more precise, its echo in German Indology) with an aggressive
defense of an austere, rational, and monotheistic religion as being most appropri-
ate to ancient warriors. But this defense had been bought at the price of the loss
of K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s divinity: K ṛ ṣ ṇa was now reduced to a warrior, a folk hero, and founder
of a simple, ethical K ṣatriya religion. Garbe had argued that, partly by a process of
euhemerization and partly by a process of Brahmanic assimilation, K ṛ ṣ ṇa had fi nally
come to be identifi ed with the Brahmanic Supreme God Vis ̣ ṇu. But Garbe rejected
this identifi cation. For him, it entailed a corruption of the ethical warrior religion,
a gradual infi ltration of Brahmanic ideals into the central institutions of ancient
Indian social life, and the rise of sacrifi ce, “the great source of income of the priest-
hood . . . . ” 227 Of the view of K ṛ ṣ ṇa as an incarnation of God, he specifi cally noted
that it was an “inversion of the real relationship,” a “myth of transformation,” and
claimed, “in our case, euhemerism is the correct view.” 228 Brahmanism, according to
him, was responsible for a whole host of evils: ritualism, materialism, and ceremoni-
alism, ultimately leading to pantheism.
Jacobi, entering the debate in the wake of this identifi cation of Brahmanism with
pantheism and pantheism with atheism, argued for a more nuanced appreciation of
224 . Jacobi, “Die Bhagavadgītā,” 715–16.
225 . “According to Garbe (p. 14f) K ṛ ṣ ṇa was originally portrayed in the Bh.g. as a personal
god in the form of a human hero, after which the Vedāntic doctrine of brahma (the imper-
sonal, pantheistic divinity) and of Māyā, the cosmic illusion, took shape [in the text]. Th is
contradiction which runs through the Gītā ‘lets itself only be eliminated on the assump-
tion that one of the two contradictory doctrines placed in the mouth of the personal god
K ṛ ṣ ṇa are a later addition’ (p. 16). G. arrives at the conclusion that the pantheistic sections
entered the poem in the wake of a revision of an originally theistic poem and can therefore
be separated out [from the original] with a fair degree of certainty. . . .” Ibid., 716.
226 . Ibid., 716.
227 . Garbe, Die Bhagavadgîtâ , 46.
228 . Ibid., 31.
210 Chapter 03
these terms. As he noted, “the two expressions [i.e., pantheism and atheism] applied
to the Indian context require a closer determination.” He pointed out that “the deci-
sive point for the Indian interpretation of divinity lies therein, whether god is [con-
ceived of as] the material cause of the world or only [as] the eff ective [cause] (causa
effi ciens) thereof. Th e former is identical with our concept of pantheism, the latter
does not correspond entirely to our theism.” 229 Rather than placing theism (iden-
tifi ed with a K ṣatriya religion with elements drawn from Sā ṁkhya and Yoga) and
pantheism (identifi ed with a Brahmanism centering in a Vedāntic monistic ontology)
into opposition, as Garbe had done, Jacobi argued that Indian thought knew of two
approaches to conceiving of the relationship of God to the created world, neither
of which was incompatible with monotheism and the idea of incarnation. “God as
eff ective cause has not created matter and the souls; they are rather as eternal as
he; he is, however, the controller of the world and of fate. Th e adherents of Yoga
and diff erent Śaivite sects, which set out partly from Sānkhya-philosophy and partly
from Vaiśe ṣika-philosophy, are theists in this sense,” he wrote.2 30 As he had clarifi ed a
line earlier, this meant that Indian theism, which was characterized by a belief in an
eternally existing God, albeit not as creator of the world, since the world too existed
in all eternity, was not entirely identical “to our theism.” In contrast, pantheism in
both the Western and Eastern contexts meant the same: to conceive of God as “the
material cause of the world.” Here he noted that the adherents of “the Upani ṣads
(Aupani ṣada), of Vedānta-philosophy and other religious systems, among them the
Bhāgavatas (Śankara on B. S. II 2, 42) or Pāncarātras, of whom one assumes that they
are ultimately traceable back to a religious community established by K ṛ ṣ ṇa” were all
“pantheists.” But, argued Jacobi, this did not mean that the Bhagavadgītā, insofar
as it knew of a personal god K ṛ ṣ ṇa and of a Supreme Being Vi ṣ ṇu who had become
mortal (as Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa), was necessarily theistic. “Both interpretations [i.e., the theistic
and the pantheistic],” he argued, “are reconcilable with montheism as well as with
the doctrine of a highest absolute divinity and do not exclude becoming human
(Avatāra).”2 31
Even though Jacobi presented his critique of Garbe as a contribution to “critical”
scholarship, there was clearly a religious subtext to his assertion. As a Catholic, it was
important for him to insist on the idea of incarnation, even if it was in the form of a
defense of the divinity of K ṛ ṣ ṇa. But, it was equally important for him, as a Catholic,
to set apart Hindu theism from Christian theism and he could best do this by dis-
tinguishing between Hindu and Catholic concepts of God. Reviving the Creator/
created distinction, he argued that Indian tradition did not really understand God’s
transcendence. It made no space for God’s creation as a unique occurrence, taking
place at the beginning of time. Rather, since according to Indian thought the world
too existed in all eternity (being brought forth at the beginning of a cosmic cycle
and reabsorbed at its end), Indian forms of theism were not strictly congruent with
229 . Jacobi, “Die Bhagavadgītā,” 716.
230 . Ibid., 716–17 (Jacobi’s emphasis).
231 . Ibid., 717.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 211
Western monotheism. Both theism and pantheism (in the Indian sense) were recon-
cilable with monotheism.
By radicalizing the distinction between pantheism and theism, Jacobi was also
attacking Garbe at his core. At the same time as he fought a rearguard action against
Hindu theism, he was also able to take on the challenge of Garbe’s Protestant funda-
mentalism. In his bid to vindicate Holtzmann’s ancient Indo-Germans of the charge
of pantheism, Garbe had simplistically identifi ed K ṣatriya religion with the worship
of K ṛ ṣ ṇa and the latter, in turn, with monotheism. By doing so, he able to generate a
picture of Germanic culture as proto-Christian, indeed, as sympathetic to Protestant
ideas of Christianity. Th e latter, of course, was a major concern in his attempted reha-
bilitation of Indology as the study of ancient India after Holtzmann. Jacobi, however,
argued that either theism or pantheism could underlie Indian ideas of divinity. Indian
theism, which did not know God as the Creator, was no more conducive to the cult
of K ṛ ṣ ṇa than Indian pantheism, which could conceive of the impersonal Brahman
as absolute divinity. Against Garbe’s identifi cation of theism with the K ṣatriyas and
pantheism with the Brahmans, Jacobi also argued that the warrior caste itself had an
interest in pantheistic ideas. In his words,
If the martial hero [K ṛ ṣ ṇa], as has been assumed, founded a popular religion, then
the question is, whether this was founded on pantheism or theism (in the Indian
sense). Th e former is a priori to be accepted, because K ṛ ṣ ṇa, the son of Devakī,
belongs to the older Upani ṣad period (Chāndogya Upani ṣad 3, 17, 6) and was there-
fore rooted in the intellectual world of the Upani ṣads, since after all the warrior
caste or the K ṣatriyas had a lively interest in “Brahma research” and made indepen-
dent contributions to it.2 32
Th e picture Jacobi produced of the Bhagavadgītā was thus far more complex than
Garbe’s. First, he rejected the theism/pantheism distinction in its absolute form
(inherited from the pantheism controversy of F. Jacobi and Mendelssohn). Second,
he rejected the Ks ̣atriya/Brahman distinction in its proto-Protestant form (inher-
ited from Lassen and Holtzmann). Instead, he related a much more complex story
in which spiritual ideas had always been part of K ṣatriya society, the Upani ṣads in
particular being testament to their high level of intellectual and cultural develop-
ment. Complicating Garbe’s narrative of a gradual infi ltration of heroic tradition by
a priestly culture, Jacobi argued that “for the pure theism proclaimed by Garbe to
work out, the Upani ṣadic elements in K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s religion would have to be subsequently
eliminated and later reinserted into the Bh.g. by the Vedāntic redactors of the poem
assumed by Garbe.” 233 Jacobi thus split Indian pantheism itself into two traditions,
each having a diff erent source. On the one hand, there was the pantheism of the
K ṣatriyas rooted in the Upani ṣads; on the other, the pantheism of the Brahman
rooted in Vedāntic texts, especially the Vedānta Sūtras and later commentaries. Since
232 . Ibid.
233 . Ibid.
212 Chapter 03
the Bhagavadgītā according to him preceded the latter, its pantheism was innate to it
and not the imposition of Brahmans. Jacobi notes:
I speak explicitly of Upanis ̣ad doctrines and not of those of Vedānta philosophy. Th e
latter fi rst begins with the Vedānta Sūtra of Bādarāya ṇa and is, in my view, younger
than the Bh.g. Th e V. S. bases its doctrines upon revelation ( śruti ), but also adduces
the tradition ( sm ṛti ), which possesses a limited authority, as support. In three pas-
sages (I 3,23. II 3,45. IV 2,21) where the sūtras refer to s m ṛti , the commentators
relate the reference to the Bh.g. alone (namely, XV 6.12 or XIV 2; XV 7 7; VIII 23 ff ).
In IV 2, 21 ( yoginah prati ca smaryate smārte caite ) the fi rst two words refer unmis-
takably to the relevant passage of the Bh.g., so that its priority to the V. S. can hardly
be doubted. 234
Jacobi had thus found a way to anchor pantheism in the Gītā, while still accepting
the Holtzmannian narrative of a heroic epic tradition. By distinguishing between a
philosophical pantheism (i.e., that of the Upanis ̣ads) and an orthodox pantheism
(that of Vedānta), he was able to overturn Garbe’s identifi cation of pantheism with
orthodox systems. To be sure, his argument rested on the Bhagavadgītā being earlier
than the Vedānta Sūtra. But here, as all Indologists before him had done, he could
conveniently invoke the category of “interpolation” to dismiss evidence contrary to
his thesis. In his words,
If, in contrast, someone were to raise the objection that XIII 4 refers to V. S.
( brahmasūtra-padais ), then my response is that this verse is obviously an interpola-
tion. For, at the end of verse 3 stands “hear” (ś ṛ ṇu ) and what is to be heard stands in
verse 5; both naturally belong unbroken together and are only rent asunder by the
inserted verse 4 contrary to their nature.2 35
Jacobi concluded:
If my conclusion is correct, then already by the time of the composition of the
V. S. the Bh.g. was already considered a s m ṛti , a semi-holy book, specifi cally, the work
in its revised form according to Garbe, since he characterizes VIII 23 ff ., to which V. S.
IV 2, 21 refers, as interpolations.2 36
Lest we overlook the fact that what was at stake in this game of dating texts was
not the Indian poem itself, but the diff ering conceptions of religion held by the two
scholars, Jacobi also clarifi ed, “It is hardly possible for us fi nite mortals to realize the
transcendent in thought (XII 5). Instead the most appropriate means of reaching
the highest goal is to meditate on a concrete divinity or some other form of love for
god depending upon the higher or lower disposition of the worshiper.” He argued
234 . Ibid.
235 . Ibid., 717–18.
236 . Ibid., 718 (Jacobi’s emphasis).
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 213
that “this thought” was “completely in keeping with the character of a popular reli-
gion, which is aimed not merely at ascetics and thinkers but just as much at a man
anchored in a life of activity.” 237 Th e Bhagavadgītā, thus, although setting out from
a pantheistic frame of reference, could still recommend a monotheistic form of wor-
ship as “the most appropriate means” for humans, especially average citizens, to
attain the highest goal. It was not simply a work for “ascetics and thinkers” and, by
implication, it was wrong of Garbe to associate its popular character with an anti-
clerical stance. Jacobi’s conclusion is succinct:
As concerns the core point of the question raised, however, it follows from the
refl ections above that even in the “genuine” portions of the Bh.g. the “intransient”
and the “transient,” that is, primordial matter and all the things that proceed from
it according to Sānkhya are not considered independent things distinct from the
highest divinity (Īśvara) as in Yoga. Rather, they are regarded as components of
Parmātman as in Vedānta. Th erewith I believe I have refuted G.’s theory of the revi-
sion of the Bh.g. 238
Jacobi had thus undermined the very basis for Garbe’s assertion of a theistic philoso-
phy to the original poem: if Sā ṁkhya too (and not just Vedānta) was not theistic in
the Western sense inasmuch as it did not exhibit a clearly marked dualism between
the highest divinity and everything that proceeded from him, there was no basis for
asserting that the original Gītā was theistic.
In his reply from February 1922, Garbe rejected every single one of Jacobi’s criti-
cisms. He conceded that “a completely decisive proof is not to be presented in this
important question concerning the history of religion, but only a high degree of
probability to be gained,” 239 but nonetheless insisted that Jacobi’s reconstruction of
ancient Indian ideas of religion was no more rigorous than his. “Now, however, Jacobi
cannot possibly assume that the philosophical systems of the Indians are as young as
their Sūtra works composed for the school system, whose aphoristic form alone dem-
onstrates that they are not the fi rst conceptions but the fi nal, summarizing presen-
tations. Th e age of the systems and that of their Sūtras are two completely diff erent
things. . . . ” 240 Garbe also rejected Jacobi’s challenge that his original Gītā, if it was to
be a purely theistic text, had to be free of all Upani ṣadic elements. “Where had I then
ever claimed that in the genuine Bhag. no Upanis ̣ad doctrines were acknowledged?
Have I not explicitly (p. 70, n. 1) pointed out the multiple, at times v erbatim adapta-
tions of the ‘purifi ed’ Bhag. from passages of the older Upani ṣads?”2 41 Garbe repeated
his conviction that the vacillation between the theistic and pantheistic outlook in the
Gītā was not an organic one, but the result of the addition of pantheistic doctrines to
237 . Ibid., 719.
238 . Ibid.
239 . Garbe, “Noch einmal das Bhagavadgītā-Problem,” 98.
240 . Ibid., 99.
241 . Ibid., 101.
214 Chapter 03
the original text, even if these additions could not (in spite of his best eff orts) always
be identifi ed:
What Jacobi then describes in column 719 via a reference to Bhag. XII. 2ff . and XV.
16ff . as the crux of the question raised, provides, in my view, the opposite. J. fi nds in
these “genuine” passages of the Bhag.—if I may briefl y say so—an organic mixture
of theistic and pantheistic ideas, whereas in the fi rst passage the two perspectives
are sharply distinguished and the theistic [perspective] advanced as the more cor-
rect one. I would also like to remind [the reader] of what I had said on p. 24 of my
Introduction: “I do not harbor the delusion that I have succeeded in excising a lln on-
genuine portions of the Bhag. in this manner. Th ere will still be some verses which
have been added in the revision, of which no word stands in the original poem.” 242
Th e wider problem, of course, which neither Garbe nor Jacobi were willing to address,
was that in the absence of a mutually accepted text, any and all assertions of the Gītā
could be true. Since neither was willing to assign canonicity to the Bhagavadgītā as
handed down, the debate could not continue meaningfully. Garbe could not accept
the Bhagavadgītā as handed down because the existence of what he thought were
“pantheistic” elements in the text brought Indology into jeopardy. In light of the
pantheism controversy, no one could recommend a discipline associated with the
study of pantheistic texts. Recall that Heine, commenting on Schlegel’s Die Sprache
und Weisheit der Indier , had written that “the scent of frankincense streamed out of
this book.” 243 He might as well have said “the scent of sulfur” for all the associations
Catholicism evoked in Germany after Luther. Garbe was sophisticated enough to real-
ize that there was a problem with Holtzmann’s attribution of pantheistic doctrines to
the ancient Indo-Germans, but he was not sophisticated enough to solve the problem
philosophically through adjudicating between the Bhagavadgītā’s diff erent perspec-
tives. 244 It was clear to him that the only way to render the Gītā safe for Indology was
242 . Ibid., 102 (Garbe’s emphasis).
243 . Th e reference is to Heine’s review of the book in Heinrich Heines Sämtliche Werke , vol.
5, cited earlier. See ibid., 270.
244 . As noted earlier, the pantheistic confusion (as opposed to the pantheism contro-
versy) is ultimately rooted in a misunderstanding concerning ancient ontology, specifi cally
the distinction between empirical objects and their transcendental and conceptual (i.e.,
ideal) conditions. In the Bhagavadgītā (and even more so in the related Nārāya ṇīya), the
authors of the text clearly distinguish between various gradations of being. Th us, Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa is
Brahman (Being), but also Yogeśvara (Lord). Additionally, he exists in universal, fourfold,
and mortal forms. Indeed, the text introduces an entire gamut of terms to characterize these
various ontological levels: Supreme Person, Nature, the Unmanifest, the Indestructible,
and so on. All these exceed the manifest, destructible creation. Without being cognizant
of these distinctions and without grasping the way each preceding ontological level was
implicit in the successive ones without being identical with them, the Indologists resorted
to the catchphrase “pantheism” as a convenient way of classifying (and, as we have seen, of
eliminating) certain verses found to be repugnant. To them, it seemed self-evident that if a
text asserted that God was coextensive with his creation, this was evidence of its “panthe-
ism.” Th e inevitable consequence was a leveling of the text’s carefully constructed ontologi-
cal distinctions, and the rise of a pseudoproblem: was the Bhagavadgītā pantheistic?
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 215
to censor the text. Although ostensibly a contribution to “critical” scholarship on the
poem, his edition of the Gītā had the eff ect of censoring the pantheistic doctrines of
the Bhagavadgītā. And lest his edition still be accused of pantheism, he could defend
himself that he had never claimed to have identifi ed “ all the nongenuine [he might
as well have said, heretical] portions of the Bhag. in this manner,”2 45 as he explicitly
reminded Jacobi:
I may therefore protect myself [against the unfair treatment] that a few verses
that I considered genuine and which are perhaps after all inserted verses should be
treated as the basis for a rejection of my theory. 246
In spite of their claims and counterclaims, however, no resolution was possible.
Once they had embarked on the task of “critically” editing the Bhagavadgītā (i.e.,
tailoring it to their religious prejudices), there was no longer a stable basis for discus-
sion available. Garbe complained that Jacobi had “overlooked one of [Garbe’s] most
important arguments, namely, the observation that in the wake of [Garbe’s] exci-
sions nowhere does a real gap arise in the Bhag., rather in many places the broken
contexture is restored and that the Bhag. purifi ed in this way signifi cantly improves
in poetic beauty and coherence [Geschlossenheit] on the transmitted text.” 247 Jacobi
countered with the observation that “the pantheistic view, which according to G.’s
opinion is supposed to have been foreign to the original Bh.g. also turns up in the
parts acknowledged by him as genuine.”2 48 He then challenged Garbe to acknowledge
that these verses, too, now needed to be removed as per his theory of the original
Gītā. “If there are truly pantheistic traces to be found, he will also remove the con-
cerned verses. Th at naturally cannot be forbidden him. If in the actual didactic poem
which contains more than 600 verses, 170 verses, that is, over a fourth of the whole,
are supposed to be interpolated, a few verses more or less will not matter.”2 49
In eff ect, Jacobi was now forcing Garbe’s argument to a reductio ad absurdum. In
fact, if we accept his argument that Sām ̇khya, too, does not see God in separation from
creation, a reconstruction of the original Gītā cannot even count on the Sā ṁkhya ele-
ments being genuine. Further, as he pointed out, the “ crux of the question, the actual
problem ,” lay in the “fusion of theistic and pantheistic views” in the Gītā. 250 If, as Jacobi
held, the two terms were not mutually exclusive in the Indian context, Garbe’s entire
reasoning for a Gītā purifi ed of “pantheistic” elements fell by the wayside. Writes Jacobi:
I ask myself: if since approximately 4th century AD Indians manifestly have not
taken issue with this fusion of such heterogenous concepts of god, which appears
so strange to us, then it is also not evident why this fusion should not have been
245 . Garbe, Die Bhagavadgîtâ , 24 (Garbe’s emphasis).
246 . Garbe, “Noch einmal das Bhagavadgītā-Problem,” 102.
247 . Ibid., 104.
248 . Jacobi, “Weiteres zum Bhagavadgītā-Problem,” 265.
249 . Ibid., 266.
250 . Ibid. (Jacobi’s emphasis).
216 Chapter 03
acceptable to Indian thought in the past as well. At any rate, for the assumption
of a fundamental change objective reasons must be forthcoming; but such factual
considerations are lacking [in Garbe’s work]. We therefore cannot get around seeing
in the text of the Bh.g. as handed down essentially a faithful expression of religious
beliefs predominant at the time of its composition in the K r ṣ ṇ ạ istic communities.2 51
With this remark, Jacobi essentially pushed Garbe into a corner. In an attempt to
justify his critical project, Garbe had earlier countered the objection that “the Indians
did not see a contradiction in [the Gītā’s] combination of theism and pantheism,”
with the suggestion that their “syncretic tendencies” had made them oblivious to
a contradiction that was, at least for Western scholars, an evident fact.2 52 Jacobi,
however, raised a fatal objection: what if Indians had not felt there to be a contra-
diction between pantheism and theism at the time of its composition itself (rather
than only later during its reception)? In that case, Garbe’s objections were moot. If
Garbe wished to declare syncretism characteristic of Indian tradition, then he had to
accept it for its beginning as well. Indeed, sharpening the objection, Jacobi noted, “if
we accept the text as purifi ed by G. as the original Bhagavadgītā, we fi nd something
absolutely essential to be missing. Th is Gospel of the Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa religion engages with
the most varied religious and philosophical perspectives; and yet it is supposed to
have not touched upon the most important perspective of all, the doctrine of the
All-Divinity, of brahma and âtman, made holy through Revelation, with even a word”
and then he exclaimed: “Th at is utterly unbelievable!”2 53 A Gītā purifi ed of its panthe-
ism, he implied, would also be a Gītā purifi ed of its syncretism, that is, its tendency
to approach and engage with other traditions.
In essence, Jacobi was exposing Garbe’s project as anti-Catholicist (if not, indeed,
as simply anti-Catholic) and fundamentalist. Garbe’s attempt to purify the text
ran aground on many presuppositions, not least that the Indians had no such clear
notion of authentic, pure revelation. Once this fundamentalist aspect of his work
was revealed, Garbe responded petulantly that “it is naturally not possible to con-
tinue the discussion in DLZ in the current manner; furthermore, a continuation
would also not have the outcome that one of us might convince the other of the
incorrectness of his perspective.” He rejected Jacobi’s suggestion of a synthesis with
the claim that “in the passages under consideration (IV. 31f., V. 16ff ., 24ff ., VIII. 1ff .,
XIII.12 ff . etc.), Brahman is spoken of s uddenly , without it being anywhere suggested
that Krishna and Brahman are the same.”2 54 And once again he claimed that the pas-
sages that refer to Brahman appear throughout “as something foreign.”2 55 Clearly,
he wished to reject any suggestion that pantheism could have had any role in the
outlook of his ancient Indians. It was more important to emphasize the “foreign”
251 . Ibid., 266–67.
252 . Garbe, Die Bhagavadgîtâ , 12 (Garbe’s emphasis).
253 . Jacobi, “Weiteres zum Bhagavadgītā-Problem,” 272–73.
254 . Garbe, “Mein Schlusswort zum Bhagavadgītā-Problem,” 604 (Garbe’s emphasis).
255 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 217
nature of pantheism vis-à-vis the original Bhagavadgītā than to read the poem in
philosophically illuminating ways. It was important, even at the price of fundamen-
talism and religious censorship, to uphold the purity of the original Revelation.
THE K N S NA GĪTĀ OF HERMANN OLDENBERG
. . .
Although Garbe’s reconstruction did not hold up against Jacobi’s criticisms, his
more general propositions about the need for critical reconstruction were nonethe-
less widely infl uential. Jacobi himself, as we have seen, adopted Garbe’s assumption
of an original text (to be recovered on the basis of so-called historical and critical
considerations). Even though he disagreed with Garbe on almost every point of
his reconstruction, he did not hesitate to off er his own reconstruction based on
similar ideas of an epic original. Likewise, Hermann Oldenberg (1854–1920), the
next scholar to consider the matter, accepted Garbe’s presuppositions regarding
the method and aims of Gītā scholarship. In his 1919 article, “Bemerkungen zur
Bhagavadgītā,”2 56 Oldenberg initially off ered a comprehensive critique of Garbe’s
theory of a theistic Sām ̇khya-infl uenced original. 257 Oldenberg argued that the idea
that the Bhagavadgītā, being theistic, must be older than other sections of the epic
(and the theistic sections of the Gītā themselves the oldest in the text) did not fol-
low from the fact that Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa was introduced diff erently (i.e., as a man, a counselor,
a hero or a god) in diff erent sections of the epic. As he put it, it is “quite natural
that, in the context of the epic, the narration of battles and councils in which Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa
appears off ers less occasion to refl ect upon the more esoteric doctrine of the meta-
physical supremacy of his Being than is the case in the speculative Gītā.” 258 Hence, he
rejected Garbe’s idea that a theistic original could be recovered on the basis of such
considerations. 259
256 . Hermann Oldenberg, “Bemerkungen zur Bhagavadgītā,” 321–38.
257 . Oldenberg’s critique was built on ideas he had already explored in an earlier article
(“Zur Geschichte der Sā ṃkhya-Philosophie,” N achrichten von der königlichen Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Philologisch-historische Klasse [1917]: 218–53; reprinted in
Hermann Oldenberg, Kleine Schriften , vol. 2, ed. Klaus L. Janert [Wiesbaden: Fritz Steiner
Verlag, 1967], 1423–58) in which he had argued against Garbe’s ideas of Sā ṁkhya philoso-
phy that Garbe failed to adequately distinguish between classical Sām ̇khya (which is what
Garbe had in mind when he spoke of the school) and its pre-classical variants. Oldenberg’s
main concern was to demonstrate against Garbe, the great advocate of theistic Sā ṁkhya
rationality, that Sā ṁkhya had earlier been more open to Vedic and Brahmanic ideas of
impersonal Being.
258 . Oldenberg, “Bemerkungen,” 323.
259 . “Garbe’s deletions do not prove more successful in the individual case than the prin-
ciple upon which they are based. . . . Reading the Gītā with these deletions gives me the
impression that the text has been mastered with violence here according to considerations
from a distant reality that have been applied to the text. Now here, now there, the criti-
cal knife sets upon a passage that is closely and intrinsically linked to its surrounding on
the evidence of a ‘Vedāntic’ catchword and cuts it out of its entire context.” Oldenberg,
“Bemerkungen,” 331–32.
218 Chapter 03
Oldenberg nonetheless remained committed to the idea of an original Gītā and in
fact reverted to a form of Holtzmann’s thesis that the original Gītā must have been
a brief battlefi eld encomium written for a militaristic war epic. Th us, he argued that
the “linchpin” to the entire composition lay in verse 2.39.2 60 Before Oldenberg, Jacobi
had already proposed that the crux of the Gītā lay in verse 2.37. Jacobi claimed that
K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s argument comes to an end with this verse. Th ereafter, he argued, extensive
didactic sections had been interpolated into the poem; these, however, were unre-
lated to the “epic situation” and the original poem resumed only with verse 18.73. To
this compact epic Gītā of 23 verses, Jacobi proposed adding sections of Mahābhārata
6.44 to present an unambiguous (and uninterrupted) narrative of the build up for
war. Oldenberg shared Jacobi’s conviction that the original Gītā could not have been
longer than a few verses and centered mainly around the problem of how to get
Arjuna to return to the war. As he put it, “Arjuna laments the imminent bloodbath
and thinks of deserting the battle. K ṛ ṣ ṇa turns to him II, 11ff . with his appeal.” 261
However, he disagreed with him on the individual details of this account. Jacobi had pro-
posed a tripartite analysis of the original Gītā structured around the use of the words
anāryaju ṣtạ , asvargya , and a kīrtikara in verse 2. Oldenberg, however rejected his anal-
ysis with the words that it “simply did not appear to him to be correct.” 262 Instead,
he proposed a bipartite analysis of the original poem, based on the assumption that
K ṛ ṣ ṇa, in the original text, off ered a twofold response to Arjuna’s indecision:
1 . Verses 11–30: Th ere is no reason to lament. For the spirit, changing its physical
abode is itself eternal, unkillable. 263
2 . Verses 31–38: Furthermore, the soldier’s duty and his fear of dishonor demand
that he fi ght. You conquer and gain the earth, or you fall and enter heaven.2 64
According to Oldenberg, this meant that only the fi rst 38 verses of c hapter 2 (and
possibly chapter 1, although he was silent on this) could have been part of the origi-
nal poem. As he put it, “up to verse 38 everything stands in the closest relation to the
situation, out of which the entire dialogue arose. Arjuna does not want to fi ght and
laments about the ones who will fall in battle; what is at stake is to motivate him to
fi ght, to bring his lament to silence: everything is oriented toward that.” Th ereafter,
however, Oldenberg found everything in the text to be “pure theory.” “Only the brief-
est, most meager references to the occasion for all these discussions are scattered in
between here and there; in essence, it has been forgotten that one fi nds oneself on
the battlefi eld and that, before the battle could begin, the scruples of a central com-
batant had to be allayed.” 265
260 . Ibid., 332.
261 . Ibid.
262 . Ibid., 334, n. 1.
263 . Ibid., 332–33.
264 . Ibid., 333.
265 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 219
Although he thus implicitly built on Jacobi’s ideas of an original epic Gītā,
Oldenberg plainly considered this original poem to be less decisive for Gītā criticism
than the additions that followed thereafter. Calling chapters 2.39 to 12 the “main
body of the entire Gītā, 266 he argued that it was these sections (rather than the origi-
nal Gītā) that had become canonical among Indian authors as the Bhagavadgītā. It
was this expanded poem scholars had in mind when they spoke of the didactic poem
called the Bhagavadgītā. Th us, he argued that Schrader’s remark that “the oldest Gītā
was already at an end at II, 38” was “fully correct,” but only “as long as we wish to
reserve the description Gītā for this little piece.” 267
How did Oldenberg characterize this expanded text? First he noted that it “only
superfi cially paid heed to the external situation.” Instead, its main concern was “Yoga,
especially its orientation toward K ṛ ṣ ṇa.”2 68 Chapters 2.39 to 5, for instance, once
again took up the question “with which the foregoing original sections of the poem
were concerned: whether Arjuna should fi ght.” 269 However, the question was now
“universalized, raised to another level.” 270 Th e answer, “given from the perspective of
Yoga is this. Th e one striving in yoga has to draw his senses back from the world of
objects, he should have equanimity and be internally fi rm, defeat the enemy lust: but
he must act , not seeking the fruits of action, but rather fulfi lling his duty [fi lled] with
inner peace.” 271 In chapter 7, Oldenberg saw “a certain progression.” “Th e theme
of action is now left behind. Th e poem speaks [instead] of meditation.” Likewise,
chapter 8 marked a “great turning point.” “Whereas until then the main concern was
Yoga in general, from now on (VII[I] –XII) K ṛ ṣ ṇa, the m ahāyogeśvara (XI, 9) steps into
the foreground.”2 72 According to Oldenberg, each of these chapters dealt with “indi-
vidual aspects of the theme . . . thus, in the concluding section of [chapter] IX bhakti ,
which, as has been known since a long time, has the closest connection to Yoga; in
[chapter] X the vibhūtaya ḥ of the God. Th e XIth chapter culminates in a majestic
appearance of the God in his universal form. Th us, thereafter (chap. XII) one ought
take the shorter path and worship h im : in immersion, in meditation, in works while
giving up their results, in knowledge, [and] in equanimity.” 273
Even though Oldenberg raised the possibility of certain passages being interpola-
tions into the expanded Gītā itself (for instance, verses 2.26–27, 274 or, alternatively,
2.11–37 275 ; also verses 6.14, 15, 30 and 312 76 and perhaps 5.29 277 ), on the whole he
266 . Ibid.
267 . Ibid., 334 (Th e reference is to the Schrader article cited earlier, “Über Bhagavadgītā
II, 42.”).
268 . Oldenberg, “Bemerkungen zur Bhagavadgītā,” 334.
269 . Ibid., 334–35.
270 . Ibid., 335.
271 . Ibid. (Oldenberg’s emphasis).
272 . Ibid.
273 . Ibid. (Oldenberg’s emphasis).
274 . Ibid., 333, n. 1.
275 . Ibid., 333, n. 2.
276 . Ibid., 336.
277 . Ibid., 336, n. 2.
220 Chapter 03
was more circumspect than either Garbe or Jacobi about the prospect of identify-
ing such changes. As he acknowledged, the “use of source materials which did not
know of K ṛ ṣ ṇa” in chapter 6 could have been the occasion for “the relationship to
this god stepping into the background [in this chapter].” However, he was less will-
ing to concede this of the sections following chapter 12, which he considered to be
clear interpolations into a K ṛ ṣ ṇa Gītā. “In a wide spun context, the Yoga that is dedi-
cated to K ṛ ṣ ṇa and [the theme of] Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s glory was presented. But we cannot read
further in [chapter] XIII without the sense of having landed in completely diff erent
regions.”2 78 Invoking von Humboldt, he argued for seeing the “concluding sections”
of the Bhagavadgītā as “additions.”2 79 Writing that it seemed “beyond doubt” to him
that the “break” between “the great K ṛ ṣ ṇa-Yoga-poem and the appendix or appendi-
ces” lay here, he argued that the Gītā in chapters 13–18 conveyed “doctrines about
issues lying far from its central concerns,” doing so, furthermore, in an altogether
“diff erent, dry and schoolmasterly, indeed, pedantic tone.” 280
We need not pursue Oldenberg’s comments about individual chapters further
here. However, as he strongly defends the idea that the Bhagavadgītā was essen-
tially a poem in worship of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa, we need to examine his views of the K ṛ ṣ ṇa cult
in greater detail, articulated mainly in his 1922 book on the Mahābhārata. As we
have seen, Oldenberg made a distinction between the original epic, Brahmanic addi-
tions, and a K ṛ ṣ ṇaite revision. He regarded the original epic as a heroic war narrative
and contrasted it with the later Mahābhārata, which he attributed to Brahmanic and
K ṛ ṣ ṇaite circles. Writing that the “younger, didactic portions of the epic are no longer
as preferentially [at home] in the northwest, the land of Janamejaya, as the old ones,”
he argued for seeing the epic as having “freed itself from its moorings in its original
motherland.” It was now “bound up with the interests of a stronger and more endur-
ing power than that of this dynasty [i.e., the lineage of Janamejaya, which Oldenberg
considered a historical dynasty],” a power able to “secure the great prestige of the
poem far beyond the domain and the duration of the rule of the Pā ṇḍavas. Th is power
was Brahmanhood.” “And one must add,” he clarifi ed, “linked with this, a second
one: the worship of K ṛ ṣ ṇa.”2 81
How did Oldenberg characterize this shift in authority? According to him, K ṛ ṣ ṇa
was introduced “very early on—perhaps already in the period of the prose-poetry
narrative” into the story. However, he thought his antecedents to lie outside the
epic, specifi cally, in Chāndogya Upanis ̣ad 3.17.6. Declaring that “Vedic antiquity is
thereby secured for him,” he suggested that Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa probably fi rst became familiar to
the epic poets via the “the clan of the Satvants, to which the later but reliable tradi-
tion accords him.” Th is clan, he argued, “had contacts with the Bhāratas of the epic;
contacts that suggest that a Vedic reference [to K ṛ ṣ ṇa] is [intended as] antagonis-
tic.”2 82 In somewhat confused argumentation, he proposed that this reference was
278 . Ibid., 336.
279 . Ibid., 336–37.
280 . Ibid., 337.
281 . Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata , 12.
282 . Ibid., 37.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 221
to a historical K ṛ ṣ ṇa, who later became the prototype of the god K ṛ ṣ ṇa Vāsudeva. As
he put it,
Behind the fi gure of this all too human man, of this hero, [and] without being really
reconciled with it, appears, to the faith of the devotees and to the faith of the epic
as well, the god: a god of a diff erent vitality than the largely faded Vedic gods or the
abstractions of speculation, acting powerfully from person to person, demanding
and repaying the love (bhakti) of his own [followers]—and then, ultimately, soaring
above all limitations of personality, expanding himself to infi nity in the All-Being.2 83
In order to trace the evolution of this conception of K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s “human-divine double-
nature,” Oldenberg took up Garbe’s view of “the real K ṛ ṣ ṇa” as “the chieftain of a
tribe, but also simultaneously the founder of a monotheistic religion independent of
the Veda that gained widespread currency.” However, he rejected the latter’s three-
stage apotheosis, arguing that there is “nothing in his [i.e., K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s] physiognomy to
suggest a religious teacher.”2 84 Rather, he proposed that “the step from prince to god”
would have occurred directly “without the detour via the founder of a religion.” “If
I may trust our fantasy to recognize reality out of the legend across great distances,”
wrote Oldenberg, “we might imagine him as a victorious hero [Siegernatur] to our-
selves, equally irresistible to [his] enemies and to women.” “Even today in India as
nowhere else, one is inclined to deify the most impressive personalities.” “Th is took
place . . . nowhere in India with such great success as precisely here [Oldenberg means
the deifi cation of the hero K ṛ ṣ ṇa].”2 85
Regarding the identifi cation of K ṛ ṣ ṇa with Vi (cid:18) ṇu, Oldenberg argued that, with the
rise in popularity of the cult, “contact” between “the Vedic-Brahmanic Being and this
[cult of] Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa veneration” became unavoidable and an assimilation of the two was
inevitable. Th ough the latter was “essentially foreign to” their ideas of Brahman, the
Brahmans were forced to incorporate K ṛ ṣ ṇa into their pantheon. Inevitably, there
occurred a “mixing-up in which . . . both parts found their due and, in particular, the
Vedic faith, which was already tending to infi rmity with age, was provided fresh
blood. . . .” 286 As Oldenberg described the process, the Brahmans, following “a pro-
cess that we . . . frequently observe even today in India [namely, that] a certain tribe
that had stood apart from Brahmanism up to now comes into contact with it [and]
very soon one discovers that their god is nothing other than one of the great brah-
manic gods,” quickly assimilated “the new god or divine man among the old gods of
the Veda.”2 87 Th ey “practically legitimized [K ṛ ṣ ṇa] through linking him to traditional
divine names and essences,” to produce the composite deity K ṛ ṣ ṇa-Vis ̣ ṇu-Nārāya ṇa. 288
According to Oldenberg, the reason for choosing Vi ṣ ṇu-Nārāya ṇa “in the case of
283 . Ibid., 38–39.
284 . Ibid., 39.
285 . Ibid., 40.
286 . Ibid.
287 . Ibid.
288 . Ibid.
222 Chapter 03
K ṛ ṣ ṇa” was the story of Vi(cid:18) ṇu’s three footsteps: “with his three gigantic footsteps,
he attained the highest peak of the universe. Th ere is to be found ‘the highest foot-
print of Vi ṣ ṇu’ or ‘Vis ̣ ṇu’s highest abode’.” 289 In contrast, Nārāya ṇa was “originally a
totally independent god from Vi ṣ ṇu, which the theological fantasy of the later Vedic
period had created . . . [and] in [whom] . . . are embodied confused representations of
a primordial sacrifi cer, of an essence that is associated with the emergence of the
cosmic order, indeed, an essence that includes the universe in itself.” Yet, for reasons
not wholly clear, “this Nārāya ṇa [was] now fused together in many places—by no
means everywhere—with Vi ṣ ṇu and with K ṛ ṣ ṇa Vāsudeva.” 290 While the processes at
work in this homologization were not fully clear to Oldenberg,2 91 he insisted that the
theory of K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s euhemerization (and only it!) held the key to the reconstruction
of the epic. As he put it, “Now [coming] back from this detour concerning K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s
essence to his role in the epic. How do these developments in the history of religions
refl ect themselves in this [i.e., the epic] and its development?” 292 His response to this
question was threefold:
1. He described the diff erent passages in which K ṛ ṣ ṇa appears in diff erent roles or
guises as follows:
One encounters K ṛ ṣ ṇa again and again, not just in individual episodes, but through-
out the entire poem. Th ere are disbelievers who deny his divinity. For the one who
sees rightly, in spite of his human appearance, nothing is more certain than this. He
concludes the closest alliance and brother-in-law-hood with Arjuna. . . . He becomes
Arjuna’s charioteer, continuously supports the Pā ṇḍavas’ side; sanctions, as we have
seen, questionable deeds of these heroes by his divine authority. “Where there is
K ṛ ṣ ṇa, there is victory!” His role reaches its climax when, in the Bhagavadgītā imme-
diately before the great battle, he reveals to his friend that powerful and deep image
of the world and the beyond, in the midst of which his own divine-human, divine
form [gottmenschliche, göttliche Gestalt] stands. 293
2. He suggested that certain passages were more indicative of the older epic than
others:
In all this, I cannot avoid the impression that we would hardly encounter K ṛ ṣ ṇa and
the veneration of K ṛ ṣ ṇa in the o riginal epic—if we could only reach back to it. By
nature, this cycle of legends and that of the Bhāratas appears to have been totally
separate. 294
289 . Ibid., 40–41.
290 . Ibid., 41.
291 . “Whether thus, that he fi rst merged with Vi s ṇ ụ and then Kr ṣṇ a with this double-essence,”
he asked, or, “did the representations of the highest transcendental abode (Vi ṣ ṇu) and of the
fi rst origin of the world and the cosmic order (Nārāyan ̣a) attract each other at fi rst and there-
after poured out their fullness in the human who had become god (K ṛ ṣ ṇa), who now appeared
as a god who had become a man?” Ibid.
292 . Ibid., 42.
293 . Ibid.
294 . Ibid. (Oldenberg’s emphasis).
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 223
3. He argued that the older passages of the epic would have been those closer to
Vedic ideas and that these, by their very nature, could not have included K ṛ ṣ ṇa
as a deity:
If one examines the old prose-poetry sections, one will fi nd in them a world of ideas
that stood so close to the Veda, that one can with diffi culty imagine the veneration
of K ṛ ṣ ṇa in it. And does not Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa also carry a trace of foreignness in relation to
his surroundings even in the remaining poem so often as he is present there? Not a
fi ghting hero, but a charioteer. Th eosophist on the battlefi eld. Counselor in matters
that could also have occurred without his advice, and where he is often only there
in order to render questionable actions acceptable—matters that would hardly have
appeared questionable to high antiquity. 295
As Oldenberg told it, there would have taken place a process of “confusion” of the
“Vedic-Brahmanic catalogue of ideas with the K ṛ ṣ ṇaite,” until it “appeared out of the
question to the narrators, that this personality towering above all existence could have
been uninvolved in the signifi cant events, of which they knew to report.” 296 However,
even though they chose to incorporate this folk hero, now elevated to the status of a
deity, into their epic, the results could not be very satisfactory. As Oldenberg told it,
the central narrative of the epic was concerned with “a battle between warring cous-
ins.” 297 Th e introduction of K ṛ ṣ ṇa into this epic, especially in the crucial scene of the
Bhagavadgītā where Arjuna asks him to station his chariot between the two armies,
had something out of place about it: “How peculiar,” Oldenberg wrote, “these theo-
sophic teachings at s uch a moment, this sudden silencing of the noise of battle in the
face of a mystic otherworldly stillness.” 298 Recalling Holtzmann’s ideas of an original
epic encounter between two heroes, he therefore proposed that the Bhagavadgītā
must have originally been a much shorter poem, tailored to the exigencies of the epic
situation:
Indeed, it seems, in fact, that the dialogue of the two was originally much shorter,
and was more directly concerned with the single question of whether Arjuna would
do the right thing by fi ghting. Only later did one add at this point the main por-
tion of the Bhagavadgītā as it now exists including further additions that accrued to
it: not a poem that originally existed independently, but was composed for precisely
this passage in the epic. 299
In time, however, this poem underwent a reworking as the Brahmans felt compelled to
off er some form of ethical justifi cation for Arjuna’s actions. Notes Oldenberg, “God’s
closest friend was about to perform deeds along with him that appeared to be a major
295 . Ibid., 42–43.
296 . Ibid., 43.
297 . Ibid., 3.
298 . Ibid., 71 (Oldenberg’s emphasis).
299 . Ibid.
224 Chapter 03
sin to the strict morals of many. Th at required a justifi cation.” Since it was precisely
K ṛ ṣ ṇa, the spokesperson or the fi gurehead of the new cult, who was endowed the task
of off ering such a justifi cation “in philosophical contemplation,” it was also “under-
standable that the K ṛ ṣ ṇa faith—one can say, the faith of the Bhāgavata sect—used
this opportunity to present his essence, to strengthen his claim with all [possible]
emphasis here within this epic.” 300
By premising his reconstruction of the Bhagavadgītā on a theory of the diviniza-
tion of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa, Oldenberg was able to evade judgment on the pantheism controversy
and yet enter the “original Gītā” debate with a “critical” stance. But while he overtly
rejected Garbe’s reconstruction, he actually reinstated almost every aspect of the
latter’s theory of a historical evolution of the Bhagavadgītā—albeit now embedded
at a deeper level of the text. Whereas Garbe had made use of an extrinsic framework
to explain the Gītā’s form, Oldenberg, by resorting to a theory of euhemerization,
was able to embed the Gītā’s supposed evolution in the very process of composition
itself. In place of Garbe’s narrative of a theistic Gītā with later pantheistic elements,
he was able to off er an account of the Gītā that could make sense of both its theistic
and pantheistic moments by pointing to diff erent ways in which K ṛ ṣ ṇa had been
regarded throughout history. Since K ṛ ṣ ṇa had aspects of a human, a hero, and a god,
his interpretation of the Bhagavadgītā was fully capable of accounting for diff er-
ences in the text without having to resort to a theory of its progressive infi ltration
by pantheistic doctrines. As he argued against Garbe, it was possible that the sources
the Gītā’s poet relied on were already of a composite nature. Th ere was neither a
pure Sām ̇khya nor a pure Yoga; instead, Oldenberg advocated that the yogic doc-
trines of the poem had themselves been modulated so as to lead up to the worship
of K ṛ ṣ ṇa. Th is Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa, furthermore, was not simply the folk god of a popular cult; he
was already a composite of the minor divinity and the Brahmanic Vi ṣ ṇu-Nārāya ṇa.
One did not need to seek an external explanation for the Bhagavadgītā’s manifold
doctrines; the reason for its composite appearance was rooted in the history of reli-
gions itself.
RESISTANCES TO MODERNITY
Th is radical historicization of faith would not be without its discontents. Some of
the earliest voices of protest would come from within Protestant theology itself.
One such voice would be the Evangelical theologian Rudolf Otto (1869–1937), who
in numerous works such as Das Heilige (Th e Idea of the Holy ) contested the reigning
orthodoxy of his time. 301 As Otto also took a stance on the original Gītā in three
300 . Ibid.
301 . Rudolf Otto, D as Heilige: Über das Irrationale in der Idee des Göttlichen und sein
Verhältnis zum Rationalen (Breslau: Trewendt und Granier, 1917), translated into English
by John W. Harvey as Th e Idea of the Holy: An Inquiry into the Non-Rational Factor in the Idea
of the Divine and Its Relation to the Rational (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1923).
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 225
books published between 1934 and 1935, his views are relevant to our review of the
German Gītā here. Before we take a look at his ideas of the Bhagavadgītā, however,
let us fi rst consider his views on historicism.
Born September 25, 1869, into a family of conservative Lutherans, Otto initially
studied theology in Erlangen. After receiving a doctorate for a dissertation on Luther
in 1898, he turned his attention to a defense of personal religious experience against
naturalistic and historicist currents. (Looking back at these years, Otto reported
being disturbed even as a child by unorthodox currents: “In school, in the church and
at home I was raised in the forms of traditional orthodoxy [Strenggläubigkeit] and
this type of faith appeared to me not only best, but also the only one. . . . [N] ow while
in school we began to hear of innovations and innovators, who barging into theology,
shattering its foundations: dazzling [us] with their methods and leading [us] away
from the old truth. . . . I wanted to acquire the methods for defense from men of the
old school.” 302 ) An early work, N aturalistische und religiöse Weltansicht ,3 03 was dedi-
cated to a defense of religion against scientifi c naturalism by distinguishing between
two equal but fundamentally distinct perspectives, the naturalistic and idealistic. Th e
main target of Otto’s criticism in this early stage was the evolutionary theories of
Darwin, but by the time he published his later works K antische-Fries’sche Anthropologie
and D as Heilige , his intellectual horizon had broadened. Alongside scientifi c natural-
ism, he now began to see historicism as the main threat to his discipline. Gooch, for
instance, argues that “Otto’s Neo-Friesian position is best understood as a reaction
to historicism, where that term refers both to the general relativization of cultural
norms as a result of the accumulation of historical knowledge in the nineteenth cen-
tury; and, more specifi cally, to Troeltsch’s attempt in A bsolutheit des Christentums to
establish normative means by undertaking an a posteriori comparison of the great
historical formations within the religious history of mankind.” 304 Against the back-
ground of these historicist movements, Otto sought to demonstrate the existence of
a faculty of religious sentiment in man independent of its historical manifestations.
As he put it in his foreword to K antische-Fries’sche Anthropologie :
Like all history of spirit, the history of religion too is a history of the development
and unfolding and impact of inclinations and capacities of the rational human spirit.
And its history will become clear to us [only] to the extent that the essence of this
spirit itself, its inclinations and their relationship to each other and the manner of
their reciprocal eff ects, becomes clear to us [as well].3 05
302 . Rudolf Otto, “Vita zum I. Examen [1891/92],” cited in R. Boeke, “Rudolf Otto,
Leben und Werke,” Numen 14, no. 2 (1967): 131–32.
303 . Rudolf Otto, Naturalistische und religiöse Weltansicht, PhD diss., University of
Tübingen, 1905, simultaneously published as Naturalistische und religiöse Weltansicht
(Tübingen: H. Laupp, 1905).
304 . Todd A. Gooch, Th e Numinous and Modernity: An Interpretation of Rudolf Otto’s
Philosophy of Religion (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2000), 75.
305 . Rudolf Otto, K antische-Fries’sche Anthropologie und ihre Anwendung auf die Th eologie.
Zur Einleitung in die Glaubenslehre für Studenten der Th eologie (Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1909).
226 Chapter 03
In the same work, Otto also noted that “supernaturalism and historicism fail to
supply a measure and a principle of the truth in religion. Th e history of religions
[Religionsgeschichte] expands into titanic dimensions. But how does it hope to
mature from a mere description of religion into a science of religion, if it is noth-
ing but a history of religions [Religionsgeschichte]. . . . Indeed, how can it even be
a history of religions, unless one does not fi rst possess, even if in dim outline, a
principle in oneself according to which we [are able to] select the historical subject
matter to say nothing of its classifi cation?”3 06 Th e solution, for Otto, lay in identify-
ing a “ spiritus sanctus in corde ,” an intuition of the holy spirit within the heart. 307
Based on this idea of an innate knowledge of the holy (which, under the infl uence of
Kant’s language, itself mediated via Troeltsch’s notion of the “religious a priori,” he
also described as the “religious a priori” 308 ), Otto argued that history of religions was
insuffi cient to properly understand the phenomenon of religious life. To begin with,
it was insuffi cient as a science:
Th e science of religion [Religionswissenschaft] is not the description of religion, as
little as jurisprudence [Rechtswissenschaft] is the description of an extant law or of
laws in general. Jurisprudence seeks to determine the validity of law and the valid
law [in a particular case]. In this goal, legal history is only a means to an end for
it. [Similarly,] [t] he science of religion seeks [to determine] the validity of religion
and the valid religion. Since, for historical-critical reasons and for reasons [lying] in
religion itself, it is denied a recourse to supernatural criteria, it must proceed like
moral, legal and, in general, like all human sciences [Geisteswissenschaft]. 309
But Otto’s critique was not restricted to the simple observation that in order to be
able to recognize the phenomena of religious life (to say nothing of being able to
study them) we need a principle. Rather, in focusing upon historical manifestations
of the religious feeling, the history of religions had gone astray. It had missed out on a
viii. (Th e foreword is not reprinted in the English translation, Rudolf Otto, Th e Philosophy
of Religion based on Kant and Fries , trans. E. B. Dicker [New York: Richard R. Smith, 1931],
which features a foreword by W. Tudor Jones instead. Due to weaknesses in the English
translation, we have preferred to translate from the German throughout rather than make
use of Dicker’s edition.)
306 . Otto, Kantische-Fries’sche Anthropologie , 3.
307 . For the origins of this expression in Otto’s dissertation on Luther’s doctrine of the
intuition of the Holy Spirit, see Gooch, Th e Numinous and Modernity , 73–77. Gooch rightly
points to the origins of this doctrine in a “specifi c, historically localizable tradition” and
argues for seeing Otto’s later thought as “transpos[ing]” “this Lutheran doctrine . . . onto
the history of religion as a whole” with the “ testimonium spiritus sanctum internum ” con-
ceived of as a kind of “general capacity for recognizing the holy in history (DH 174), and
for distinguishing the relative validity of individual manifestations of the holy.” Ibid., 76.
308 . On the emergence and popularization of this term in a spectrum of nineteenth-
century authors, among them Troeltsch and Otto, see Mark D. Chapman, Ernst Troeltsch and
Liberal Th eology: Religion and Cultural Synthesis in Wilhelmine Germany (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2001).
309 . Otto, Kantische-Fries’sche Anthropologie , 193.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 227
more fundamental domain, a domain that was the wellspring of all religious experi-
ence and, as such, had to be presupposed in all positivistic researches into the phe-
nomenon of religion. Adopting a term from Fries, Otto called this stage of primitive
experience the domain of “Ahndung” (a “foreboding” or an “intimation”).3 10 As the
“epistemological mode of ‘unmediated knowledge’ ” (Kleeberg), Ahndung (or Ahnung
as it was more commonly spelled after the early nineteenth century) corresponded
to the most fundamental intuition of the holy in man. Following Fries (for whom
it delineated the basic domain of experience for knowledge of the eternal 311 ), Otto
argued that A hnung off ered a basic domain for experience and analysis of spiritual
existence. According to him, “[caught] in the power of obscure feelings of the beauti-
ful and the sublime in all its forms in natural and spiritual life, we have an immediate
understanding of the eternal in the temporal and of the temporal as a manifesta-
tion of the eternal.” “Distinctly and positively, albeit inexpressibly,” he declared, “the
world of faith announces itself in the world of knowledge through ‘Ahnung’.” 312
In his later work D as Heilige , he would repeat this call for analyzing the phenom-
enon of religious life out of a domain of “principles a priori, which no experience
and no ‘history’ can give.”3 13 In his opinion, the history of religions, which focused
merely upon identifying and categorizing diff erent forms of religious life, was insuf-
fi cient to answer the question of what religion was or whence it arose. Concretely,
what was required alongside the empirical study of religion was a philosophy and a
psychology of religion, or, rather, a philosophy of religion that ultimately went over
into a psychology of religion. Moreover, as the science of religion, history of religions
had fundamentally missed its aim if it thought it could rest content with the mere
taxonomic classifi cation of religious phenomena. Like “all human sciences,” it was
fi rst and foremost an experience of formation of consciousness. Th us, while history
of religion proceeded from the insight into the innate disposition toward religion
in every human being, insofar as it was a human science, its object was not distinct
from history of religions itself. Otto thus essentially overcame the deadend of his-
torical consciousness. On the one hand, history of religions had to recognize the
process of evolution in history. But, on the other, he was taking the discipline itself
back into history, making it a part of the very same evolution it claimed to study. As
such, it aimed not only at “understanding religion in its historical manifestation and
310 . Rudolf Otto, “Wissen, Glaube und Ahnung,” Die Christliche Welt 48 (1908): 818–22.
Th e title plays on a work of the same title by Fries (Jakob Friedrich Fries, Wissen, Glaube
und Ahndung [Jena: J. C. G. Göpferdt, 1805]).
311 . As Kleeberg puts it, “For Fries, to believe meant to deny all limitations on knowl-
edge, while A hnung formed a necessary prerequisite for real scientifi c knowledge, since it
was ‘the feeling that the eternal was refl ected, albeit in an imperfect and restricted man-
ner, in the fi nite.’ Hence, Ahnung showed that causal explanations were comprised within
a realm of absolute causes, which the beauty and harmony of nature refl ected.” Bernhard
Kleeberg, “Th e Will to Meaning: Protestant Reactions to Darwinism in Nineteenth-Century
Germany,” in Nature and Scripture in the Abrahmic Religions, 1700–Present , vol. 1, ed. Jitse
M. van der Meer and Scott Mandelbrote (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2008), 267.
312 . Otto, Kantische-Fries’sche Anthropologie , 83.
313 . Otto, Das Heilige , 206.
228 Chapter 03
multiplicity, its comparison and evaluation, criticism, clarifi cation,” but also, “when
possible,” it aimed at its “further development.”3 14 In fact, it became “a technique for
the formation [Bildung] of religion and the religious community.” 315 A further conse-
quence of this Neo-Kantian approach to faith was that theology no longer had to be
“a supernaturally intuited physics and metaphysics of heavenly objects.” Rather, as
the “science of religion,” it could aim both at theoretical knowledge and at “the practi-
cal exercise and care of religion.” 316
In critiquing the historians of religion for their emphasis on empirical research, Otto
was discretely trying to return theological questions to the center of the search for dif-
ferent forms of religious life. (As Gooch imagines it, in Das Heilige Otto is engaged in
an interior conversation with German audiences, which runs as follows: “religion is not
at all what you have come to think of it as being. It is not merely the refuge of those
weak-minded, stodgy, moralistic people who are its most visible representatives. Indeed,
it is the highest aspiration of all truly passionate and creative individuals. And once you
have seen what religion r eally is, you need not, indeed, you cannot, despise it.”3 17 ) Th e
real aim of Otto’s argument, however, was not simply to reconcile faith with history.
Rather, he wished to do so under the sign of a specifi c faith, namely, Christianity. As
Gooch notes, Otto’s claim that “the capacity to recognize the holy in its appearances (the
sensus numinis ) undergoes a process of education in the course of history, similar to the
education of taste (the sensus communis ) described by Kant in the Th ird Critique , whereby
‘false’ applications of the category of the holy are gradually recognized and rejected” has
direct consequences for Christian theology. In his assessment,
Das Heilige . . . proposes a solution to the theological impasse produced by histori-
cism. Otto wants to show, without appealing to supernatural causality, 1) that
Christ is the supreme manifestation of the holy, 2) that the e xperience of Christ as
a revelation of the holy is still possible for modern persons, 3) that the religious
signifi cance of Christ is still the same today as it was for the original Christian com-
munity, and 4) that these conclusions are immune to “the accidental fl uctuation of
exegetical results and the torment of historical justifi cations.” 318
Das Heilige was thus as much a contribution to the historical grounding of a spe-
cifi c faith as it was a philosophical grounding of the idea of faith in general. Born
out of Otto’s specifi c experiences, it was nonetheless an attempt to locate those
experiences within a broader epistemological and historical narrative. 319 And though
314 . Otto, Kantische-Fries’sche Anthropologie , 84.
315 . Ibid.
316 . Ibid.
317 . Gooch, Th e Numinous and Modernity , 210 (emphasis in original).
318 . Ibid., 22.
319 . For Otto’s fi rsthand account of his experience of the holy, see later. Ernst Benz also
reports that Otto recounted such an experience to him, an experience “granted . . . primar-
ily not through the lecture of holy texts, but as a spontaneous religious experience in a
Jewish synagogue.” Ernst Benz, “Rudolf Otto als Th eologe und Persönlickeit,” in R udolf
Otto’s Bedeutung für die Religionswissenschaft und die Th eologie heute , ed. Ernst Benz
(Leiden: Brill, 1971), 36.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 229
Otto tried to give his work the appearance of cosmopolitanism, journeying to India,
China, and Japan to investigate those countries’ ideas of faith, his overarching out-
look remained peculiarly parochial. “Otto’s political and theological views emerge
from a typically German vision: cultivation [Bildung], especially the cultivation of a
personality, which attains its high point in the study of ethical-religious worldviews
and the history of religions. Th is cultivation is the source of all true freedom, for it
develops the good will and the religious experience of the individual.” 320
In spite of his conservative outlook, however, Otto was far from advocating
a return to the exegetic tradition. On the contrary—and here one sees the deep-
est infl uence of Luther on his thought—he wished to make a personal experi-
ence of the divine the centerpiece of his restitution of theology. As Alles puts it,
“the starting-point and aim of [his] analysis of the holy is the numinous experi-
ence of infi nity which human speech can hardly express.” 321 In the fourth chapter
of D as Heilige , via a reference to the mystic Gerhard Teerstegen (1697–1769), Otto
attempted to develop the essence of this experience in terms of what he called the
“ mysterium tremendum .” Distinguishing the mysterious object from all “subsequent
‘rationalizations’,”3 22 he argued that “the truly ‘mysterious’ object is ungraspable and
incomprehensible [ungreifbar und unbegreifbar] not only because my knowledge has
certain limits that cannot be overcome but because I here encounter ‘something com-
pletely other’ that in its kind and essence is incommensurable with my essence and
before which I therefore recoil in awestruck amazement.” 323 But albeit the numinous
experience refuses itself to speech, Otto thought that it could be analyzed in terms
of three moments:
1 . “Th e moment of the ‘tremendum’.”3 24
2 . “Th e moment of the overpowering (‘majestas’).”3 25
3 . “Th e moment of the ‘energetic’ [Energischen].”3 26
For the fi rst of these, Otto preferentially cited examples from the Old Testament.
Th us, he noted that the Hebrew h iqdish (which he translated as “heilig” or “holy”)
contained the essence of what he meant with “tremendum.” Th e Old Testament, he
argued, was “especially rich in parallel expressions for this feeling.” Citing Exodus
23:27 and Job 9:34 and 13:21, he argued that “the emat Yahweh, the ‘divine ter-
ror’ [Gottesschrecken], that Yahweh can radiate, indeed, unleash [upon humans]”
constituted a paradigmatic example of the “tremendum.”3 27 Otto placed this feeling
at the lowest scale of religious sentiment. “From it,” he argued, “and from its fi rst
320 . Gregory D. Alles, “Rudolf Otto (1869–1937),” in K lassiker der Religionswissenschaft.
Von Friedrich Schleiermacher bis Mircea Eliade , ed. Axel Michaels (Munich: C. H. Beck,
1997), 203.
321 . Ibid., 204.
322 . Otto, Das Heilige , 30.
323 . Ibid., 31.
324 . Ibid., 14–21.
325 . Ibid., 22–25.
326 . Ibid., 25–27.
327 . Ibid., 15.
230 Chapter 03
emergence in the minds of primordial humanity, all religious historical development
has proceeded.”3 28 Th is “numinous awe” he further claimed is the “genuine charac-
teristic of the so-called ‘religions of the primitives’ in the form of ‘demonic dread’ as
a naïve, crude, and fi rst stimulus.”3 29 However, beyond the t remendum that denoted
the “absolute unapproachability” (of God), Otto argued that “another moment must
supervene in order to exhaust it [the concept of mysterium ] completely: the moment
of ‘power’, ‘force’, ‘overwhelming force’, ‘absolute overwhelming force’.” Adopting the
term “majestas” for this feeling, Otto argued that “the moment of the tremendum
is then more fully described as ‘tremenda majestas’.” 330 Under the latter concept, he
subsumed phenomena such as Schleiermacher’s idea of a feeling of dependence and
the mystic’s experience of loss of selfhood. (In fact, Otto regarded “identifi cation
with the transcendent” as that which is “in terms of power and reality absolutely
superior , [and hence,] simultaneously irrational” 331 to be the defi ning characteristic
of the mystical experience.) Finally, he also included a third characteristic under the
concept of mysterium , which he circumscribed with expressions such as “vitality,
passion, emotional being, will, strength, movement, arousal, activity, and drive.” 332
Arguing that the energetic was “the moment that has everywhere generated the most
and strongest protest against the ‘philosophical’ God of merely rational speculation
and defi nition,” he argued for seeing “Luther’s ‘omnipotentia dei’ in his ‘De servo
arbitrio’ as nothing but the combination of ‘majestas’ as the absolute superiority
with this ‘energy’ as a restless and all-encompassing drive, [as] activity, conquest,
and life.” 333 Th e numinous experience was thus properly characterized as a mysterium
that was tremendum or awe-inspiring, m ajestas or overwhelming in its force or power,
and, fi nally, as energetic or enlivened. To this tripartite characterization, Otto also
added a further (superordinate) characterization. According to him, the m ysterium
was not only characterized by the “moment of the repellent tremendum with the
‘majestas’ . . . It is manifestly at the same time also peculiarly attractive , involving,
fascinating , which, together with the repellent moment of the tremendum creates
an oddly contrasting harmony.”3 34 Calling this “the strangest and most signifi cant
phenomenon of all in the history of religion,” he argued that “as horrifi c and fearful
as the demonic-divine can appear to the mind, so enticing and attractive is it at the
same time.” “For it, the mysterium, is not simply the miraculous [Wunderbare], it is
also the marvellous [Wundervolle].” 335
Although Otto analyzed the mysterium in terms of four moments, it was clear from
his discussion that two of these took precedence for him over all others. Correctly
formulated, mysterium did not refer to just any mystery, but to that mystery which
328 . Ibid., 16.
329 . Ibid., 18.
330 . Ibid., 22.
331 . Ibid., 24–25 (Otto’s emphasis).
332 . Ibid., 25.
333 . Ibid., 26.
334 . Ibid., 39 (Otto’s emphasis).
335 . Ibid., 39.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 231
provoked awe in the witness. Th us, its full name, as Otto made clear, was actually
mysterium tremendum . 336 In his words, “the epithet tremendum indicated, fi rst and
foremost, the positive ‘How’ of the matter.”3 37 Th us, properly speaking, tremendum
was not simply a “moment” in the mystery, but constituted its essence. It is what
set apart the divine mystery from all other (lesser) mysteries. Likewise, he placed
the moment of the fascinosum on the same level as the m ysterium tremendum itself.
Fascinosum was not a subordinate moment, but a parallel aspect of the latter includ-
ing its lesser moments such as m ajestas . As he put it in the chapter titled “Analogies”
(summing up the results of the investigation of the preceding chapter on “Th e
Fascinosum”), “in order to adequately describe this second aspect of the numinous,
we had to add to the ‘mysterium tremendum’ from on high that it is simultaneously
an absolute fascinosum. And in this infi nitely h orrifying which is simultaneously the
infi nitely m arvellous , the m ysterium has its own p ositive content, which announces
itself to the sentiment.” 338 Th e mysterium tremendum ( fascinosum ) constituted the
essence of the religious experience, to which on the subjective side corresponded
the “ testimonium spiritus sanctum internum .” When these two came together, when
“alongside the inner revelation [Off enbarung] out of the spirit there was the outer
revelation [Off enbarung] of the divine,” then one could speak truly of the “manifes-
tation [Erscheinung] [and not just an intimation] of the holy.”3 39
A REVELATION AND A MYSTERY
Th ough better known as a theologian, Otto was also a scholar of religion. Indeed, his
anthropological approach to religion practically required some knowledge of other
religious traditions, since many of his claims about the innate nature of the religious
instinct or drive in man were actually empirical claims, based on the observation
of the universality of the phenomenon of religion. Nonetheless, he was far from
renouncing the claim (to priority) of theology. As he put it in the foreword to his fi rst
book on Indian religions, the goal of his book was “not ‘Indological’ or ‘religion his-
torical’ [religionsgeschichtlich], but rather ‘religion informative’ [religionskundlich].”
“As a theologian ,” he wrote, “I am interested in this religious formation and the theo-
logian may not let himself be preempted or overtaken by anyone in [the task of]
grasping such a noble growth [i.e., Hinduism] in the purest form possible and of
giving it space to unfold its innermost essence without hinderance.” 340 Otto thus saw
a parity between the history of religions and theology. In his opinion, the two disci-
plines were related fi elds—the former providing positivistic researches to the latter,
the latter providing ultimate meaning and clarifi cation to the former—but neither
336 . Ibid., 13.
337 . Ibid., 14 (quotation marks the authors’ addition).
338 . Ibid., 52 (Otto’s emphasis).
339 . Ibid., 169.
340 . Rudolf Otto, V ischnu-Nārāyana: Texte zur indischen Gottesmystik I (Jena: Diederich,
1917), 7 (Otto’s emphasis).
232 Chapter 03
able to claim precedence over the other. Indeed, insofar as the theologian was inter-
ested in gathering materials (and in this task, he could not permit himself to be led
by the historians of religion, but had to carry out his own researches), he conducted
himself too as a scholar of religion. But, and this was crucial to Otto, whereas the
scholars of religion were content with identifying religious plurality (leading to reli-
gious relativism), the theologian could not rest content with constating the existence
of relative notions of value. Indeed, for the reasons examined above, this was logi-
cally and empirically impossible. Th us, while the theologian’s (positivistic) researches
were to lay “the groundwork for a comparison and a mutual evaluation of value and
superiority,” these things, according to Otto, could not “infl uence the presentation
itself.” 341 Questions of value were to enter later.
Among the many religions Otto studied, none seems to have been as important
to him as Hinduism. In all he published twelve books on Hinduism, including fi ve
translations 3 42 and one edited volume. 343 In the same year as Das Heilige appeared,
he published the volume V ischnu-Nārāyana: Texte zur indischen Gottesmystik contain-
ing selections from the Mahābhārata (above all, the Śvetadvīpa episode from the
Nārāya ṇīya) and other texts. At the center of this book, however, stood his interest
in understanding the parallels between Christianity and Hinduism (more specifi -
cally, that subset of it associated with the worship of Vi ṣ ṇu)—parallels he took as
evidence of “the inner kinship of the religious urge and its expressions in man as
such.”3 44 Motivated by a desire to understand this universal desire and convinced that
Vai ṣ ṇavism off ered the closest analogue to Christianity,3 45 Otto undertook to present
some central texts of the Vai ṣ ṇava tradition accompanied by a commentary.
341 . Ibid.
342 . In addition to the aforementioned V ischnu Nārāyana: Texte zur indischen Gottesmystik
I , translations of Rāmanuja’s Siddhānta (S iddhānta des Rāmanuja: Texte zur indischen
Gottesmystik II [Jena: E. Diederich, 1917]), Śrīnivāsa’s Yatīndramatadīpikā (D īpika des
Nivāsa. Eine indische Heilslehre [Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1916]), the Kat ḥ a Upani ṣad (D ie
Kat ̣ha Upanis ̣ad. Übertragen und erläutert [Berlin: Alfred Töpelmann, 1936]), and of course
the translation of the Bhagavadgītā.
343 . Rudolf Otto, ed. Rabindranath Tagore’s Bekenntnis (Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1931).
Th e other volumes were: C hristianity and the Indian Religion of Grace (Madras: Christian
Literature Society for India, 1928), Die Gnadenreligion Indiens und das Christentum
(Gotha: L. Klotz, 1930) (a revised, expanded version of the 1928 text), G ottheit und
Gottheiten der Arier (Giessen: A. Töpelmann, 1932), Varuna-Hymnen des Rig-Veda. Vol. 1
of R eligionsgeschichtliche Texte , ed. Gustav Mensching (Bonn: Ludwig Röhrscheid 1948),
and the two books on the Bhagavadgītā already cited. To this list, one could also add his
West-Östliche Mystik. Vergleich und Unterscheidung zur Wesensdeutung (Leipzig: Leopold
Klotz, 1926), a comparison of Śam ̣kara and Meister Eckhart.
344 . Otto, Vischnu Nārāyana , 4.
345 . Initially, Otto argued that “the analogy” between Christianity and Vai ṣ ṇavism
“consist[ed] solely in the fact that it, too, [i.e., Vai ṣ ṇavism] is a salvifi c religion
[ Erlösungsreligion ] in the strictest sense of the word.” “To fi nd salvation [ Heil ],” he wrote,
“specifi cally, other worldly and transcendental salvation [Heil] is the entire goal of the reli-
gion.” But, then, noting that this was the goal of “all other religions of India too,” he argued
that the “further and specifi c analogy” of Vai ṣ ṇavism to Christianity was its “highly devel-
oped theistic concept of God. Furthermore, its doctrine of salvation as experienced and
received through the grace [ Gnade ] of divinity. [And furthermore its doctrine of] s alvifi c
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 233
In this early work, Otto did not focus specifi cally on the Bhagavadgītā.3 46 In his
foreword, he referred the reader to Garbe’s edition. In a summary that clearly betrays
the infl uence of Garbe’s work, he noted:
Th e Gītā, as it is present to us today, is a text in which the religion of a strictly
personal god and of the faithful surrender to him in [the attitude of] Bhakti are
peculiarly mixed and crossed with the theomonism and the ‘Advaita’ of Upanishadic
speculation and which is simultaneously combined with the emergent systems of
Sānkhya and Yoga. But Garbe has made it highly probable in his introduction to [his
edition of] the Gītā that the present Gītā came about when an older, simpler, and
more more equivocal work was defaced by insertions from Vedic priestly theology
and changes in the text itself. 347
But while Otto adopted Garbe’s thesis of an earlier theistic Gītā corrupted by panthe-
istic interpolations, he was interested in it only as it furthered his own ideas of the
origins of Vai ṣ ṇavism. Th us, prior to his résumé of Garbe’s views, he argued that “we
still possess obscure information about very old religious and cultic communities, for
whom Vishnu, Nārāyana, Bhagavant or similar types of divinities were a god, perhaps
even before he acquired the theological honor of [being] Brahman: [information]
about the Sātavatas, Vaikhānasas, Bhāgavatas, Pāñcarātras, the Krishna worship-
pers, among others.” Placing the origins of these groups “even before the appearance
of Buddha and the literature of the Upanishads,” Otto argued that “Vishnu-Nārāyana
then invaded these at an early date and was glorifi ed in a number of them [the refer-
ence is not clear, perhaps he means the Upani ṣads].” Further, he took “control” of
the “great epics of India, the Rāmāyana and the Mahābhārata” and “soon, perhaps
already in the second century before Christ, his veneration attained a remarkable
majesty and clarity.” “For here,” wrote Otto, “arises the Bhagavad-Gītā = ‘the doctri-
nal poem of the Sublime One’ that is embedded in the Mahābhārata, the holiest text
of all Vaishnavas and simultaneously of all faithful Hindus everywhere.” 348
Otto’s thesis of the Bhagavadgītā’s emergence was more complex than Garbe’s.
Although he shared the latter’s suspicion of a pantheistic (or, rather, as he called
it, a monistic) revision of the original Gītā, he was more interested in developing a
bliss [H eilsgut ] as union with God.” “For,” he clarifi ed, “the Vishnu religion too tends toward
mysticism, but its mysticism is ‘god mysticism’ [Gottesmystik], theistic mysticism, and
is thus distinguished as such from the impersonal mysticism of the strict Advaita doc-
trine.” To this, Otto also added one fi nal point of “analogy to Christianity”: “its religious
basic functions as ‘Bhakti’, which means faithful and devoted surrender [G laubens- und
Liebes-Hingabe ], and as ‘Prapatti’, which means an e quanimity [ Gelassenheit ] that disposes
of all personal work.” Ibid., 5–6 (all italics Otto’s).
346 . But see the footnote in his Das Heilige , where he notes that “nowhere can the irratio-
nal moment of ‘(cid:21) (cid:14) γ (cid:10)’ [passion or frenzy] be better studied than in this [eleventh] chapter
of the Bhagavadgītā that belongs among the indisputably classic [examples] of religious
doctrine.” Otto, Das Heilige , 77, n. 1.
347 . Otto, Vischnu Nārāyana , 16.
348 . Ibid.
234 Chapter 03
thesis of the poem’s evolution as a foil for his own ideas of religious development
than in the Gītā itself. Garbe’s work, for him, represented an example of what could
be achieved through “philological textual purifi cation”: “a text of great simplicity and
beauty with the primitive traits of a primitive religion, which might have quite likely
existed at fi rst as a tribal religion.” But its real value lay in what it revealed about the
universal (and uniform) development of religion across the globe. Arguing that “the
development here [i.e., in the Bhagavadgītā],” “would not have been dissimilar to
that on Semitic and, especially, Israeli terrain (the Egyptian, too, off ers parallels),”3 49
Otto declared:
It is not a perfected monotheism that stands at the beginning [of the history of
religions], but the cult of a tribal god, who is to be worshipped by this tribe as its
God and exclusively so, which does not rule out that other tribes and peoples have
their own respective god, but who is nonetheless the ‘sole God’ for his people and,
as such, a ‘zealous’ and that means, a ‘jealous’ God, who demands from his followers
‘one-pointedness’, namely his exclusive worship and worship as the highest [god], as
does Yahweh from [the people of] Israel. 350
Originating as the tribal god of a small people, Yahweh according to Otto was none-
theless capable of attaining the status of the highest god. “Th is god,” he wrote, “then
grows to become the universal God, the God of gods, God in the genuine and exclu-
sive sense. And this takes place through prophetic experience and prophetic ‘found-
ing’ [of a religion].”3 51 And then, making it clear that he transferred this development
one-to-one on to the Indian context, he wrote:
What Echnaton wished to do for Egypt, what Moses did for Israel, that is what
Krishna probably achieved for the tribe of the Sātvatas: like Moses, tribal chief and
prophet in one person, but simultaneously upon his death a deifi ed hero who is wor-
shipped as the ‘avatāra’ of the God, whom he himself announced—a process that
repeats itself in India unto this day. 352
And then, concluding, he drew the discussion back to the Gītā: “Krishna’s annuncia-
tion, however, and the annunciation of Krishna would then be that ‘authentic’ core
and genuine foundation of the Gītā [which the Western researchers had sought].”3 53
In essential respects, then, Otto’s account of Vai ṣ ṇavism replicated essential fea-
tures of the story Orientalists had recounted about Judaism. (Otto does not cite his
sources, so it is diffi cult to say whom he specifi cally relies upon.) A tribal god, a cult
hero, a religious founder, K ṛ ṣ ṇa arose through prophetic declaration (or, exaggera-
tion) to become the sole God of a monotheistic faith, based on ideas of exclusivity
349 . Ibid. (punctuation modifi ed).
350 . Ibid., 16–17 (all emphasis Otto’s).
351 . Ibid., 17.
352 . Ibid.
353 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 235
and universality. But the parallels to Judaism and, ultimately, to Christianity did not
end there. Otto wrote:
Soon after this high point, the Vishnu religion including all other Vedic
sister-confessions faltered before the powerful fl ood of heresy. Buddhists, the fol-
lowers of Buddha, and Jainas, the followers of Jina, dominated the fi eld for many
centuries in India. But Vishnu did not die out. And, from approximately the 5th
century onwards, Šiva and Vishnu, with ever greater success, pushed back the her-
etic usurpers. 354
Holtzmann had already explored the history of the subcontinent in terms of a reli-
gious confl ict between Brahmanism and the “heretical” Buddhism. But, although
he used this predicate of the Buddhists, it was clear that, for him, it was in fact
Brahmanism that was the heretical faith, imposing itself upon the Indo-Germanic
Buddhist tradition. If the heretic faith could ultimately claim the title of orthodoxy
that was only because of the weakness of the true faith, a state of aff airs that could
only be corrected through the work of the Western critics. Th us, when Otto entered
the scene, there was already precedent for regarding the history of religions of
India in terms of Western categories and experiences. Otto, however, did not share
Holtzmann’s Indo-Germanic fantasy (although he did have a similar fascination with
“Āryan” civilization).3 55 In the story he told, Vai ṣ ṇavaism was essentially analogous
to Christianity, a stunning example of the universality of the religious sentiment
across cultures. Not only were the two similar in that they were both “ salvifi c religions
[ Erlösungsreligion ],” but there was also a series of further and more specifi c parallels
connecting them. Both had a “highly developed theistic concept of God”; both held
that “salvation [was] experienced and received through the g race [ Gnade ] of divin-
ity”; both saw “ salvifi c bliss [H eilsgut ] [to lie in] union with God.” 356 “In its immediacy
and plasticity,” wrote Otto, Vai ṣ ṇavism off ered “a practically thrilling example for the
law of parallels on the diff erent arenas and fi elds of religious development [in the
world].”3 57 But which Christianity was Vai ṣ ṇavism constructed to parallel?
If, for Holtzmann, Brahmanism was the symbol of a decaying, corrupt church
and Buddhism of an aborted Enlightenment, Otto reversed this evaluation. Lacking
Holtzmann’s obsession with a shared Indo-Germanic heritage, he did not have to
resort to the latter’s historical perversion. Instead, the story he told of Vai ṣ ṇavism
(which, we must remember, represented for him the archetype of all Indian reli-
gions) was more complex and, in a way, “truer” to events (that is to say, closer to
354 . Ibid.
355 . See his G ottheiten der Arier , already cited. In this strange little book, Otto tries to
demonstrate how the gods of the “Āryan” people arose from the feeling of awe before nat-
ural forces, not however insofar as they were “perceived to be ensouled” but insofar as
they were “perceived to be numinous.” Ibid., 4. Th ere can be no better example of how the
autodidactism endemic to German scholarship since Luther led it down the garden-path.
356 . Otto, Vischnu Nārāyana , 5–6 (Otto’s italics).
357 . Ibid., 4.
236 Chapter 03
actual events in the history of Christianity) First, he compared the period of threat
to Vai ṣ ṇavism from schismatic movements to the medieval ages. Th us, noting that
during this period (i.e., when “Buddhists . . . and Jainas . . . dominated the fi eld . . . in
India”), “the [scholarly] production did not come to a rest,” he argued that this was
the “age of the Purānas and Āgamas and Samhitas, the holy verses, songs, and collec-
tions of songs, of the ritual and law books” that laid “the foundation for the periods
of the higher scholastic education [höheren schulmäßigen Lehrbildung].”3 58 To be
sure, Otto did not view this period entirely positively. It represented “a period of
transition” during which “myth proliferated luxuriantly” and would need to be shorn
back. It was also a period when “the instincts and superstitions of the vulgar seg-
ments [of society], the naïve minor religions, the mythology and magic of the Šāktas
formed disorderly connections with elements of the older classical speculation” and
would thus require a purifi cation. Indeed, underscoring his assessment of this phase
as a mere “period of transition,” Otto wrote that it was “simultaneously a period of
the urge and the preparation for victory and to a new ascent to something higher and
more pure.” “Th is then occurred successfully with the great Vaishnava Reformation in
the eleventh and twelfth centuries. . . .”3 59 But before this could occur, an upsurge of
devotional feeling within the Vai ṣ ṇava church itself was required.
As Otto saw it, the Vai ṣ ṇava Reformation of the eleventh and twelfth centuries
had to battle not only Buddhist and Jaina heterodoxy, but also a tendency toward
speculation and mysticism within the order itself. Imperiled by the heretic sects on
the one side, the medieval period was also the age of the proliferation of the great
monistic sects. Inspired by the “Buddhist speculation about the ‘emptiness’ of all
things,” Otto argued, Śam ̇kara set out to formulate his ideas of “the strict ‘non-duality
of Brahman’ in connection with the doctrine of illusion [Scheinlehre].” Th is develop-
ment “cast its shadows over the theistic speculations and literature as well, as the
later and interpolated parts of the Gītā demonstrate, [and] attained a dominant posi-
tion [in society].” 360 Although ultimately “victorious over Buddhism,” this resurgent
monistic Vais ̣ ṇavism remained “initially and primarily a religion of the speculators,
the scholarly and the wise.” It was only later, Otto argued, as it was “swept over by
its theistic competitors“ that “a conscious and keen battle against the opponent got
underway.” 361 Otto wrote:
Instead of the atmosphere of compromise and average connections there now arose
a clear and sharp insight into the fundamental diff erence in terms of inclination
and content of the two religious outlooks. A passionate reaction of true, strong feel-
ing for God [Gottesgefühls] and faith in God [Gottesglaubens] erupted against the
mists of impersonal mysticism, a rebellion against the clutch of the foreign elements
of the doctrine of illusion that had wrapped themselves around one’s own tradition
and innate devotion. And out of this reaction resulted the great age of the Vaishnava
358 . Ibid., 17.
359 . Ibid. (Otto’s italics).
360 . Ibid., 87.
361 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 237
Reformation, which, beginning four centuries before our own [Reformation], was
completed by the twelfth century. 362
But this Reformation, according to Otto, “did not just mean a triumphant advance of
the truer faith in God vis-à-vis impersonal mysticism.” 3 63 On the contrary. It “simul-
taneously” implied “an internal reformation: a rejection and overcoming of a mass of
pagan elements, which, in part, the Vishnu religion already contained within itself
since the beginning and which, in part, had befallen all the great Indian religions in
the centuries of heathen decline . . . sorcery, amulets and charms, Šaktaism and tant-
rism, and the overgrowth of pure speculation by fabulism and fantasy.”3 64 Th is “great
Reformation,” claimed Otto, “had been anticipated for a long time in a series of popu-
lar singers and poets and in an entire literature. . . . But it was really carried out by four
especially signifi cant masters, by the great Rāmānuja, by Vishnu Svāmin, Nimbārka,
and Madhva. . . . If we were to imagine that someone had collected in the form of a
brief summary the doctrines of the four masters of our Occidental Reformation, of
Luther, of Calvin, of Zwingli, and of Zossini, that would be more or less an analogue
to this text [Otto means the fourteenth-century text S akalācāryamat Sangraha by
Gopāla Bha tṭ ạ ].” 365
In the story Holtzmann recounted of the Mahābhārata, Indian thought had
undergone a development from a heroic Indo-Germanic phase to a rationalistic,
proto-modern Buddhist phase. Th e eruption of a successful Counter-Reformation,
however, had interrupted and turned back this development. As part of this story,
Holtzmann argued that the pantheistic elements of the Bhagavadgītā, being based
on Indo-Germanic ideas of the ubiquity of divinity in nature, were original to the
poem, whereas theistic elements were added later by Brahman priests wishing to
render the populace submissive before their god. Garbe, looking to defend the ratio-
nalistic heritage of the Bhagavadgītā against Holtzmann’s Indo-German fantasies,
had argued that the theistic elements of the Gītā were the original ones and the
pantheistic ones later interpolations, added during an age of decline into Brahman
mystical and monotheistic speculation. Otto, arriving on the scene in the wake of
this debate, deeply beholden to his Lutheran faith but relying on the work of the
Indologists for evidence for his theories of the universality of the religious instinct
in man, now added a further twist to the narrative. It was true, as Garbe had argued,
that the theistic element of the Gītā was the most original. But this theistic element
alone did not simply come to the fore unchallenged. Rather, it had to undergo a long
history in which it was frequently overlaid with competing religious views. Finally,
in a spectacular transformation—a reformation that aff ected both external and
internal faith—it shook of this historical detritus to establish itself as the one true
faith. Revealed, like the Jewish Yahweh, at the beginning of time to a small tribe as a
362 . Ibid.
363 . Ibid., 87–88.
364 . Ibid., 88.
365 . Ibid.
238 Chapter 03
cult god, K ṛ ṣ ṇa had survived both schismatic movements and Scholastic specula-
tions to fi nally emerge triumphant.
As implausible as Otto’s reconstruction of the history of a Vai ṣ ṇava religion is, it
is important to take it seriously because of the role it played in his overarching intel-
lectual project. Entering the fi eld in the wake of the triumph of the historical-critical
method, his main concern was to counter historicist strains of thinking in theology—
strains he regarded as, if not heretical, than at least capable of leading people astray
from their faith. Against the advocates of historicism, Otto wished to demonstrate
the existence of essential religious structures in man, structures that justifi ed him in
placing religious experience alongside the other Kantian domains of a priori expe-
rience. Th us, at the end of his discussion of Vais ̣ ṇavism, he recurred to the start-
ing point, a conversation with a Vai ṣ ṇava Brahman in Benares, that had triggered
the entire refl ection: the “impression” of an “almost astonishing parallel formation
to what we have before us in our Western religious evolution.” In the meanwhile,
however (argued Otto), it had become clear that “we do not have to do with appro-
priations, but with convergent and parallel formations.” Furthermore, as “a more
fundamental preoccupation with the development of the history of religions” would
demonstrate, this was “not just an instance of an individual case, which then looks like a
surprising coincidence. . . .” Rather, it was evidence of “the most classic paradigm of a law
under which the religious evolution of humanity in general stands: the law of parallels
in development.”3 66
From our perspective here, it is not necessary to trace all the parallels Otto identifi es.
Th ese range from the observation that “religion, from the beginning of cultural history,
emerges and develops in a very similar manner everywhere among humanity, from a
fundament of strange and confused spiritual states and representations,” a fundament
that “recurs in astonishing similarity and regularity among the peoples of the black as
well as the white, the yellow as well as the red races, that stood in the same way at the
beginning of all cultural development, [and] that shines through and continues to work
upon the higher religions and cultures and is still vital in the cultures or noncultures of
the natural peoples even today”3 67 to the observation that there is also a “moment of
simultaneity, of p arallels in time[ i.e., of when the diff erent cultural peoples of the world
take the step from one stage of development to the other].”3 68 But the more important
point concerns Otto’s observation that the religious instinct in man is “a most peculiar
blossom that was able to blossom and awaken in every climate and on every land with
stupefying similarity and precisely through this points to a uniform and consistent function
of the human psyche as such underlying it. ”3 69
Th e comparison of the phenomenon of religious life across diff erent cultures thus
took on a crucial heuristic role in Otto’s case against historicism. It off ered him a way
of showing that in spite of the diff erences in external manifestation (which the histo-
rians had been completely taken up with), there was a uniform and consistent law to
366 . Ibid., 205.
367 . Ibid.
368 . Ibid., 206 (Otto’s italics).
369 . Ibid. (italics added).
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 239
these manifestations. Once again, the precise details of the development Otto traces
across six cultures—Greek/Hellenistic, Chinese (Lao Tse and Confucius), Semitic,
Persian (Zorastrianism), Indian, and Christian—need not concern us here. But it is
important to note that there are four main stages or four underlying motifs he iden-
tifi es consistently across all these cultures, stages he fi nds to have been paradigmati-
cally fulfi lled in Christianity, specifi cally, that form of Christianity that established
itself after the Protestant Reformation. Th ese stages are: (1) Demythologization;
(2) Spiritualization; (3) Ethicization ( Versittlichung ); and (4) Th e Advance to the
Absolute. Th ese four, accomplished at various times in the various religions prepare
the way for what Otto, speaking of Judaism, calls “the other great turn,” the “turn
of religion to the individual, the subjective, and the interior” that is accomplished,
paradigmatically for Judaism, with the appearance of Christ. 370 And yet, although
Otto recurred to Judaism as much as Greek and Hellenistic antiquity to make his
point about a consistent evolution of religion, his central exhibit in his case against
historicism was unequivocally Hinduism. As he put it, “these temporal parallels
appear most clearly when one considers them from the perspective of the Indian
development.” 371 A series of equations ensue: the Indian ā tman is the Greek pneuma,
brahman is the l ogos , both cultures identify the one with the other (i.e., ātman with
brahman and p neuma with logos ), both cultures begin to seek religious salvation in
the separation of the soul from the body (in the Upani ṣads in the Indian tradition;
Orphism and Platonism in the Greek). Finally, both develop techniques for spiritual
control: Yoga in the Indian tradition seeking “spiritual concentration and abstrac-
tion from the world of the senses” and Stoic philosophy in the Hellenistic tradition
seeking “ataraxia and apatheia.” 372 In the fi nal stages of course, for Otto, Greek/
Hellenistic tradition must go over into Christianity, but here, too, there is a parallel
with Indian tradition. “Th e praxis of Sānkhya and Yoga now becomes the necessary
stepping stone, but only a stepping stone, in order from this, initially merely negative
salvation from the sensible world to attain the true salvation [das eigentliche Heil] in
the union of the soul that has been freed thus [from the sensible world] with ‘Īšvara’.
Th e ‘Song of Songs’ of this stage of development is the Bhagavad-Gītā.” “And this
too,” adds Otto, “has its parallels in the West.”3 73
Th e details of how these parallels work themselves out (in the Gītā, but also else-
where, for instance, in the lives of the Vais ̣ ṇava saints who are “Reformers” who initi-
ate “an entire period . . . that stands under the sign of Pietism” 374 ) will concern us later.
We shall trace Otto’s understanding of how the demythologization and spiritualiza-
tion of religion splits up into two parallel paths—that of a rational theism and that
of a mystical pantheism—and of how mysticism itself, in the fi nal, decisive stages of
religion is transformed from “god mysticism [Gottesmystik]” to “Savior mysticism
[Heilandsmystik]” at the appropriate juncture. For now, let us return to what these
370 . Ibid., 208.
371 . Ibid., 209 (Otto’s italics).
372 . Ibid., 213.
373 . Ibid., 214.
374 . Ibid., 216.
240 Chapter 03
parallels, surely too similar to be purely coincidental, reveal about the nature of the
religious instinct in man, and what this in turn reveals about the possibility of a
science of religion that goes beyond the purely empirical collection of data accom-
plished in the history of religions. As we have seen, Otto’s dominant philosophical
concern since the beginning of his career was the defense of theology. According to
him, theology was an autonomous discipline that had its own right alongside (and,
indeed, ultimately took precedence over) the history of religions. From his perspec-
tive, historicism, by leading to relativism, was an invitation to apostasy. Otto con-
ceded that all experience was historical (Otto, no less than other scholars of his age,
was unable to completely overcome the dominance of historical thinking in his day).
But an objective comparison of diff erent religions, in his opinion, “reveal[ed] one
thing with compelling force,” namely,
the underlying uniform [and] common disposition of humanity in general in the
East and the West, North as well as South, which, because it is present and works
itself out as the motor for the formation [of human life], sets the formation of reli-
gious life, ideational as well as emotional, into motion and, because it is uniform,
brings forth similar [formations] in diff erent lands. 375
Th e study of religions thus revealed something like a “religious a priori.” “ ‘Religion’,”
Otto conceded, “manifests itself historically in ‘religions’, which are as uniform
but also as diff erent among each other as there [i.e., in the fi eld of biological life].”
“As with all other dispositions of the human spirit, its generic uniformity does not
exclude specifi c individual manifestation . . . ” and it was precisely the task of “the
comparison of religions . . . to understand how this “common fundamental force, in
spite of all parallelism, nonetheless once again manifested individually and distinctly
in each instance.”3 76 But while a comparative and descriptive history of religions was
a necessary propadeutic for theology (indeed, an autonomous discipline alongside
the latter), it was not suffi cient by itself. In spite of all resemblance between diff erent
manifestations of the religious spirit in man, Otto insisted on a fi nal element of dif-
ference. As he put it, “in spite of all resemblance even these most similar of manifes-
tations exhibit a nuanced but defi nite diff erence in [their] inner spirit.” “Th e spirit of
India is not . . . the spirit of Palestine. . . . Fundamental emotional moments and values
separate the two emotional worlds at the same time [as they have common traits].”
And thus arose the task, for the scholar of religions as much as for the theologian,
“to note [these] in their diff erence and to measure [them] with regard to a possible
superiority [of one over the other].” 377
Knowledge of the plurality of religious formations thus did not exempt the
scholar from taking a stance on religion as such. On the contrary, in Otto’s opin-
ion, it practically obligated him to take such a stance. Th e history of religions had
375 . Ibid., 217.
376 . Ibid., 218.
377 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 241
its place in tracing the history of this evolution, but it had no role to play when it
came to the ultimate assessment of the “value and superiority” of faith. In this latter
task, theology clearly took the lead. History of religions merely provided the empiri-
cal data necessary for an evaluation of religion; the true challenge for the scholar lay
in arranging these various manifestations of religious life according to a hierarchy,
discovering what was common to them, and extracting this common element as the
principle a priori of religious life. Th is principle, to be sure, could not be discovered
without experience, but it was not derived from experience. It was therefore truly a
priori and hence deserving of a refl ection on principles a priori in the human spirit
that would lead to the development of the individual (he would become self-critical
and autonomous through the discovery of this principle within himself). But, and
this was decisive for Otto, the scholar could never come to this point of a Kantian
Archimedean refl ection on religion if he did not follow the history of religions down
the path of its natural evolution into a science of religion, thereupon into theol-
ogy, and, ultimately, into a soteriology. In his colorful metaphor, “the c omparison
of religions [Religionsv ergleichung ] is merely a preparatory servant [vorbereitende
Dienerin] for such evaluation of religion [ Religionsmessung ]” and “it can depart once it
has done its service.” 378 But the scholar of religion, insofar as he understood himself
(and the needs of his age), could not rest satisfi ed with such a servile existence. He
could not follow the comparative study of religions in its exit from the stage. Two
options were open to him, as Otto saw it. First, “diff erent types [of religion] could
be, in this respect [i.e., in terms of their specifi c “spirit”], equally valid and therefore
equally ‘valuable’.” But, wrote Otto, “it was also conceivable that a decisive superiority
was proper to one of them.” “Th e coolly evaluative historian, who aesthetically appre-
ciates the richness and diversity of historical manifestation and wishes to preserve
it,” suggested Otto, “will tend to the former standpoint.” 379 “However, he who has
himself been seized and determined by the true spirit of one of these religions in his
inner being and decisively so will tend to the latter.” 380 And then, bringing the discus-
sion full circle, that is, from an accidental history of religions to an a priori Kantian
critique of religion and, fi nally, to a personal conviction of religion, he acknowledged:
Th e latter standpoint is my own. I am, in truth, earnestly convinced that Christianity,
not in respect of its various historical accidental characteristics, which are disput-
able in manifold ways, but rather, in terms of its specifi c ideal content, in terms of
its highly individual, typically characterized unique spirit [Sonder geiste ] is decisively
superior to the other particular forms of religion. . . . 381
Otto’s interest in Indian religions thus dovetailed perfectly with his interest in
Christian apologetics. By off ering proof of a univocal development of religion, the
similarity between the Vais ̣ ṇava and Christian faiths implicitly lent support to his
378 . Ibid.
379 . Ibid., 222.
380 . Ibid., 222–23.
381 . Ibid., 223.
242 Chapter 03
assumption of a principle a priori in the human spirit. It permitted him, further, to
concretize his ideas of a domain of numinous experience, which he articulated in
the same year as the appearance of his Vischnu-Nārāyana in his Das Heilige . On the
one hand, the comparison permitted him to undercut the historians of religion, who
had only seen the parallels (and, sometimes, not even that), but not the underly-
ing regularity that pointed to a Law . On the other, it permitted him to show that
the assumption of a principle a priori in the human spirit, although a step forward
beyond the mere historians, was insuffi cient. One religion approximated or realized
the ideal content implicit in the principle more closely than any other. Th us, not only
could the historians of religion no longer pretend indiff erence to the religious spirit
(as a principle a priori in man, it was present in them too, so that their insistence on
a distanced, neutral contemplation was tantamount to a most un-Kantian refusal to
cultivate their natural powers), but they also could not be indiff erent to Christianity
(as the highest aesthetic and moral realization of this principle a priori it made a
claim upon their assent). As Almond elegantly puts it, “Because the history of reli-
gions refl ects the unifi ed process of development of the religious a priori the history
of religions is a progressive revelation of the transcendent to the human mind.”3 82
“ Religionswissenschaft with a Friesian foundation is theology.” 383
An engagement with Indian religions served Otto magnifi cently in his polemic
against the historians. Via his demonstration of the universality of the religious
instinct in man, he had succeeded in discrediting their method. And via his demon-
stration of the presence of this instinct in them too (and the concurrent obligation to
develop it), he had succceed in bringing them back to the fold. And yet, if he was to
be fully vindicated, one fi nal proof was required: confi rmation of the original revela-
tion via a personal experience of the mystery. Here, the Bhagavadgītā would come to
his aid.
THE TRINITARIAN GĪTĀ OF RUDOLF OTTO
Scholars typically begin their accounts of Rudolf Otto’s Gītā with his Die Urgestalt
der Bhagavadgītā of 1934 or with his Lehrtraktate der Bhagavad-Gītā from a year later.
But, in truth, the Bhagavadgītā had preoccupied Otto long before: at least since his
Das Heilige of 1917, where in an appendix to the text he published a translation of
an extract from chapter 11 under the title “Beispiel einer numinosen Dichtung”
(Example of Numinous Poetry).3 84 By this title, Otto did not mean the Bhagavadgītā
was an example of a beautiful or even sublime poetry. Rather, “numinous” in his
terminology, as we know by now, meant that the Gītā was a poem conducive to an
experience of the mysterium tremendum . And thus, it was only proper that in his
translation he focused on the central sections of chapter 11, which he described
382 . Philip C. Almond, Rudolf Otto: An Introduction to his Philosophical Th eology (Chapel
Hill and London: Th e University of North Carolina Press, 1984), 130.
383 . Ibid., 133.
384 . And see also Otto, Das Heilige , 77 and 126.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 243
as “the grand and terrible theophany that attempts with the human and natu-
ral means of the fearful [des Fürchterlichen] and of the majestic and sublime [des
Majestätisch-Erhabenen] to convey a feeling of the unapproachability of the divine,
before which the creature shivers and passes away [into nothingness].”3 85 Further,
by eliminating the beginning of the chapter (Arjuna’s request and K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s response
as well as his opening description of his glory), the interchanges inbetween (parts of
Arjuna’s response to the vision), as well as the entire end (Arjuna and K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s conver-
sation) Otto was able to condense the description of K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s theophany into a singu-
lar vision of horror. Th us, he eliminated verses 1–8 (4 is partially mentioned), 15–16,
18–19, 32–54, recurring to the text again only with verse 55, which he claimed was
“described by the commentators as the sum and essence of the entire Gītā.”3 86
Unsurprisingly, when Otto turned his attention once again to the Bhagavadgītā in
1934, he emphasized the very same aspect. Th e Bhagavadgītā, he argued, consisted
in its “present form” of a much briefer original poem and a number of “ special trea-
tises [ Sondertraktaten ].” Th e latter dealt with “highly specifi c characteristic doctrines
of schools that were either already present or in the process of formation”3 87 and were
thus negligible for understanding the fundamental intention of the poem, which,
in his opinion, was to demonstrate that “this cruel terrible battle is not the work
of man [and] it is not men who decide here what is to happen. Th e battle is the work
and the will of God himself, incomprehensible and unjudgeable by human reason.” 388
But before the reader could approach this core intention (and, even more, the insight
into the mysterious essence of God, who could be cruel as well as benefi cent), he had
to be brought into the same situation as Arjuna. Th is, Otto argued, was the task of the
epic poet, or, more precisely, of the “basic text [Grundstock]” of the Gītā. Th e latter, he
argued, “reveals not the language of doctrinal writings, but the living speech of the epic
itself”; 389 it was “in no way a doctrinal- or school-text, but a poem that, initially entirely
without general doctrinal intent, presented purely with reference to the situation a won-
derful piece of that great tragedy that occurred on the Kuru-fi eld and thus reveals itself
to be not the pedagogic work of a teacher or a mentor [Lehrmeister] but the creation of
a genuine epic poet. . . .” 390
Of this epic poem Otto noted: “Arjuna’s situation is given. Whatever in Krishna’s
words corresponds to this situation has a primary and immediate claim to being orig-
inal. Whatever lies outside it and is not related to it arouses the suspicion of [being
a] later insertion.” 3 91 So far, Otto was entirely in agreement with the Indologists: the
Bhagavadgītā was part of an original heroic epic, the story of the Kuru confl ict; its crux
lay in Arjuna’s refusal to fi ght. Recalling Holtzmann’s ideas of an epic Gītā and, more
specifi cally, Jacobi’s idea of a poem coordinated to the “epic situation,” whatever was
385 . Ibid., 211.
386 . Ibid., 213.
387 . Otto, Die Urgestalt der Bhagavad-Gītā , 6.
388 . Ibid., 8–9.
389 . Ibid., 6.
390 . Ibid., 6–7 (Otto’s italics).
391 . Ibid., 7.
244 Chapter 03
related to Arjuna’s “situation” was original to the poem. “Arjuna’s ‘concern’ and his pro-
test against this battle is the clear crux of the entire scene and places Krishna before the
task of bringing it about that Arjuna himself declares, ‘Destroyed is the delusion; I will
fulfi ll your command.’ ” And, once again illustrating the infl uence of his predecessors in
these matters, Otto concluded: “A clear context of ideas refers to this situation, [although
now] shattered and obscured by the masses of material of the Gītā [at present].”3 92
In his opinion, “Hermann Jacobi in the Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft . . . had, indeed, with full justifi cation, arranged the verses from chapter 2
that speak of the indestructibility of the spiritual nature and thereupon the genuinely
human appeal to Arjuna’s knightly honor [Rittergefühl] according to the criterion of
being appropriate to the situation as K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s original answer.” In one crucial respect,
however, Otto disagreed with his colleagues and this was concerning K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s purpose.
Holtzmann and co., as we have seen, all regarded his message to be one of the impor-
tance of duty, specifi cally, of the soldier’s duty to fi ght. Otto not only regarded this
answer as superfi cial in that it stopped short of the religious signifi cance of the dia-
logue, but also, as we have seen, held that the theologian could not permit himself to be
preempted by anyone in the evaluation of these matters. In his opinion, Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s answer
consisted not of verses 11, 31–33, and 34–35 (as Jacobi thought), but, as he put it, “if
anything in Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s attitude and response is appropriate to the situation, it is verses
32–34 of chapter 11.” 393
Th is shift in registers, from epic to theophanic, was not accidental. As we have
seen, as early as 1917, Otto had been interested in the Bhagavadgītā as an example
of “numinous poetry.” In his Vischnu-Nārāyāna of 1917, too, although the poem only
featured at the margins of his discussion, the Gita clearly represented the preeminent
example of a theistic turn ( Wendung ) in Indian thought. Calling the Bhagavadgītā the
text marking the “stage of development” from “initially merely negative salvation”
to a “true salvation” in the form of a “union of the soul . . . with ‘Īšvara’,” Otto had
compared it to the Song of Songs of Salomon. 394 And thus, in an obvious reference to
his predecessors’ work, he noted:
No doubt powerful human appeals to knightly honor, references to the power-
lessness of bodily death to aff ect the eternal essence of the fallen, are all thoughts
appropriate to the situation. And yet, they are manifestly only an introduction to
something much higher, [and] simultaneously to something that is much more
eff ective at conquering weakness of spirit and stubborn rejection of the command
to do battle. Th is is what [Otto argued] is expressed in these verses. Krishna opens
Arjuna’s eyes to the [true] meaning of what appeared to him to be entirely meaning-
less and abhorrent to God, to a meaning that he, in his blindness, had not recog-
nized and [indeed] not [even] intuited. 395
392 . Ibid.
393 . Ibid., 8.
394 . Otto, Vischnu Nārāyana , 214.
395 . Otto, Die Urgestalt der Bhagavad-Gītā , 8.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 245
Th is meaning, which the Indologists had intuited as little as Arjuna, was of course the
insight into God’s mysterious nature itself. “Th is cruel terrible battle,” Otto wrote, “is
not the work of man . . . [It] is the work and the will of god himself, incomprehensible
and unjudgeable by human reason.” 396 Th us, “deeper and more appropriate to the situ-
ation than the thought ‘You worry over those for whom you ought not worry [i.e., the
fallen warriors]’ was the thought ‘You are nothing but my instrument’, namely [added
Otto] the instrument of terrible and, simultaneously, the most sublime divine maj-
esty [Gottesmajestät].” In Otto’s opinion, this verse (and this verse alone) deserved to
be called “the carama śloka, the main verse of the Gītā.”3 97 For, as he argued:
It is only thence that the conversation of Krishna with Arjuna attains its [proper]
meaning. Krishna does not teach Arjuna a general ‘doctrine of God,’ not Sānkhya or
Yoga, nor even Bhakti doctrines, but he has disclosed to Arjuna the meaning of his
own situation and thus his ineluctable duty. 398
Otto was thus transforming the very meaning of “situation.” Setting out from the
assumptions of his colleagues, and borrowing their thesis that only what corre-
sponded to Arjuna’s situation could be genuine, he nonetheless gave the term an
entirely new connotation: “situation” did not refer to the externally given situation,
but to the human condition as such. Man is confronted, on the one hand, by horrifi c
events that evoke revulsion and a sense of refusal in him; on the other, by a God
whose ways are obscure and who nonetheless demands obedience of him. And yet, it
is only when he is able to grasp the unity of these two—that the destruction is willed
not by men, but by God —that he is able to fi nd any kind of composure. Th e epic poet,
according to Otto, had
simultaneously disclosed the deepest sense that appeared to him in the old heroic
materials and narratives of that horrifi c fratricidal rampage [Bruderwüten]: incom-
prehensible from a human perspective, a tale of terror from beginning to end, [and]
a sight to inspire cold shivers of terror as long as human action is measured against
human action and in terms of human standards; [but] fi rst an epic once the veils of
human perspective are rent and behind them is revealed: ĪŚVARA, the VIOLENT. 399
As with Garbe and Jacobi, Otto was aware that it was not enough to put forth a
theory of the Gītā’s purpose and contents. He had to back it up with the necessary
“philological” evidence, which he proceeded to do via a theory of what the original
Gītā would have been. He began with chapter 11 (of which he wrote, “for this rea-
son [i.e., because it shows “ĪŚVARA, the VIOLENT”] chapter 11, the great theoph-
any, belongs fi rst of all in our primordial context [Urzusammenhang]. It shows the
Almighty All-Being: in his ghora-rūpa and his viśva-rūpa and the former is more
396 . Ibid., 8–9.
397 . Ibid., 9.
398 . Ibid.
399 . Ibid. (uppercase in original).
246 Chapter 03
important than the latter” 400 ) and thereafter added other passages which he felt also
had a connection to the poem’s “Urzusammenhang” or “primordial context.” Among
such passages he included chapter 10, verses 1-8 of which he noted that “it belonged
immediately to this [context].” 401 Th is passage, he argued, was “clearly the immedi-
ate preparation for the theophany through the ‘highest word’ of ĪŚVARA, which he
utters as the preamble to the revelation.”4 02 In his opinion, “once Krishna had taken
away from Arjuna his fi rst ‘concern’, namely over the destruction of his opponents
and, simultaneously, issued a powerful appeal to his knightly sentiment,” he now
came “to the main thing, to what is ‘higher’ than everything said as yet. Th erefore the
connecting verse 10.1, which simultaneously paves the way for an intensifi cation [of
the discourse]: hear now my most sublime [erhabenste] word.” Th e word Otto trans-
lated as “erhabenste” or “most sublime” was paramam ̇ and he once again repeated
this word (i.e., “erhaben”) in the next line. “For, what he [i.e., K ṛ ṣ ṇa] now has to say
is more sublime than promises of immortality or mere knightly pronouncement. He
will now speak as ĪŚVARA.” But here, too, Otto insisted that what Īśvara had to say
was not “a general instruction regarding God as such.”4 03 Rather, it stood “under the
perspective of the special situation” (and, by now, we know this means for Otto not
the epic situation, but the numinous revelation). And thus he argued that K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s
“highest word” did not lie in the “list of the powers of Īśvara that are now listed
here,” which, furthermore, according to Otto “looked remarkably pathetic,” but in
the “cardinal sentence: mattah sarvam pravartate, Everything proceeds from me [V on
mir geht alles aus ].” 404 Th is sentence, according to him, was “that upon which every-
thing depends and alone depends here.” 405
Otto’s gloss on this one sentence makes for interesting reading, for it sums up in a
nutshell his entire understanding of the nature of the religious experience announced
in the Gītā. It is not a relationship of equality or a philosophical exploration of the
concept of divinity, but a call to genufl ection in faith before a deity characterized as
an absolute Other. As he put it,
God says to him [Arjuna]: “everything proceeds f rom me . It is not you who give
yourself intellect [buddhi], that means, the correct judgment and will [Urteils- und
Willenskraft], knowledge [Erkenntnis], clarity of thought and, in general, all states
of the understanding [Gemütszustände], but rather, everything comes from me. You
‘worry’ about the great wise men and the kings, who stand before you. But the primal
rishis [seers] and Manus have proceeded from me , that means the primal wise men
and the primal kings, from whom these wise men and these kings on the battlefi eld
are descended. Th ey are not yours, but mine; the concern over them is not yours, but
mine. Th us thinks—verse 8—one who thinks correctly and is devoted to God.”4 06
400 . Ibid., 9.
401 . Ibid.
402 . Ibid., 9–10.
403 . Ibid., 10.
404 . Ibid., 10 (Otto’s italics).
405 . Ibid. (Otto’s italics).
406 . Ibid., 10–11 (Otto’s italics).
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 247
Th is experience, that is, the reception or intuition of the sublime majesty of God
as vouchsafed in a direct, perceptual experience, according to Otto constituted the
essence of the religious experience as such and hence even the essence of the ethical
relation was already contained within it. God or K ṛ ṣ ṇa was “simultaneously preparing
in speech what he is going to next reveal about himself in an overpowering revelation
[gewaltiger Schau]. For in this ‘everything proceeds from me’ is already implied that
the terrifying event that is to take place as well as the admonishing thought: ‘you are
to be my instrument, nothing more’, proceed from him as well.” 407
Th e descent into the irrational was thus already prepared by this speech, and by
this we mean not only Arjuna’s descent into the irrational (as imagined by Otto),
but also the descent of the entire discussion into the irrational (as demanded by
Otto’s epistemological premises). (Religion, we may remember, for Otto was primar-
ily a domain of irrational experience that had its own legitimacy besides the Kantian
domain of rational experience.) It thus cannot surprise us that when Otto turned
next to the question of what Arjuna had perceived or intuited or understood through
these words, he made use of precisely the scheme for the numinous experience. Th us,
he fi rst argued that “this piece from chapter 10, verses 1–8, which is so clearly ori-
ented toward the situation, was . . . immediately attached to chapter 2, verse 37 in the
basic text [i.e., the Ur-Gītā] and it was followed immediately by Arjuna’s question
in c hapter 11, verses 1ff .” Th is, according to him, was “confi rmed by Arjuna’s words,
which we read in chapter 11, verse 1–3.”4 08
Your word, the most high, secret word, which concerns the genuine S elf, which you
have uttered to me, has dissolved my delusion. For I have (thus) learned of the true
Being and Passing-Away of beings. And the secret of your own majesty [dein eigenes
Majestätsgeheimnis ] (I have also learned). 409
Elaborating, Otto noted: “Th ree things [Stücke] has Arjuna heard thus far. Th ese
are precisely the three textual sections [Text-Stücke] that we hold to be original and
these summarizing words of Arjuna’s are thus practically a critical canon for what
could have existed earlier in the basic text and what not.”4 10 And he emphasized yet
again: “Th ree things Arjuna acknowledges having heard from Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa here.” Otto listed
these three as follows: “Th e secret that is called adhyātman; thereafter Being and
Passing-Away of all beings; and fi nally, your divine majesty.” 411 And, then, bringing
his “philological” investigation full-circle, he noted: “these three points correspond
as precisely as possible to the content of the three passages highlighted by us as origi-
nal [i.e., verses 2.1–2.37 and 10.1–8].”4 12 Th ese three passages are as follows.
407 . Ibid., 11.
408 . Ibid.
409 . Ibid. (Otto’s italics).
410 . Ibid.
411 . Ibid., 11–12.
412 . Ibid., 12.
248 Chapter 03
First, “Krishna, in order to dispel Arjuna’s śoka for the foes he would kill, had in
truth fi rst —until 2.37—revealed the great primal secret [das große Urgeheimnis]
concerning the indestructibility of the ‘true Self’ (= adhyātman).” Second, “with this,
however, Krishna in fact simultaneously instructed Arjuna in a s econd matter: what
‘ Being and Passing-Away ’ are in themselves. . . .” And, “ third , Krishna then—namely, in
10.1–8—uttered to him his ‘highest word’ concerning the great God and his majesty
as ĪŚVARA, ‘from whom everything proceeds.’ ”4 13 Otto’s conclusion is succinct:
Th ese three points are presented by Krishna and nothing further. Th ese three points
are accepted by Arjuna and nothing further. He does not confess to having received
Sānkhya- or Yoga- or Bhakti-doctrines or any such other doctrines from Krishna,
and what is inserted in between concerning these matters is revealed from the out-
set to be a later interpolation by this clearly programmatic summary in Arjuna’s
statement.4 14
Otto’s “reconstruction” of the original Gītā is essentially at an end here. Th e remain-
ing fi ve sections of this fi rst half of the text (the second half is concerned with the
expansions to this original Gītā and need not concern us here as they are a pastiche of
views of earlier Indologists) are primarily concerned with expanding on the descrip-
tion of each of these three moments in K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s divine revelation. But before we look
at these more closely, we need to pause and refl ect on the passage from theology to
philology (and back again) in Otto’s Gītā.
As the perceptive reader will have realized by now, Otto’s reconstruction was no
more than a rather facile attempt to ground his own ideas of the numinous experi-
ence in the Indian text. (Th is grounding, as we know from the preceding sections,
was required by his campaign against the historians of religion, since only through it
could he demonstrate the existence of universal and hence innate structures of reli-
gion in the human mind.) In essence, Otto wished to demonstrate the existence of a
numinous experience in the Bhagavadgītā (recall that as early as 1917 in an appendix
to his Das Heilige , he had called the Bhagavadgītā “an example of numinous poetry”)
and for this he had to fi nd three sections corresponding to the three elements he had
identifi ed as constitutive of the essence of the numinous experience: the elements
of the mysterious, of the terrifying or overpowering, and of the fascinating. Every
holy encounter, we may recall, was essentially a m ysterium tremendum ( fascinosum ).
It was a mystery that revealed itself to the believer, but of course not every mystery
was holy. Rather, it was the mystery that revealed itself as awe-inspiring, evoking a
sense of the majesty or sublimity of God and, fi nally, of his endless energy or power.
Th e m ysterium tremendum was mysterious not only because of its mode of appearance
(which could erupt into a person’s life without signs or warning) but also because
of its mode of reception (it was not received as rational experience was, i.e., not
mediated through the Kantian categories, but required and appealed to an entirely
413 . Ibid. (italics and uppercase in original).
414 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 249
separate faculty in the human spirit, precisely that of Ahnung ). Both its operation
and its apperception were thus not accessible to rationality.
Corresponding to this threefold nature of the religious experience, when Otto
took up the Bhagavadgītā he cast about in the Indian text for precise analogues to the
mysterium tremendum and f ascinosum and found them in verses 2.1–37 and 10.1–8.
(Otto is not clear about where he sees the break between mysterium and t remendum
in the section 2.1–37 and it is clear that this section actually does a kind of double
duty for him, and this, too, is wholly proper, since the m ysterium and t remendum
are never wholly separate.) Verses 2.1–37 of course had already been admitted as
original by Jacobi. But whereas Jacobi had analyzed them in terms of three separate
moments (providing a threefold response to the criticisms of akīrtikara, asvargya ,
and anāryaju ṣtạ m leveled by K ṛ ṣ ṇa at the outset), Otto subsumed them under a sin-
gle heading, the m ysterium tremendum . In his view, this opening section of the dia-
logue between Arjuna and K ṛ ṣ ṇa revealed the mysterious existence of the Self and,
still more precisely, of the mysterious nature of Being and Passing-Away. Th e latter
aff ects beings alone, but not Being itself, leading to an intuition of the mystery in
its terrible or awesome aspect. Th ereafter the msyterium tremendum was revealed (in
verses 10.1–8) as Īśvara or God and thus in its full majesty. Th is part of the poem, for
which Otto repeatedly found the words “erhaben” (or “erhabenste”) corresponded
to the element of m ajestas he had identifi ed in his analysis of the numinous in Das
Heilige . But, inasmuch as the experience of God’s majesty was also calculated to take
away Arjuna’s “worry” or “care” (Otto’s term is “Sorge”), it was simultaneously an
experience of the fascinating nature of the sublime. “Th ey are not yours, but mine;
the concern over them is not yours, but mine. Th us thinks—verse 8—one who
thinks correctly and is devoted to God.” 415 Finally, having heard this word (or, per-
haps, we should now write “Word”), Arjuna is ready for the full experience of the
numinous, for which he turns to K ṛ ṣ ṇa next (i.e., after confi rming he has heard and
understood “these three points . . . and nothing further”). He asks to see K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s uni-
versal, divine form.
In his earliest studies on Indian thought, Otto had already worked out a general
history of Hinduism corroborating his views on the development of the religious
instinct in man. Via a comparison of Christianity with Islam, Taoism, Confucianism
and Zorastrianism, he was able to document the universality of the religious instinct
of man. But Hinduism clearly off ered the best example on which to base a compari-
son. If the same structures could be found in it, then Otto had good grounds for
claiming the existence of something like a religious a priori. Toward the end of his
Vischnu-Nārāyana , Otto felt he had suffi ciently demonstrated the existence of such
parallels to make the thesis of a religious a priori plausible. But, as he was well aware,
one piece of evidence was still missing to make his case conclusive, and that was the
possibility of a direct intuition of the holy. Das Heilige took up the task of working
out the essence of the holy and concluded by analyzing the numinous experience
in terms of the three moments of mysterium, tremendum , and f ascinosum . But this
415 . Ibid., 11.
250 Chapter 03
was still not enough: even if there were structural parallels between diff erent tradi-
tions in the history of religions, and even if there was a common, universal structure
to the experience of the holy, unless this experience could be validated—and that
means, v alidated ever again —within these diff erent traditions, these parallels could
just be historical accidents. As Otto vaguely intuited, the empirical evidence of the
parallels could not confi rm the existence of a religious a priori (although it could
make it more likely) and the apodictic evidence of the religious a priori could not
explain the existence of historical parallels (although it could make them intelligible)
unless there was a way to activate the religious a priori within historical experience
(or, what for Otto amounted to the same, to demonstrate its activity in a historical
context). Th at is why D as Heilige ended with not one appendix, but seven—all of
them examples of the appearance or intimation of the numinous in history (besides
the Bhagavadgītā, Joost van den Vondel’s Song of the Angels from L ucifer , numinous
“primordial sounds” [mainly from the Upani ṣads], spirit and soul as miraculous enti-
ties [again from the Bhagavadgītā; verse 2.29], the transpersonal in the numinous
[mainly examples from the Old and New Testaments], mystic elements in Luther’s
concept of faith, and silent worship [from a Quaker text]). Insofar as there was evi-
dence for the activation of the religious a priori in a numinous experience in history,
this experience itself had to be illuminated from two sides: fi rst, from the subjec-
tive side, showing that there was, indeed, something like an understanding of the
numinous in its three moments of m ysterium, tremendum , and f ascinosum in another
tradition; and, second, from the objective side, showing that there was something
like a manifestation of these three moments as a unifi ed complex in a numinous
experience. With the fi rst part of his Gītā interpretation (sections 1–5 of the fi rst half
of the book), Otto had addressed the fi rst task. He had shown that there was a clear
theoretical awareness of m ysterium, tremendum , and f ascinosum , arranged precisely
according to this tripartite structure and only according to this structure in the text.
(Th e price for this “demonstration” of course was the utter mutilation of the text,
but that did not concern Otto any more than it had concerned any other Indologist
before him.) Only one thing remained: to demonstrate that there was a numinous
experience latent in the text itself.
GOD REVEALS HIMSELF
Th is is precisely the task Otto addressed himeself to next. In section 6 of his book
he took up the challenge of presenting the numinous experience via a discussion of
chapter 11. As we have seen, Otto regarded this chapter to be the crown and cen-
terpiece of the Gītā, but it had hardly as yet played a role in his interpretation. He
had described it as the “great theophany, [that] belongs fi rst of all in our primordial
context [Urzusammenhang]” and argued that “it shows the Almighty All-Being: in
his ghora-rūpa and his viśva-rūpa. . . .”4 16 (the former, according to him, being more
416 . Ibid., 9.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 251
important than the latter). In anticipation of the theophany, he had demonstrated
how K ṛ ṣ ṇa laid the ground for the revelation by clarifying his being in terms of the
moments of the mysterious, awe-inspiring, sublime, majestic, and so forth. But now
it was time to present the theophany itself. Could he fi nd fi rst person validation for
this experience? Could the numinous be experienced directly in the text itself (and
not just noted as a historical fact)? We read: “As testament [Beleg] for Krishna’s
words about his own divine mahātmyam now, cleverly introduced by Arjuna’s words,
follows the magnifi cent depiction of the theophany in chapter 11.” 417 Otto insisted
that this experience was not such that one could merely take cognizance of it (that
would still be history of religions), but a vital experience, indeed, a possibility latent
in the text. Th us, he argued that the goal of the theophany of chapter 11 was
once again, not general theological instruction, but rather, solely and exclusively to
evoke in Arjuna the a esthetic knowledge [anschauliche Erkenntnis] of the omnipo-
tent majesty of [verses] 10.1–8, [the God] who wishes to accomplish his goals,
[though] incomprehensible to men, here on the site of death and hence [bring
about] the insight that Arjuna himself is nothing but an instrument in the hand of
the majestic God. 418
In other words, these words were capable of activating the same experience in the
reader, an experience that consisted not of theoretical knowledge (this corresponded
to the fi rst part of Otto’s discussion), but an “aesthetic knowledge” (“anschaulich”
can also be translated as “intuitive,” but in this context clearly an “aesthetic” experi-
ence is meant) of God. And this aesthetic intuition, in turn, was calculated to bring
about a transformation in the relationship of man to God:
Th e sense we are to understand immediately is that Arjuna found himself in great
self-deception, indeed, in a state of hubris as he thought he was to act here out of his
own plenipotence. In that he surrended himself to his vishāda [grief], he had, albeit
without being aware of it, committed [the sin of] ahamkāra, that means a conceited
reliance on his intellect [Eigendünkel], had been presumptuous, had forgotten or
not known that he was about to intervene in God’s prerogative of majesty. 419
Otto concluded:
Th e absolutely necessary obverse of the glorious [and] sublime divine manifestation
and especially of the sentence ‘be merely my instrument’ was, on the one hand , the
demand to direct one’s thoughts to God rather than following one’s own [train of]
thoughts, to be mindful of God, to be maccittas . . . and, on the other hand , a restric-
tion of Arjuna within his [proper] limits, the discovery of creaturely superbia versus
417 . Ibid., 13.
418 . Ibid. (italics ours).
419 . Ibid. (Otto’s italics).
252 Chapter 03
the omnipotent numen [i.e., the hubris of the creatures versus their Creator], the
discovery of the ‘hubris’ that had lain—without his knowing it—in his refusal to
fi ght.4 20
Otto found both these ideas to be expressed “in all clarity in the verses 18.58ff .,
which continue until verse 61 and attain their clear conclusion with verse 72–73.”4 21
Translating m accittah ̣ sarvadurgā ṇi matprasādāt tari ṣyasi | atha cet tvam aham ̇kārān na
śros ̣yasi vina nk̇ ṣyasi || (18.58) as “Meiner sei eingedenk, dann wirst du durch meine
Gnade über alle Schwierigkeiten hinauskommen” (“Be mindful of me, then you shall,
through my grace, triumph over all diffi culties”), he argued that Arjuna’s “diffi cul-
ties” were not “the misery of samsāra or any other such theological misfortune.”
Rather, “moha, īšvara-smriti-nāša, samdeha, and disobedience [Ungehorsam] had
been his ‘diffi culties’.” He would overcome them, according to Otto, “when he did
not think any more on those things for which he was not to worry, when he, rather,
became mindful of God who had shown himself to him just now as the Lord and
Cause [Bewirker] of everything occurring here. . . .” 422 Glossing aham ̇kāra as “ defi ance
[ Trotz ] against God . . . defi ance of the creature that feels itself [to be independent]
over against the Omnipresent [and] Omnipotent One,” he argued that such defi ance
was nonetheless “i mpotent defi ance [o hnmächtiger Trotz]” for Arjuna would “in spite
of his reluctance be driven to fi ght.”4 23
Before we look more closely at how Otto imagined the conclusion of the
Bhagavadgītā, however, we should look at his continued description of the theoph-
any of chapter 11, which he resumes in section 9 (sections 7 and 8 are concerned with
“critical” refl ections on the extent of the original Gītā, which are as vapid as those
of all the other Indologists before him and therefore need not concern us further
here). In section 9, Otto argued that Garbe in his translation of the Bhagavadgītā had
excluded verses 7, 13, 15–16, 18–19 and 37–40 of c hapter 11 in the “belief that the
Ur-Gītā had been a kind of textbook of the Bhakti religion, which had been partially
transformed by Vedāntic Advaita infl uences.”4 24 He thought that this was “doubtless
correct,” for the “face that Arjuna sees is, in the fi rst instance, not intended to describe
the viśva-rūpa form of the God, but rather his ghora-rūpa as the terrible [and] majes-
tic [Furchtbar-majestätischen].” Arjuna, according to Otto, “saw God as equipped
with old mythic traits of the majestic [and] terrible [Majestätischen-furchtbaren],
as many-headed, many-bodied, he saw him as burning terribly” 425 and he glossed
“many-bodied” with the comment “which originally does not at all mean that the
God encompasses the world in himself, but has completely other motives. Cf.
R. Otto, Gottheit und Gottheiten der alten Arier, p. 35. Many heads, arms, bodies
are an expression of the numinous [and] terrible [Numinos-furchtbaren], and not
420 . Ibid. (Otto’s italics).
421 . Ibid.
422 . Ibid., 14.
423 . Ibid., 14–15 (Otto’s italics).
424 . Ibid., 21.
425 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 253
speculative symbols of the All-One. Purusha-Sūkta verse 1, too, is to be understood
in this way.” 426 And, as if any more evidence were required, he once again emphasized
that Arjuna saw “him [i.e., God] . . . as the Worker [Vollbringer] of the terrible event
[furchtbaren Geschehens] . . . in a form that clearly represents itself in the depictions
of the terrible Mahā-Kāla.” “Th e meaning of these passages is, at fi rst,” he clarifi ed,
“not to present a vision of cosmic universality, but rather in a terrible manner to
convey an impression of him who, according to his decree, when his time has arrived
(when he is ‘fully matured’ to his work of wrath) brings his Judgment [Gericht] over
the people and destroys them in his form as Kāla.” Likewise, he claimed that the fact
that the victims entered K ṛ ṣ ṇa was not intended to show that “they belonged to his
universal form, but that he swallows them and destroys them.” 427 Th en, concurring
with Garbe that the “ideas in verses 37–40 diverge signifi cantly in terminology and
style from the stark and great, simple confessions in verse 48” and that they “inter-
rupt the clear p rogression of the entire piece and disturb . . . the intended eff ect,” he
argued for eliminating verses 37–40 (as well as verses 18–19 as a “quite superfl u-
ous anticipation” of the thoughts of verses 37ff .) to let “the confession in verse 43
[appear] as the actual high point [of the piece], to which the entire theophany mani-
festly wishes to lead up.” “It is fi rst here in verse 43 and rightfully fi rst here that this
confession has its place as the sum and result [of everything that has gone before]
and crowns the entire progression.”4 28 What made this passage so exceptional for
Otto? We read:
Here God attains what He wanted to attain, namely that Arjuna recognizes and
acknowledges Him as the one He had presented Himself to be in [verse] 10.1 in his
introductory “most sublime word”—namely the great and sole ĪŚVARA.4 29
But as confi dent as Otto was of having discovered, with this verse, the entire culmi-
nation of the numinous experience (Arjuna acknowledges K ṛ ṣ ṇa as one whose might
has no comparison in all three worlds), a terrible doubt haunted him. What if the
acknowledgment of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s divinity referred to his universal and not to his terrible form,
that is, to the v iśvarūpa and not the ghorarūpa ? We have seen that Otto, speaking of
the two, declared that “the former is more important than the latter.” 430 But what
was at stake in this for him? If what Arjuna beheld in chapter 11 was a v iśvarūpa ,
arrived at via a philosophical refl ection on the nature of Being, then not only would
all of Otto’s ideas about the primacy of the religious instinct in man (and its corre-
sponding confi rmation through the primal experience of the mystery) be overturned
but he would also be left without the fi rst person experience of the numinous he
had sought (and so desperately needed) in the Bhagavadgītā. Arjuna h ad to have been
426 . Ibid., 21, n. 1 (Otto’s italics; the reference is to his G ottheiten der Arier from 1932,
cited earlier).
427 . Ibid., 22.
428 . Ibid. (all italics Garbe’s).
429 . Ibid., 22–23 (uppercase in original).
430 . Ibid., 9.
254 Chapter 03
having an experience of the mysterium tremendum and not a philosophical viewing of
the All-Being. If not, Indian faith, no less than later Protestantism, would be subject
to Otto’s critique of having lost its way; of having put the “conceptual and the doctri-
nal” over the “inexpressible,” 431 whereas Otto had argued that, “In this Indian b hakti -
religion there is presented, without doubt, a real, saving God, believed, received,
and—can we doubt it?—experienced. And this is just why this religion appears to me
to have been, and to be today, the most serious ‘competitor,’ to be taken seriously.” 432
Otto thus argued that “it would be of course false to think that the the idea of a
personal All-God who in his presencing encompasses the universe within himself,
specifi cally [the idea of] Vishnu-Nārāyana-Vāsudeva, fi rst arose under the infl uence
of the Advaita doctrine. Rather, it is much older than all Advaita and all Vedānta.” 433
Th is idea of God, according to Otto (and this was decisive for him) “sprang very
early on from the basic conception of Vishnu-Vāsudeva itself. . . . It is not from the
impersonal Brahman that God has his universal form; rather, we could in all honesty
ask . . . whether such ideas must fi rst have been transposed onto Brahman from the
original theistic representations of a višvarūpin.”4 34
It would be easy to mistake these passages for an attempt by Otto to assimilate
himself to Garbe. After all, Garbe had already advanced the thesis that the theis-
tic elements of the Gītā were older than the pantheistic “Vedāntic” sections. But, in
spite of all external similarity, Otto was not interested in Garbe’s thesis of a historical
evolution (except as it served him in his project of demonstrating the existence of a
primordial religious experience). His concern was to defend the idea of an immedi-
ate, irrational, and non-historically mediated experience of the holy, specifi cally as
the terror or sublimity of the m ysterium tremendum , that is, of God experienced as
wholly other. Like his predecessors, Otto was only interested in the text as a way of
confi rming his ideas about religion, ideas whose origins lay in the Protestantism of
his youth. Even before he encountered the Indian texts, his attitude toward religion
had been decisively shaped by his Protestant upbringing, especially his reception
of Luther’s De Servio Arbitrio during the years of his licentiate. 435 Almond records
431 . See Almond, Rudolf Otto , 30: “Otto wants to maintain that, despite Luther’s own
experience and despite emphasis on the nonrational, this numinous depth was lost in later
Lutheranism: ‘More and more it deprived the forms of worship of the genuinely contem-
plative and specifi cally “devotional” elements in them. Th e conceptual and doctrinal—the
ideal of orthodoxy—began to preponderate over the inexpressible, whose only life is in
the conscious mental attitude of the devout soul.’ ” (Th e quotation is from Otto, Th e Idea
of the Holy , 108).
432 . Rudolf Otto, I ndia’s Religions of Grace and Christianity Compared and Contrasted
(London: Student Christian Movement Press, 1930), 21.
433 . Otto, Die Urgestalt der Bhagavad-Gītā , 23.
434 . Ibid., 23–24 (Otto’s italics).
435 . Otto’s thesis was entitled “Geist und Wort nach Luther,” later published in an extended
version as Die Anschauung vom Heiligen Geiste bei Luther (Göttingen: Vandenhoek & Ruprecht,
1898). Th is was his dissertation for the degree of Licentiatus theologiae and should not be
confused with his PhD dissertation, Naturalistische und religiöse Weltansicht, of 1904,
published a year later as as N aturalistische und religiöse Weltansicht (Tübingen: H. Laupp, 1905).
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 255
that Otto found “the nonrational essence of religion [to be] refl ected especially in
the life and writings of Martin Luther.” 436 He also cites Otto as stating that, before he
found the numinous to constitute the essence of religious experience in general, he
fi rst encountered its essence in Luther’s De Servo Arbitrio. 437
Th us, when Otto turned to the Bhagavadgītā in the 1930s, his main aim was to
fi nd evidence of a similar experience in the text. For instance, he consciously down-
played the sam ̇vāda , the dialogue between K ṛ ṣ ṇa and Arjuna. Likewise, he argued
that the philosophical or ontological doctrines of the Bhagavadgītā were secondary
to its revelation. Asserting that the poem was the paradigmatic example of the uni-
versality of the numinal phenomenon, he implicitly suggested it depicted an experi-
ence of the numinous analogous to that found in Luther’s De Servo Arbitrio. When
it came to describing the theophany of chapter 11, he consciously chose language
recalling a Lutheran understanding of faith. His God was not the God of the Gītā and
his promise was not the promise of K ṛ ṣ ṇa “to those who, always yoked, love me joy-
fully, I grant the singleness of mind by which they attain to me. Residing in their own
very being, I compassionately dispel the darkness of their ignorance with the shin-
ing lamp of knowledge” (Bhagavadgītā 10.10–11). Rather, he was the Lutheran Deus
Absconditus, the absent and crucifi ed Christ, and the doctrine he preached was one of
the strict separation of reason and faith. Whereas Arjuna repeatedly asks questions
of K ṛ ṣ ṇa in a playful, almost bantering tone (and for this is immediately reassured
by Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s “you are profoundly dear to me”), Otto off ered an austere vision of a God
of whom nothing could be asked, not even his name. In his translation Otto skipped
over verse 31 in which Arjuna asks K ṛ ṣ ṇa who he is. Rather, it is Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa—and Otto
was quite insistent on this—who introduces himself to Arjuna: precisely as the God
who “according to his decree, when his time has arrived (when he is ‘fully matured’
to his work of wrath) brings his Judgment [Gericht] over the people. . . .”4 38 Further,
he claimed that God’s “form [Gestalt]” “remained s eparate both over against the one
viewing him [dem Schauenden] as well as the divine beings [Götterwesen] who, pray-
ing, approach him from all sides but do not constitute parts of him.”4 39
To be sure, this reading was not without problems. For all Otto’s attempts to see
parallels between them, the Bhagavadgītā is not De Servo Arbitrio and it does not
articulate a solefi dean doctrine (the doctrine that one is saved by s ole fi de , i.e., by
faith alone). As we have seen, he had to exclude a number of verses from the recon-
struction to achieve the desired eff ect, among them verses 18, 19, 37, 38, 39, and 40.
Although he tried to justify his exclusion of these verses on technical grounds, even
citing Garbe, the truth was a little more complex. Otto himself was far too immature
436 . Almond, R udolf Otto , 29.
437 . “Indeed, my understanding of the numinous and its contrast to the rational grew
out of Luther’s De Servo Arbitrario long before I recognized it [again] it in the qādosh of
the Old Testament and in the moments of ‘religious awe’ in the history of religion in gen-
eral.” Otto, Das Heilige , 120 and see also 122–23 where Otto claims that this text is “practi-
cally a key to related manifestations [i.e., of the numinous in other traditions].”
438 . Otto, Die Urgestalt der Bhagavad-Gītā , 10.
439 . Ibid., 22 (Otto’s italics).
256 Chapter 03
a reader to arrive at a nuanced evaluation of these verses4 40 and pointing to Garbe
did not really help. Garbe had his own reasons for excluding these verses. 441 Otto’s
real reasons for excluding these verses probably had something to do with the fact
that they ran counter to his solefi dean interpretation of the text. For instance, verses
37–40 articulate an ontology based on the principle of non-contradiction. 442 Rather
than giving expression to an experience of the numinous understood as the myste-
rium tremendum , these verses clearly suggest that the experience was also a rational
one. Arjuna not only describes it in words but also fi nds a conceptual framework
within which to locate it. Th us, verse 37 makes a distinction between the Supreme
Being and the Creator; verse 38 develops the theme of the relationship of the knower
to the known (and to a third that transcends them both); and verse 39 identifi es
aspects of the creation with the Supreme Being, illustrating a continuity of Being.
All this was far from what Otto wanted to see in the text. From his perspec-
tive, these claims were extremely problematic: how could the Deus Absconditus be
expected to reveal himself as knowable through reason? How could he be seen in con-
tinuity with his creation? How could he be approached hymnically and confi dently,
when the appropriate attitude toward him was one of terrifi ed awe? Fortunately,
Garbe’s method of critical construction came to his rescue. Rather than having to
integrate them into his interpretation, he could now simply eliminate the dialogical
exchange between Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa and Arjuna from his text. Aligning himself with the tradi-
tion of idiosyncratic reconstruction in Indology, Otto was able to justify the excision
of these verses on “text-critical” grounds. From his perspective, his shortened text
had the advantage that need not address the Indian poem’s synthesis of knowledge
and devotion. By eliminating these verses, he could continue to insist that the God
of the Gītā was inscrutable and unreachable by reason. Arguing that in a war situ-
ation anything other than “a strong knightly word to a knight, who because of a
momentary change of mood is about to let himself be shaken out of the attitude
440 . Schrader thought that it was “extremely disconcerting that this ‘Ur-Gītā’, even
before critical scholarship [Kritik] could say a word about it, has been placed before a wide
audience,” and then he added: “[Otto’s edition] is still lacking in the foundation on the
basis of which such constructions can attain security: the philological investigation, ori-
ented toward [a knowledge of] grammar, vocabulary, style, and meter.” F. Otto Schrader,
Review of Die Urgestalt der Bhagavad-Gītā, Die Lehrtraktate der Bhagavad-Gītā , and D er Sang
des Hehr-Habenen by Rudolf Otto, O rientalische Literaturzeitung 2 (1936): 112.
441 . Contrary to Otto’s assertion, he had said nothing about these verses diverging from
the others in terminology and style. His only comment as to why he was excluding them
from his edition was to footnote them with: “pantheistic interpolations” (for 11.7, 13,
15, 16, 18, 19) and “Vedântic interpolation” (for 11.37–40). Garbe, D ie Bhagavadgîtâ , 157.
442 . In van Buitenen’s translation, the verses read: “And why should they fail to bow
down, great-souled One, / Creator more worthy of honor than Brahmā? / Unending
Lord God, repose of the world, / You’re what is and is not and what is beyond it. [37]
/ Th e Original God, the Person Eternal, / You are of this world the ultimate support, /
Th e knower, the known, the fi nal abode— / All is strung upon you, of infi nite form: [38]
/ Moon, wind, fi re, Varu ṇa, Yama are you, / Prajāpati are you, the great-grandfather, /
I praise thee, I praise thee a thousandfold, / Once more and again I praise thee, I praise
thee, [39] / I praise thee in front, I praise thee in back, / I praise thee on every side, O All!
/ Of infi nite vigor, of measureless might, / You encompass it all and therefore are all. [40]”
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 257
that just happens to be the proper one for a knight [die eben nun Ritters Sache ist]” 443
would be out of place, he claimed that the epic poet could not have intended to eluci-
date complex philosophical and ontological doctrines at this juncture.
Likewise, Otto’s excision of verses 18–19 was motivated by his understanding of
the numinous experience. Both verses presented insuperable problems for his thesis,
since they featured detailed descriptions of the God. In verse 18, Arjuna describes
K ṛ ṣ ṇa as the “highest of truths to be known, the highest foundation of all this world,
[and as] the undying protector of Law [Dharma] sempiternal. . . .” From Otto’s perspec-
tive, this emphasis on God as knowable and as the upholder of the Law was highly
problematic. It risked reinstating the Law at the heart of the religious experience, thus
undoing Luther’s turn away from the Law to self-consciousness. It also risked undo-
ing the Lessingian dichotomy between the truth and eternal longing for it. (Lessing’s
solution, famously recorded in his phrase, “Vater gib! die reine Wahrheit ist ja doch
nur für dich allein!,” was to choose the latter as the only option appropriate to a fallen,
fi nite being.) Th us, Otto argued that these verses were “a totally superfl uous anticipa-
tion of the thoughts of verse 37ff .” Once they were removed, there would be a clear
progression leading up to the “confession” of verse 43 (Arjuna confesses that Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa
is the “father” of the moving and unmoving creation). Th e personal intimation of the
numinous experience would have had its anticipated eff ect. Arjuna would have recog-
nized God, as Otto put it, “as the one whom he [God] had presented himself in [verse]
10.1 in his introductory most sublime word,’ namely a s the great and sole ĪŚVARA .”4 44
Although Otto presented his reconstruction as a contribution to “critical” schol-
arship on the epic, we need to exercise caution. For one thing, as has become clear,
his account of the theophany was not true to the theophany of the text. Indeed,
by selectively translating and foregrounding various passages, he had implanted an
entire alternative theology into the Gītā. In pursuit of this goal of a solefi dean read-
ing of the text, he had read the textual evidence selectively. Like Garbe and Jacobi
before him, he had used the category of “interpolation” to make certain points about
the nature of true religion. For instance, he cited the earlier v iśvarūpa of the fi fth
book of the Mahābhārata (before the assembled potentiaries of the Kaurava court).
Noting that “the entire second half [of the theophany],” that is, those parts of it
describing K ṛ ṣ ṇa as possessing manifold legs, arms, eyes and containing sun, moon,
and the world domains within his body, was “m issing ” from the Calcutta edition of
the Mahābhārata, he argued that “this lets us assume that this second half is a later
insertion and we are here on the trail of a specifi c tendency of the interpolators,
which then also makes itself clearly manifest in the passages excluded by Garbe.” 445
Arguing that the fi rst half of the theophany of the fi fth books “actually does not speak at
all of a viśvarūpa but of the māyā of an all-powerful māyin, and portrays him in his
ghorarūpa ,” Otto concluded that “it was only later that people tried to make out of this
the viśvarūpa of the All-God.” 446 But—and this seemed self-evident to him—“what
443 . Otto, Die Urgestalt der Bhagavad-Gītā , 19.
444 . Ibid., 22–23 (uppercase in original; italics added).
445 . Ibid., 24–25 (Otto’s italics).
446 . Ibid., 25 (Otto’s italics).
258 Chapter 03
was initially meant was monstrous miraculous power [ungeheure Wundermacht] and
terrible overforce [furchtbare Übergewalt].” And, then, transposing the argument to
the Gītā he argued: “this casts light on the theophany in Gītā [chapter] 11 too and
gives [us] a measure for the elimination of certain insertions in it.” 447
Via a detour into the Udyogaparvan (and via an invalid “text-critical” consider-
ation), Otto had succeeded, as he wished, in establishing the ghorarūpa as the original
and essential aspect of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s theophany and not the v iśvarūpa . He had succeeded in
demonstrating (if we can call it a “demonstration”) that “the ĪŚVARA of Gītā c hapter 11
was not derived from Brahmanic-Vedic tradition.”4 48 Rather, it demonstrated that God
could be experienced directly in the numinous encounter. Indeed, this experience was
not coupled to specifi c historical circumstances (against Garbe, Otto argued that even
granted that “our epic poet” was a “worshipper of Krishna’s and thus will have been
a Bhāgavata and have stood in the context of Bhāgavata tradition,” “his ĪŚVARA does
not for that reason have to be simply the god of ‘the’ Bhakti religion and he does not
wish to write a doctrinal treatise of bhakti” 449 ), but could be repeated by all people and
at all times. “Th is Garbe has overlooked. Wherever it arose, this annunciatory intima-
tion of God wishes at fi rst to be understood free of all sectarian additions in itself and
in its ownmost [transhistorical or ahistorical] nature.” 450 In contrast,
Bhakti theology [he wrote] as much as the moksha doctrines in competition with it
had, as their genuine object, the theme o f a transcendental salvation [ überweltlichen
Erlösung ]. Th is, however, is not at all the question in this situation and in the dia-
logue between Krishna and Arjuna itself. Rather, what is in question is the absolute
subordination [of the individual] to the almighty will of Him who is sublime beyond
all human existence [Menschentum] and all human interests, completely incompre-
hensible, but for this very reason all the more binding as the will of God. 451
“Th is God,” argued Otto, “however the way might have been [historically] prepared
for it, arose purely and solely from the numinous feeling of majesty [numinosem
Majestäts-Gefühl] which I have studied in my book ‘Das Heilige’ on page 14ff .
Th at is why he is the God of absolute predestination, as verses 11.22–23 [of the
Bhagavadgītā] show.”4 52 (Actually, verses 11.32–33 [Otto miscites the verses] show
nothing of the sort: the Bhagavadgītā does not know of a doctrine of predestination;
indeed, its philosophy urging the performance of disinterested action provides one of
the strongest arguments against it.) By way of conclusion he cited Draupadī’s words
in the third book of the Mahābhārata (she “knows of this omnipotent God” from
“obscure a ncient lore” but her “feeling protests against it and she raises the argu-
ments that have been brought forth everywhere in the world against the numinous
447 . Ibid.
448 . Ibid., 26.
449 . Ibid.
450 . Ibid., 26 (Otto’s italics).
451 . Ibid. (Otto’s italics).
452 . Ibid., 26–27.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 259
idea of the God who is responsible for predestination and is the sole cause”; Otto
interpreted the entire scene as evidence of “how deeply alive this overpowering intu-
ition of God, which cannot be gained out of any nature mythology, must once have
been in Indian circles” 453 ) and by way of confi rmation, Th e Book of Job. According to
him, if we were to look around “for members of the same species of this Īśvara” we
would fi nd such identical or related types “most clearly in the powerful intuition of
God in the Book of Job.” 454 And bringing his investigation full circle, from the empiri-
cal research into the history of religions to the discovery of a religious a priori to the
specifi c instances of its manifestation in history to the attestation of its presence
as an actual and actualizable possibility in man back to the empirical and historical
manifestations of the religious spirit, he wrote:
Here is the same God, before whose inscrutability all creatures become silent and dumb
and nonetheless in the experience of His Overforce [des Übergewaltigen] simultane-
ously fi nd inner śānti, the [inner] peace. We fi nd him again in the words of Paul: “Shall
the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?” [Romans
9:20; King James Version]. Th ese parallels warn us against a derivation of religious
intuitions from sectarian origins. Th ey warn us even more against a derivation from
“Blood and Soil” [Blut und Boden]. For Job is an Edomite, that means, a Semite, and
Paul is a Jew. Th ey also warn us against seeing the unique aspect of Aryan-Indian reli-
gion, in contrast to the “absolute feeling of dependency” of perverse Jewish souls, as
[being] the feeling of equality and kinship with “the ultimate reality”. 455
AN AUTODIDACT AMONG AUTODIDACTS
It would be easy to dismiss Otto’s eff orts as the work of a neophyte, but in fact he
was a mainstream fi gure in Indology. 456 Trained by Garbe, 457 an adherent of his school
453 . Ibid., 27 (Otto’s italics).
454 . Ibid.
455 . Ibid., 27–28.
456 . A number of scholars have indeed tried to portray Otto as an outsider. Sharpe, speak-
ing of Otto, notes in his Th e Universal Gītā that “it is always dangerous for a scholar who
has established a reputation in one branch of learning to venture unbidden into another.”
Edward J. Sharpe, Th e Universal Gita: Western Images of the Bhagavad Gita: A Bicentenary
Survey (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1985), 123. Staal, writing of the “philologists’ dissection
game,” observes mockingly that “the famous German phenomenologist of religion, Rudolf
Otto, put all these earlier eff orts [i.e., to reconstruct an original Gītā] to shame by off ering
a demonstration that the B hagavad Gītā was derived from an original U r-Gītā , to which
materials from eight diff erent lost treatises were subsequently added.” Staal, Exploring
Mysticism , 86. Clearly, Otto’s religious excesses are at odds with a discipline that wishes
to see itself as a secular, nonconfessional science. But as the evidence presented here and
in the remainder of the chapter suggests, Otto is not so much an anomaly in an otherwise
unproblematic tradition, but rather, the fullest articulation of that tradition.
457 . Otto wrote his dissertation under Garbe at Tübingen (completed in 1905). But it
is not known whether he also learned Sanskrit from Garbe. Almond, following Friedrich
260 Chapter 03
(Edgerton described his work as “the r eductio ad absurdum of the Garbe school” 458 ), and
inheritor of the tradition of German “critical” Gītās, Otto saw his Gītā as setting forth
the historical-critical researches of the Tübingen School. In his 1935 translation, he
described himself as Garbe’s “grateful student” and wrote that he “wish[ed] to set forth
the magnifi cent analytic reconstructive thinking [Gedankenarbeit] of Richard Garbe.”4 59
Praising Garbe’s work on the Bhagavadgītā and the Bhāgavata religion as “a classic work
of research into Indian religions and specially into the Gītā,” he wrote that “in most cases
he agreed with his [Garbe’s] eliminations of later interpolations by theologians repre-
senting ancient Vedic sacrifi cial theology and Brahman speculations.” 460 Th ere is every
instance of continuity between the tradition of German Indological Gītās and Otto’s
Gītā. 461
As Schrader recognized, “most of the verses bracketed by Garbe” were recognized “as
glosses by Otto.” 462 His translation moreover was “little more than a revised Garbe.” 463
Schrader also saw Otto’s Gītā in a tradition of German reconstructions of an original,
core Bhagavadgītā beginning with W. von Humboldt. 464 But in fact, the inheritance goes
beyond a few borrowings or even a list of reconstructions. His edition was a direct suc-
cessor to the tradition of German “philological” reconstructions of the Gītā begun by
Richard Garbe, especially as concerned its ideas of method. Like Garbe and other German
Gītā interpreters before him, Otto thought the Bhagavadgītā was a composite text. Like
them, he thought its form as transmitted was not normative for the scholar. Like them,
he thought he could bring his critical acumen to bear upon the poem to separate out
its epic, historical elements from its didactic and philosophic elements, and the former
again from the core of divine revelation he thought was contained therein. Accepting
Jacobi’s thesis of an original epic Gītā extending up to verse 2.37, he sought to show that
the answer to the questions raised therein (why fi ght, why engage in this horrifi c activity,
and so on) was not given (as Jacobi thought) in the statements on the indestructibility
of the soul or the appeal to the knights’ code of honor. Rather, he argued, they were to
be found in an experience of the numinous as given in the theophany of c hapter 11. In
Heiler, is inclined to place it in the years 1912–16 during the time he spent in the
Himalayas; see Almond, Rudolf Otto , 21. It would be most unusual, however, if Otto stud-
ied under one of the foremost scholars of Sanskrit in Germany and did not come into some
contact with the language.
458 . Franklin Edgerton, Review of Th e Original Gītā: Th e Song of the Supreme Exalted One
by Rudolf Otto, translated and edited by J. E. Turner, Review of Religion 4 (1940): 448.
459 . Otto, Der Sang des Hehr-Habenen , 8.
460 . Ibid.
461 . Otto’s translation is dedicated to Garbe (the dedication reads: RICHARD GARBE
smara ṇârtham).
462 . Schrader, Review of Die Urgestalt der Bhagavad-Gītā , 109.
463 . Ibid., 114.
464 . Ibid., 108–9. Th e other Gītās Schrader lists in this German critical tradition
are: W. von Humboldt (1826), A. Weber (1853), A. Holtzmann (1893), E. W. Hopkins
(1902), R. Garbe (1905), M. Winternitz (1907), F. O. Schrader (1910), R. Garbe (1914),
H. Jacobi (1918), H. Oldenberg (1919), and J. Charpentier (1930). Schrader does not
include Paul Oltramare’s and Deussen’s interpretations as having “only a few adherents
outside of India today.” Ibid., 109.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 261
taking up the Indologists’ theses, but then trying to show that something more primal—
an appeal to the irrational part of man’s mind rather than to his rational faculties—was
at work in the poem, Otto brought the irrational, anti-traditional, and fundamentalist
tendencies of German Indology to the fore: since the experience of the holy was utterly
personal and incommunicable, there was no need for an authoritative, legitimate and
legitimizing text; every individual could put together his own scripture according to his
own intuition of God. Even less was there a need for an exegetic tradition. All the scholar
had to do was approach the text from the perspective of his subjective expectations and
impressions and he would be able to discern, as Garbe and Jacobi too had thought before
him, what was essential in it. Th us, setting aside the traditional reception of the text for
a fetish history of epic origins, he tried to explain the Bhagavadgītā in a way consonant
with his ideas of religion. He emphasized that the problem of the Bhagavadgītā was that
of a lone hero on the battlefi eld, utterly abandoned by cultural norms and by his capacity
for ratiocinative thinking and thus forced to turn to a personal intimation of the divine.
Th is intimation, Otto insisted, could only be one of “ĪŚVARA, the VIOLENT.”4 65 Th e
teaching of the Bhagavadgītā was not “a general ‘doctrine of God,’ not Sānkhya or Yoga,
nor even Bhakti doctrines. . . .”;4 66 it required no complex exegetic eff ort to understand
the text but only openness to the experience of the holy as the m ysterium tremendum .
Although Otto was radicalizing the subjective, irrational aspects at the core
of Indology, the more problematic aspects of his work ultimately arose from his
“Indological” rather than his “theological” premises. Although under the infl uence of
Schleiermacher he imported an irrational theology centered around feeling into the
Bhagavadgītā, the major problems with his work were not due to his theological com-
mitments. Rather, they were due to his methodological assumptions—assumptions
he had borrowed from the Indologists.4 67 Central principles of interpretation—what it
means to read a text, how to approach Indian texts, whether the commentarial tradition
465 . Otto seems to have been constitutionally incapable of writing these two words in
lowercase. It bears pointing out that the expression is his own; “īśvara, the violent” is not
found anywhere in the Gītā.
466 . Otto, Die Urgestalt der Bhagavad-Gītā , 9.
467 . We know Otto closely followed the work of the Indologists. His Bhagavadgītā trans-
lation, for instance, engages Garbe’s and Schrader’s views of the text. In the introduction,
he also mentions his great debt to Garbe’s edition, to whom his translation of 1935 is also
dedicated. For the years Almond lists as the years of Otto’s peak engagement with Indian
thought (1912–15) we also fi nd he was borrowing a lot of books on and by Indologists. In
1912, for instance, he reads Schroeder’s Dhammapada , Garbe’s D ie Samkhya Philosophie , and
Paulinus Bartholomaeus’ S ystema Brahmanicum . OA 200. (Otto’s works in the Otto Archive
at the University of Marburg are cited according to the standard notation: every folder or
collection of writings bears a unique number; OA 199 contains Otto’s Ausleihescheine—
book borrowing receipts—for Buddhism; OA 200 his Ausleihescheine for Indian philoso-
phy. Th ese documents give us a partial idea of what Otto was reading in the period; partial,
because he obviously had sources other than the university library.) Th e year thereafter
we fi nd entries for Hermann Oldenberg’s article on Buddhism in Deutsche Rundschau . He
also read the Proceedings of the Vienna Oriental Congress and, possibly, Winternitz’ History
of Indian Literature (volume 2) in 1915. But the two books he keep returning to—we pos-
sess two Ausleihescheine for two diff erent dates for each book, suggesting he borrowed the
books multiple times—are Sir Monier-William’s B rahmanism und Buddhism and E. W. Hopkins’
262 Chapter 03
is to be consulted or not, whether the unity of the text is to be respected or not, whether
a scholar is permitted to argue ex hypothesi, and so on—were directly infl uenced by the
work of scholars such as Garbe, Oldenberg, and Hopkins. In his interpretation of the
Gītā, he relied heavily on Garbe and repeatedly cited him as an authority. Although he
frequently disagreed with him on the question of the original Gītā, he clearly saw him
as a model for scientifi c analysis. As early as 1935, he praised Garbe’s edition with the
words, “In his admirably careful translation of the book, Richard Garbe in a penetrating
analysis has attempted to reduce this ‘Gītā’ to its original form and to eliminate later
insertions. . . . In my recently published work, ‘Die Urgestalt der Bhagavad-Gītā’ (J. C.
B. Mohr, Tübingen 1934) I have tried to set forth Garbe’s work.”4 68 Refl ecting this high
assessment of Garbe, his personal copy of Garbe’s translation is heavily marked up.4 69
Indeed, a closer look at this copy suggests that his entire Gītā emerged out of an engage-
ment with Garbe’s edition.4 70 Besides underlining salient passages, Otto wrote extensive
notes in the margins (most of them undecipherable). He also used blue and red pencil
to mark sections he agreed or disagreed with (not always consistently; occasionally blue
verses are the ones he rejects). For instance, he marked verses 2.11–13, 20, 22, 29–37
with a single vertical blue line,4 71 while verses 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 33, 34, 35, 36 were marked with blue ticks
(multiple ticks for each verse). 472 Although it is not clear why Otto highlighted chapter 6
in this way, the marks in chapter 2 correspond signifi cantly to his ideas of the original
“epic” Gītā. Th e sequence 2.11–13, 20, 22, 29–37 corresponds precisely to his summary
in section 8, where he wrote: “one should therefore read one after the other and in a
Th e Religions of India . Otto seems to have consulted the fi rst over two separate periods,
the fi rst beginning April 21, 1912 (from the Göttingen University Library) and the second
beginning December 15, 1915 (from the Breslau University Library). In contrast, Otto bor-
rowed Th e Religions of India on December 14, 1915 but we also have a second Ausleihscheine
from December 27, 1915 which is marked “Verliehen” for some reason. (We thank the
librarian at the Religionskundliche Sammlung for helping us decipher these annotations.
Frau Schmidt was unable to explain why there were two A usleihescheine for the same
period.) Besides these specialist works, Otto also borrowed a number of books from Indian
publishers, mainly Madras and Calcutta, above all on south Indian Vai ṣ ṇava saints as well
as introductory works on the philosophy of Vedānta.
468 . Rudolf Otto, “Krishna’s Lied,” Zeitschrift für Missionskunde und Religionswissenschaft
50, no. 1 (1935): 2.
469 . As she took the book out of the bookcase, the librarian at the Religionskundliche
Sammlung in Marburg exclaimed, “Th at is a very heavily annotated book; there are some
in which he has only written one or two lines!” Th e annotations skip over Garbe’s introduc-
tion (with the exception of one or two stray marks) and only begin from the translation.
Except for two places where Otto underlined the word “Sünde (“nur Sünde” in verse 36 and
“von der Sünde” in verse 39 of Garbe’s translation), chapter 1 is not marked.
470 . As far as we have been able to ascertain, besides Garbe’s translation Otto’s collection
possessed no other edition of the Bhagavadgītā.
471 . Verses 14–15 are additionally enclosed in black square brackets; verse 37 has the
following words underlined in red: “erhebe dich . . . Kampf entschlossen.”
472 . Otto brackets verse 27 (closing bracket only, opening possibly in 26); 28 is also
bracketed (opening, but no closing bracket). Verses 27–32 are printed in small print in
Garbe’s translation.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 263
closed context: chap. 1–2.13, 20, 22, 29–37.” 473 (Even the black square brackets around
verses 14–15 make perfect sense, since they show that Otto had, by this point, already
decided to eliminate these from his reconstruction, while the underscoring of verse 37
indicates the peculiar emphasis he attached to it as the apex of this sequence.) Similarly,
he marked verses 10.1–8 with a vertical blue line and in verse 1 he underlined the words
“mein erhabenstes Wort” with a blue line (compare the preceding sections for the impor-
tance Otto attached to these words). Th ese, as we know, constituted the kernel of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa’s
teaching according to him. Otto also attached especial importance to the fi rst strophe of
verse 10.1 (“Jetzt nun höre mein erhabenstes Wort”) which he argued served to “link and
simultaneously prepare for the heightening [of the theophany of chapter 11].” 474 Verse 8
is again underlined in blue. In Garbe’s translation, the verse read “Alles von mir ausgeht,”
but Otto inverted Garbe’s expression and translated, instead, “Von mir geht alles aus.” 475
Th ereafter he bracketed verses 10.9–11, pressing down the pencil heavily, suggesting
that he thought the interpolation began here. In c hapter 11, he again marked verses
1–37 with a vertical blue line; he additionally underlined the words “erhabenen . . . Worte”
and glossed them in the margin as “paramam vacas.”4 76 Of especial interest are verses 20,
where Otto underlined the words “wunderbaren und grausigen Gestalt” in blue and noted
in the margin: “mir[ . . . ] tremendum” and 21, where he underlined the word “Stütze” in
blue (glossed in the margin as “nivāsa!”). Th e vertical blue line comes to an end at verse
37 (perhaps because by this point he realized that he wanted to include the whole of
chapter in his commentary as genuine). However, individual markings continue: in verse
40, Otto underlined the words “Alles durchdringst du, darum bist du Alles”; in verse 43,
“Du bist der Vater der Welt . . . beweglichen und der unbeweglichen . . . anzubetender und
ehrwürdigster Lehrer”; and in verse 46 “Allgestaltiger” (all in blue; the last of these is
doubly underlined and glossed in the margin as “viśvamūrti”). Verses 52–54 are enclosed
in emphatic blue brackets, 55 is marked with a vertical blue line and in verse 55 the words
“gelangt zu mir, O Pâ ṇḍava” are underlined in blue. Chapters 12 and 13, which we know
Otto considered inessential for the Gītā, are marked red. 477 Otto seems to have been
473 . Otto, Die Urgestalt der Bhagavad-Gītā , 20–21.
474 . Ibid., 10.
475 . Other verses or words underlined in chapter 10 are: verse 2 (“Ursprung . . . Götter . . .
grossen Weisen,” underlined in blue), 3 (“alle Sünden frei,” underlined in red), 6 (“meines
Wesens . . . aus [meinem] Geiste,” underlined in blue), and 7 (“Machtäusserung und
Wunderkraft,” underlined in blue; “einer erschütterlichen Ergebung,” underlined in red).
476 . Other words or phrases underlined include: “göttliche Wunderkraft” (in verse 8),
“ganze Welt vereinigt, die mannigfach geteilte” (in verse 13), and “der ewige Behüter des
unveränderlichen Gesetzes” (in verse 18).
477 . Verses 12.1-20 (i.e., the entire chapter) are marked with a vertical red line (in verse
7, the words “Eretter aus dem Meere des Weltdaseins, das zum Tode führt, Sohn der P ṛthā”
are additionally underlined in red); verses 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 24, 25, 26 are marked with red ticks (multiple ticks for each verse). Otto skipped
13.12–18 (small print in Garbe’s edition), 27–28 (also small print in Garbe’s edition), 29
(large print in Garbe’s edition), and 30–33 (small print in Garbe’s edition). Verse 13.24
(large print in Garbe’s edition) is marked with red ticks. In verse 13.30 the words “wird er
eins mit dem Brahman” are underlined in blue.
264 Chapter 03
less certain about chapter 15. He marked verses 15.1–12 and 17–20 with a vertical red
line, but skipped verses 13–16 (13–15 are printed in small print in Garbe’s edition; 16 is
large print) and additionally underlined the words “jenem uranfänglichen Wesen” (verse
4), “durchdringt” (verse 17), and “erkennt . . . liebt” (verse 19) in blue. Th e annotations
become heavy again in c hapter 18 from verse 55 onward. A vertical blue line runs along-
side 18.55–60, while the word “Überhebung” is underlined twice in blue (in verses 58 and
59). Emphatic blue brackets mark off verses 67–71. Once again, with a little interpreta-
tion, this corresponds substantially to Otto’s account in section 8, where verses 58–61,
66, 72–73 are listed by him as genuine.
Th us, in a sense, Otto can be seen as taking the Indologists’ approach to its logical
conclusion. If the form in which the text had been handed down was no longer norma-
tive for the reader, then anyone could try his or her hand at Gītā “criticism.” Th ere was
no need to defer to the experts. If all that was required to produce an edition of the text
was a little sophistic speculation and a little armchair theorizing about “history,” then
Otto was no less qualifi ed than his teacher, Garbe. Since there was no real tradition, no
real teaching, and not even a real technique, in this “red pencil” school of “critical” schol-
arship, any and everyone could mark up a text to produce his or her edition. (See image
3.3 for an overview of Otto’s method.)
Otto was thus taking up the premises of the Indologists and radicalizing them
from within. Borrowing Garbe’s (pseudo)critical method, he put forward an edition
that challenged Garbe’s assumptions about the “original” Gītā. (For Garbe, commit-
ted to orthodoxy, this had been a text incorporating rationalistic theism; for Otto,
infl uenced by Fries’ and Schleiermacher’s antirationalism, it could only be a text
refl ecting a transcendent, personal experience of the holy as it was once encoun-
tered by him in a Jewish synagogue. 478 ) In eff ect, by advancing his own reconstruc-
tion, Otto was rejecting the claim of Garbe, Jacobi, and others to possess specialized
knowledge of the text. Indeed, just as an earlier generation of Indologists did not
feel a need to defer to traditional authority, Otto now made it clear that he saw no
need to defer to his predecessors’ authority. While he was willing to borrow language
478 . “It is Sabbath, and already in the dark and inconceivably grimy passage of the
house we hear that singsong of prayers and reading of scripture, that nasal half-singing
half-speaking sound which Church and Mosque have taken over from the Synagogue. Th e
sound is pleasant, one can soon distinguish certain modulations and cadences that follow
one another at regular intervals like L eitmotive . Th e ear tries to grasp individual words
but it is scarcely possible and one has almost given up the attempt when suddenly out of
the babel of voices, causing a thrill of fear, there it begins, unifi ed, clear and unmistak-
able: Kadosh, Kadosh, Kadosh Elohim Adonai Zebaoth Male’u hashamayim wahaarets kebodo!
(Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, the heavens and the earth are full of thy glory). I have
heard the S anctus Sanctus Sanctus of the cardinals in St. Peter’s, the Swiat Swiat Swiat in the
Cathedral of the Kremlin and the Holy Holy Holy of the Patriarch in Jerusalem. In what-
ever language they resound, these most exalted words that have ever come from human
lips always grip on in the depths of the soul, with a mighty shudder exciting and calling
into play the mystery of the other world latent therein. And this more than anywhere else
here in this modest place, where they resound in the same tongue in which Isaiah fi rst
received them and from the lips of the people whose fi rst inheritance they were.” Cited and
translated in Almond, R udolf Otto , 17–18; Almond notes that the original appeared in Die
christliche Welt 25 (1911): 709 but does not give the title of the article.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 265
and style of argument from them (and even engage in hyperbolic praise of Garbe 479 ),
he saw no reason to let his interpretation be dictated by them. (Schrader bitterly
bemoans the fact that Otto did not give due credit to him.4 80 ) As with the study of
religions, where he argued that “the theologian may not let himself be preempted or
overtaken by anyone”4 81 in understanding other religions, here too he saw no reason
to defer to the professional purveyors of Indian culture when it came to the task
of interpretation. He would critique (without naming him) Hauer, another student
of Garbe’s and, since 1927, successor to his chair. 482 He would evolve his own con-
ventions for translating and presenting the text, including an alternative theory of
its origins. Indeed, in pursuit of his Neo-Protestant project (to use Barth’s term) of
placing “the modern religious subject at the center of the religious universe,” 483 the
Indologists would become just as much of an obstacle to him as the more traditional
sorts of “Brahmans” they had critiqued. 484
Otto’s Gītā thus highlights one of the fundamental paradoxes of Indology: if
what was at stake was expertise, then the tradition clearly took priority over the
Indologists; if, on the contrary, what was at stake was autonomy, then there was no
reason to stop with the Indologists. Once he had mastered their method—and the
detailed reconstruction of his annotations shows that he indeed had a good grasp of
their pseudocritical style—he could now turn it against them. If all the arguments
for an “original” Gītā were a priori, his account was as good as any other Indologist’s.
What distinguished diff erent accounts was only the fact of who, at a given time, had
control over institutional sources of authority. 485 What upheld Indology was not its
“science,” but the fact that it was willing to ally itself with whatever the dominant
institutional ideology was at the time. Nowhere would this be clearer than in the
work of Jakob Wilhelm Hauer.
4 79. G arbe, according to the concluding paragraph of the foreword of Otto’s translation,
is “the man who has accomplished for all time the foundational work for a true historical
understanding of the Gītā.” Otto, D er Sang des Hehr-Habenen , 25.
480 . Schrader, Review of Die Urgestalt der Bhagavad-Gītā , 110, 112, and 115.
481 . Rudolf Otto, V ischnu-Nārāyana, 7 (Otto’s italics).
482 . Ibid., 24 and see also n. 19.
483 . Reinhard Hütter, Bound to be Free: Evangelical Catholic Engagements in Ecclesiology,
Ethics, and Ecumenism (Grand Rapids: Wm. B Eerdmans, 2004), 84. Barth does not use the
term of Otto, but of Schleiermacher. Schleiermacher’s infl uence on Otto, however, is well
attested. Hütter does not discuss Otto among his Neo-Protestant theologians, but he may
as well have.
484 . Otto, alone of the Indologists, seems to have realized that the academics had become
exactly the sort of “priests” they criticized. In his work, he is clear that this kind of tradi-
tion betrayed the spirit of Luther’s Reformation, and he saw himself as taking up arms in
defense of the true Protestant spirit.
485 . Th is becomes especially clear in Schrader’s review of Otto’s work, where he, peeved
at Otto’s neglect of his work, tries to get the other Indologists to close ranks around him
and against Otto. Schrader tries to portray Otto as an outsider to some kind of highly
abstruse philology the Sanskritists practice, a philology into which he, Schrader (but not
Otto), has been initiated.
266 Chapter 03
3.3
egamI
.ātīG
s’ebraG
fo
noitide
sih
morf
eton
nettirw-dnah
s’ottO
:dohtem
lacitirc
eht
gniylppA
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 267
THE ĀRYAN GĪTĀ OF JAKOB WILHELM HAUER
Arriving on the scene in the wake of Holtzmann’s ideas of a heroic Indo-Germanic
epic, Richard Garbe’s ideas of pseudocritical reconstruction, Jacobi’s theories of
an original Gītā oriented toward the exigencies of the “epic situation,” Oldenberg’s
suggestion that the central purpose of the poem was the alleviation of a central
combatant’s ethical quandry, and Otto’s valorization of an irrational, decisionistic
stance on a personal religion, the Nazi Indologist Jakob Wilhelm Hauer found fertile
ground for his Gītā interpretation. Th e founder of the religious movement Deutsche
Glaubensbewegung, Hauer had already written a number of works on Indo-Germanic
religion. Although he started life as a devout Christian (his parents were Pietists),
he progressively developed an interest in primordial German religious traditions.
After studying at the Basel Missionary Seminary, Hauer taught in India from 1907
onward. In 1917, he received a doctorate in Sanskrit and Religious Studies (under
Garbe) at Tübingen. Appointments to Marburg (successor to Karl Geldner’s chair)
and Tübingen (successor to Richard Garbe’s chair) followed in 1925 and 1927.4 86
Around this time, Hauer also began to dabble in esoteric traditions. In 1920, he
founded the Köngener Bund, an amalgamation of the Evangelical and Free German
Youth movements, remaining its leader until 1934.4 87
Hauer’s Gītā was one of the last editions to be produced during this phase of peak
interest in Germany in the Gītā. Like Garbe (whose translation he recommended to
his readers as “still the most faithful and best”4 88 ), his edition was characterized by
the desire “to observe and to present this religious poem from a new perspective.” 489
In his foreword, Hauer cited a number of translations, including those of Garbe,
Schroeder, Paul Deussen, and O. Strauss, as well as Springmann’s “Nachdichtung.” 490
However, he claimed that the problem with them was that none had attempted to
understand the Bhagavadgītā “from its core idea.” Th e text appeared “to almost
everyone” to be “a compilation of a series of texts, which appeared not to stand in
any strict relation to each other.” Its basic content therefore, he argued, had as yet
“not appear[ed] clearly enough.” His own edition by contrast aimed at “interpret[ing]
the Bhagavadgītā from the core problem that was given by the historical occasion
[Hauer means the situation of battle that forces Arjuna to choose between loyalty to
486 . Hans Jürgen Rieckenberg, “Hauer, Jakob Wilhelm,” in N eue Deutsche Biographie , vol.
8 (Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 1969), 83–84.
487 . Materials on Hauer can be found in Ulrich Hufnagel, “Religionswissenschaft und
indische Religionsgeschichte in den Arbeiten Jakob Wilhelm Hauers: Wissenschaftskonzept
und politische Orientierung” and Horst Junginger, “Das ‘Arische Seminar’ der Universität
Tübingen, 1940–1945,” both in Indienforschung im Zeitenwandel. Analysen und Dokumente
zur Indologie und Religionswissenschaft in Tübingen , ed. Heidrun Brückner, Klaus
Butzenberger, Angelika Malinar, and Gabriele Zeller (Tübingen: Attempto Verlag, 2003),
145–74 and 176–207.
488 . Hauer, E ine indo-arische Metaphysik , vii.
489 . Ibid., v.
490 . Th eodore Springmann, Bhagavad Gītā: Der Gesang des Erhabenen (Hamburg:
A. Saal, 1920).
268 Chapter 03
duty and loyalty to his family] and out of which it [the Bhagavadgītā] arose,” 491 he
then clarifi ed:
Th is is the tragic confl ict of duties, in which the hero Arjuna is caught, to whom
the Bhagavadgītā is supposed to have been narrated by the divine wise man
[Weisheitskünder, literally someone who teaches or proclaims wisdom]. In this con-
fl ict of duties, the wise man unveils the thoroughgoing tragedy of life as such and
shows the way to a heroic mastery of this tragedy. 492
In spite of this sense of the poem as a unifi ed work, Hauer was not loath to adopt
the historical and analytic methods of Garbe, his teacher. Indeed, in his pursuit of
“advanc[ing] a livelier and deeper understanding of the Bhagavadgītā and thereby
of Indo-Aryan wisdom,” 493 this was the only method available to him, since he con-
ceded that “nothing would be more mistaken than the intent of proclaiming the
Bhagavadgītā as a kind of Bible for us; just as, in general, every attempt at an uncon-
ditioned takeover of Indo-Aryan ideas and experiences must be rejected as inor-
ganic.”4 94 Here Garbe’s method, with its tremendous pliability that permitted it to
be used to identify a rational proto-Enlightenment faith just as much as an irrational
experience of the numinous in one and the same poem, was an incomparable benefi t.
For someone looking, as Hauer was, to show that the Bhagavadgītā preserved “the
classical form of one of the most signifi cant phases of Indo-Germanic religious his-
tory [Glaubensgeschichte]—to be sure mixed up with other elements but in its core
of an exceptional essential purity”4 95 —Garbe’s method, with its complete lack of any
intellectual commitments (except perhaps to the absolute autonomy of the scholar),
was a godsend.
In his concrete reconstruction of the poem, Hauer proceeded more or less as Garbe
and others before him. First, he identifi ed two distinct poles in the text. (Th is, as we
have already seen, is one of the basic assumptions of the historical-critical method,
which must always assume a minimum of two “redactorial” agencies.) He assigned
the fi rst to the Western and the second to the Eastern half of the Indo-Germanic
world and characterized their relationship as follows:
India is universally held to be the land of quiet contemplation, escapist mysticism,
dreaming passivity. But whoever knows India knows that this image is onesided. It
is true that the Indo-Aryans, very early in their history, t urned inward with an excep-
tional fervor. . . . [But] the urge toward contemplation and a turn away from the
world is only o ne side of the Indo-Aryan essence. Complementing it in a polar ten-
sion is an extraordinary activism that worked itself out ever anew through the mil-
lennia in gladiatorial battles, and in the building of temples and riches. Th e powerful
491 . Hauer, E ine indo-arische Metaphysik , v.
492 . Ibid.
493 . Ibid.
494 . Ibid., vi.
495 . Ibid. (Hauer’s emphasis).
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 269
northern blood inheritance [ nordische Bluterbe ] of the Aryans who migrated into India
roughly three millennia before Christ did not remain concealed in India. 496
Assigning the active, heroic aspects of the Bhagavadgītā to this “northern blood inher-
itance,” Hauer argued for seeing the Bhagavadgītā, “upon which we base the meta-
physics of battle and action presented by us here,” as “the most signifi cant attempt
to bring both existential poles of the Indo-Germanic essence—the turn inward to the
creative depths of the soul and the world and the turn outward to a life of action and
of battle, each of which respectively asserts itself in one of the two burning centers of
Indo-Germania—into a creation tension with each other.” 497 According to him, this
tension was ultimately resolved by the text in the injunction to do battle. “To be sure,
the Bhagavadgītā also teaches a path of contemplation, but its fi nal goal is the work ,
the act . At the end of the work stands the strict demand: ‘Fight!’ ”4 98 Th is demand,
however, was not the simple demand to action, unjustifi ed or unsupported by any
metaphysics. Rather, Hauer saw it as being based upon a deep metaphysical necessity.
It was not random action; it was action based upon an insight into the world process
itself, that is, quasi-religious, sanctifi ed action. Th us he argued that “it is part of the
just war, so the poem teaches us, the profound i nsight into the essence of the work, into
the origin and the fi nal signifi cance of action .” 499 As an example of how “the life forces
that manifested themselves in emphatic form in the East and West respectively can
be brought into a unity that is capable of achieving the highest,” 500 the Bhagavadgītā
off ered him an example (once it was purifi ed of its nonoriginal elements, of course)
of how Germany in its present situation (the book was written 1937, by which time
Hauer had already become something like the offi cial Indologist of the Nazis5 01 ) could
deal with the challenges facing it. Th e key problem as analyzed by Hauer was that of
the “tragic fate of fratricidal war [Bruderkrieges] which had ever again annihilated the
Indo-Germanic peoples.”5 02 Th is was the problem the Bhagavadgītā set out to analyze.
According to Hauer, the Gītā’s fi rst message, and he emphasized this, was that
“ Th is war is fate .”5 03 In his words, “it is accepted as an act of providence from which
there is no longer any escape.” Hence, he argued, “the question of why this war broke
out at all, whether it could not still be avoided, does not arise at all. We can no longer
ask about the how and the why of this war, because no one is capable of grasping the
496 . Ibid., 1 (Hauer’s emphasis).
497 . Ibid., 3.
498 . Ibid.
499 . Ibid. (Hauer’s emphasis).
500 . Hauer, E ine indo-arische Metaphysik , 3–4.
501 . Hauer was initiated into the SS and SD personally by Himmler and Heydrich in
1934; membership in the Nazi party followed relatively late on May 1, 1937; by April of
1941 he had made it to Hauptsturmführer. See Horst Junginger, Von der philologischen zur
völkischen Religionswissenschaft: das Fach Religionswissenschaft an der Universität Tübingen
von der Mitte des 19. Jahrhunderts bis zum Ende des Dritten Reiches (Stuttgart: Steiner,
1999), 128–36.
502 . Hauer, E ine indo-arische Metaphysik , 4.
503 . Ibid. (Hauer’s emphasis).
270 Chapter 03
dark force of history.” “Th e only question at stake in the Bhagavadgītā is: ‘H ow does
the human being face up to this inexorable [destiny], how does he confront his fate ?’ ” 504
Th e answer came in the second part of the Gītā’s message.
In Hauer’s assessment, the Bhagavadgītā’s message was not restricted to a spe-
cifi c historical time (indeed, it could not be if the text was to be made productive for
Nazi ideology). Th us, he argued that the “h istorical occasion [ geschichtlicher Vorwurf ]
of the Bhagavadgītā” was, in fact, a “primordial I ndo-Germanic motif [uraltes indoger-
manisches Motiv ]: the confl ict between the warrior’s duty, who must fi ght for honor and
right and thereby becomes guilty of a crime against his own blood .”5 05 Th is “genuinely
tragic motif” according to him was found “in the same manner in the Germanic heroic
saga, where Hildebrand must slay his son (or, in the Nordic version, his brother) as
in the Persian, in the battle between the hero Rustam and his son Sohrab.” 506 “Only,”
he argued, “this motif has been raised in India to monstrous dimensions.” “Two
gigantic armies stand before each other ready for an apocalyptic battle. Th ese dimen-
sions correspond to the breadths of the [geographic] space and of the soul of the
Indo-Aryans.” 507 How did Hauer conceive of the solution to this dilemma?
In the fi rst place, he noted that the problem was specifi cally Indo-Germanic in origin.
“It is characteristic of the Indo-Germanic soul that the confl ict of duty of life is arranged
especially around the confl ict between the warrior’s duty and his love for his own blood
[i.e., his relatives].”5 08 “For,” argued Hauer, “warrior-honor and blood and family were
the two basic realities, upon which the life of the Indo-Germanic peoples was based.” 509
Further, it was characteristic that “the question of how life and fate are to be mastered
is not clarifi ed on the occasion of an event whose meaning lies clearly before our sight;
rather, [they are clarifi ed out of an event] that is preternaturally mysterious.” Th is, he
argued, “demonstrated the strength and depth of the Indo-Aryan sense for life.” 510 Be
the confl ict “against all reason [Sinnwidrig],” be life “not true to reason [Sinngerecht]
according to human understanding,” we must act.5 11 And then he wrote:
We are not called upon to unravel the meaning of life and of its unfolding, but to dis-
cover and perform the act required of us and thus, acting, to master the riddle of life . All
attempts to structure life according to an ethical or some such other scheme only
hinder the drive to act. Th e Indo-Aryan people of ancient India had a good sense of
questions that can never be answered. Th us, questions about the meaning of life,
about why the world or why Being is, of the freedom of the will never stood in the
foreground for them.5 12
504 . Ibid. (Hauer’s emphasis).
505 . Ibid. (Hauer’s emphasis).
506 . Ibid. (Hauer’s emphasis).
507 . Ibid.
508 . Ibid.
509 . Ibid., 4–5.
510 . Ibid., 5.
511 . Ibid.
512 . Ibid. (Hauer’s emphasis).
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 271
Only two answers could be given. First, “whoever binds himself to God and receives
his impulse from the ultimate realities, he is handed over to life and battle.”5 13 And,
second, “ life and battle are always tragic. Tragedy, however, makes the hero .”5 14
Setting out from these premises of the nature of the Indo-Germanic or Indo-Āryan
outlook, Hauer undertook to reconstruct the original Gītā. In chapter 1 (titled “Th e
Burden of Tragedy and the Path to its Mastery”) he discussed the core Gītā, com-
prised (according to him) of chapters 1 and 2 (only verses 1–38). Like all the other
Indologists before him, he thought the Bhagavadgītā began with chapter 1. He fi rst
presented a brief summary of the chapter and then a translation of verses 1.28–33.
He then resumed his translation from 1.38–1.42 and 1.45. Th e fi rst set of verses (i.e.,
1.28–33) according to him raised the problem of “the shedding of so much related
[versipptem] blood.” 515 Th e second set then undertook a “deepening” of the tragedy
of the “fratricidal battle [Bruderkrieges]” by discussing the “unholy eff ect [of the
war] upon the caste order [Sippenordnung] that was held in such high regard by the
Indo-Aryans.” 516 In his opinion, K ṛ ṣ ṇa refused to address this “harrowing lament.”
Instead, he began (verses 2.1–2) to adumbrate “the dark undertone of the inexorabil-
ity of fate.” “Th e battle is foreordained. Th e only thing at stake [now] is to survive it
as is fi tting [for a warrior] and so that it leads to the inner well-being [inneren Heil]
of the one fi ghting.” Th is, however, requires an insight into “the concealed depths of
human existence and of the world’s course.”5 17 Th ereafter, argued Hauer, K ṛ ṣ ṇa went
over into teaching Arjuna about the twofold nature of human existence. First, he
taught that “the world of necessity . . . is only one side of Being. Man, insofar as he is
caught up in a tragic fate, is not the man entire.”5 18 Rather, as K ṛ ṣ ṇa reveals in verses
2.11–21, man possess a “secret essence . . . the puru ṣa .” It constitutes “ the innermost
humanity of a man, the man-in-himself .”5 19 Distinguishing puru ṣa from “the immortal
soul of Christianity,” Hauer argued that it was “something much more mysterious
and inexplicable.” “It is that concealed core of the human, which dwells in the depths
of the soul apart from all empirical human existence and, in its ultimate essence, is
identical with God.” 520 Th e key to resolving the problem set up by the Bhagavadgītā
(and thus also the question of the original Gītā) lay in realizing that “the tragedy
of events” “plays itself out at the level of the foreground, [but] behind it an eternal
background stretches back into the abyss of all Being. . . . Th e tragedy of becoming
guilty plays itself out on the ground of the repose of eternal Being . . . [but] . . . the man
who recognizes that he bears this eternal Being within himself, has already, in this
moment of guilt-laden activity, immersed himself [in this eternal Being].” 521
513 . Ibid., 5–6.
514 . Ibid., 6 (Hauer’s emphasis).
515 . Ibid., 7.
516 . Ibid.
517 . Ibid., 8.
518 . Ibid. (Hauer’s emphasis).
519 . Ibid., 9 (Hauer’s emphasis).
520 . Ibid.
521 . Ibid., 10–11.
272 Chapter 03
According to Hauer, this distinction between an apparent and an essential Being,
between an empirical subject and an eternal Self permitted K ṛ ṣ ṇa in the Bhagavadgītā
to resolve the problem of the tragic confl ict of principles he (i.e., Hauer) located as
being at the heart of the Indo-Germanic outlook. It put an end to the debate between
the warrior’s duty to fi ght and his duty or love toward his family. K ṛ ṣ ṇa could thus
return hereafter to the “foundation of his [Arjuna’s] empirical existence, to his w ar-
rior honor and w arrior duty .”5 22 In two sets of verses (2.31–34 and 2.37–38) K ṛ ṣ ṇa then
addressed the problem from an empirical, social perspective. In Hauer’s opinion, with
these verses, the Bhagavadgītā was originally at an end. Th e warrior “in his tragic con-
fl ict of duties” had been “fi rst and foremost referred to what was self-evident about
his ethical existence: to his duty and honor .”5 23 Th ese, Hauer argued, were “accord-
ing to the Indo-Germanic understanding, the twin pillars of all true human exis-
tence. Whatever was not commensurable with duty and honor led to the destruction
of man.” “Th e only thing that can be preserved in the confl agaration of fate is the
man as authentic [als Echter]. Honor, that means the inner dignity of the untouched
human being, and, in the case of the steadfast, the untouchable human being, who
can be trusted unconditionally by everyone.”5 24 Calling honor the “preservation of
that adamantine core of personality, whose destruction annihilates the human being
in his inner totality,” Hauer argued that the Bhagavadgītā intended to free the human
from “all being moved by feelings [allem nur gefühlsmäßigen Bewegtsein]” and point
him in the direction of “a circle of indestructible values and universal demands.”5 25
Likewise, he argued that duty was “the demand that was placed upon a man from
his integration in the community as the bearer of a function, as the member of a
caste with a vitally important function.” Such individuals, “the people of duty,” were
“the fabric of the community, who received their tasks from the creative Spirit. It
acts through them inasmuch as, willing to make sacrifi ces, they place themselves
in its service.” “For this reason,” concluded Hauer, “honor and duty are the twin
poles around which the life of a people [and, above all, of the Indo-Germanic people]
revolves.” 526
In chapter 2 (“Th e Th oroughgoing Tragedy of Human Action and its Mastery
through Action”), Hauer then addressed the question of how the broader arc of the
Gītā related to this solution. Repeating the concluding verse from the preceding chap-
ter (“Holding alike happiness and unhappiness, gain and loss, victory and defeat,
yoke yourself to the battle, and so do not incur evil,” 2.38 527 ), he argued that “with
this demand the original dialogue between Arjuna and K ṛ ṣ ṇa in the older transmis-
sion was probably at an end.” While he conceded that “perhaps the violent vision
522 . Ibid., 11 (Hauer’s emphasis).
523 . Ibid., 12 (Hauer’s emphasis).
524 . Ibid.
525 . Ibid.
526 . Ibid.
527 . Th e translation is van Buitenen’s. Hauer’s translation reads: “Schmerz und Lust,
Gewinnen und Verlieren, Sieg und Niederlage als gleich erachtend, rüste dich zum Kampfe.
So wirst du kein Unheil auf dich laden.” Hauer, E ine indo-arische Metaphysik , 13.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 273
of chapter XI may have also belonged to this original extent of the Bhagavadgītā,” he
argued that the “current form . . . [of] the entire Bhagavadgītā with its at times very
long 18 chapters,” supposedly “a dialogue between Arjuna and K ṛ ṣ ṇa in the face of
the two armies as they are about to begin battle,” is “manifestly a fi ction.” “Rather,
a series of expansions, refl ecting the philosophical and religious developments of
centuries, were added to the original dialogue, which was brief and was probably fol-
lowed directly by the vision [i.e., the theophany of chapter 11].” 528
As Hauer’s original Gītā is at an end here, we will not pursue the question of
how these additions found their way into the Bhagavadgītā and which of these he
regarded as still being consonant with its Indo-Germanic or Indo-Āryan spirit. In any
case, he insists that even in the wake of all these insertions, “ the basic theme ” of the
Bhagavadgītā remained the same, namely “ the guilt-laden tragedy of human action and
the mastering of this tragedy through battle and action .” 529 And then he repeated: “Arjuna
stands in a confl ict of duties : honor and the warrior’s duty on the one side, blood kin-
ship [Sippenblut] on the other. Both demands reach into the deepest heart and will
of the Indo-Aryan man. Th e Bhagavadgītā takes this confl ict as the core example of the
ethical and religious problem of human action in general .”5 30 As regards the separation of
diff erent textual passages in the epic, Hauer referred the reader to Garbe’s transla-
tion as a guide.5 31 Although he diff ered with him on some aspects, Hauer argued that
“the problem is well adumbrated in Garbe’s remarks.” And while he repeated that
he regarded “the original poem to have consisted of the brief dialogue in chapter
II, as discussed above, and of the vision in chapter XI, which probably followed this
dialogue,”5 32 certain passages in his work suggest that he also included a few other
verses as original. Minimally, chapter 1 (stage-setting, discussion of the problem
of shedding related blood and build up to the confl ict) and c hapter 18, verse 18.73
(Arjuna declares his willingness to fi ght) must have also belonged to the original
Gītā as imagined by him. Hauer’s repeated assertion that the Bhagavadgītā culmi-
nates in the injunction to “the w ork , the a ct ”5 33 suggests that the Gītā could only
have ended for him with a clear declaration to act on Arjuna’s part. Indeed, in the
fi nal sentence of the fi nal chapter of his book, he noted, “Arjuna is now prepared to
fi ght the great fi ght that has been prescribed him. Th e Bhagavadgītā ends with the
528 . Hauer, E ine indo-arische Metaphysik , 13.
529 . Ibid. (Hauer’s emphasis).
530 . Ibid., 13–14 (Hauer’s emphasis throughout).
531 . “I do not want to go into the individual layers of the Bhagavadgītā here. I refer to
the introduction to the translation of the Bhagavadgītā by R. v. Garbe. Admittedly, I see
the development of the Bhagavadgītā somewhat diff erently than Garbe; above all, I believe
that not all passages, in which b rahman is present, can be excluded from the old texts.
However, the problem is well adumbrated in Garbe’s remarks. Perhaps his solution will
never succeed fully. According to my interpretation, the original poem consisted of the
brief dialogue in chapter 2, as shown above, and out of the vision in chapter 11, which
probably followed this dialogue.” Ibid., 72, n. 7.
532 . Ibid., 72, n. 7.
533 . Ibid., 3 (Hauer’s emphasis).
274 Chapter 03
verses 18.73: “Destroyed is the delusion, my mind is clear through your grace, O
Unconquerable One. I am resolved, my doubt banished. I will do as you say. Where
K ṛ ṣ ṇa is, the Lord of Yoga, where the son of P ṛthā is, the archer, there is success [Heil]
and victory, power and fi rm guidance [Führung]—this I know to be true.” 534
BY REASON OF RACE
Hauer’s insistence on this radically truncated Gītā was, of course, not innocent. As
with the other Indologists, at the back of his reconstruction lay a more complex ideo-
logical program. On the one hand, Hauer was interested in Garbe’s critical method
as a way of identifying a more “Āryan” Gītā. On the other hand, he was interested in
this core or epic Gītā as a way of making certain points about the core characteristics
or strengths of the German race, characteristics he wished to see placed in the service
of a program of national renewal. His reconstruction of the Bhagavadgītā was wholly
oriented toward this goal. Although ostensibly a work of “critical” scholarship, his
book was fi rst and foremost an attempt to separate out the original, Germanic, and
northern elements of the text from its later Indian or Dravidian elements. As he
put it, “research in comparative religion has shown that the oldest, religious docu-
ments of ancient India point back to an Ur-Germanic age.”5 35 Further, he argued that
“today, it is considered settled that the racial traits of the Indo-Aryans link them
historically to that race which has had the defi nitive infl uence in the Indo-Germanic
world, the northern [race].”5 36 Citing traveler’s reports collected in Günther’s Die
nordische Rasse bei den Indogermanen Asiens ,5 37 he argued that “even today one fi nds
overall in the realm of the Indo-Aryans and their anthropological and geographical
surroundings blond and blue-eyed types, so that we may assume that the dark-haired
and dark-eyed ‘north Indians’ became darker partly under the infl uence of the cli-
mate [and] partly through admixture with the dark-skinned pre-Aryan inhabitants
of ancient India.” 538 Hauer further invoked “the exemplary researches of [Egon] von
Eickstedt, now evaluated in R assenkunde und Rassengeschichte der Menschheit ,” which
he claimed demonstrated “that even today primarily in northwest India, indeed all
the way to Bengal and further into the mountains of south India, a type of human
close to the northern type is to be found, which von Eickstedt calls the north Indios
534 . Ibid., 71. Th e German original reads: “Vernichtet ist die Verwirrung, klar ist mein
Geist durch deine Herablassung, O Unerschütterlicher. Fest bin ich, der Zweifel ist ver-
trieben. Ich werde tun nach deiner Weisung. Wo K ṛ ṣ ṇa steht, der Herr der Jochung, wo
der Sohn der P ṛthā, der Bogenträger, da ist Heil [ś ri ] und Sieg, Wirkungsmacht und feste
Führung—dies weiß ich.”
535 . Ibid., 1.
536 . Ibid., 1–2.
537 . Hans Günther, D ie nordische Rasse bei den Indogermanen Asiens: Zugleich ein
Beitrag zur Frage nach der Urheimat und Rassenherkunft der Indogermanen (Munich: J. F.
Lehmann, 1934).
538 . Hauer, E ine indo-arische Metaphysik , 2.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 275
[Indiden].”5 39 Also citing his personal impressions during his stay in India (between
1907 and 1911, Hauer taught at a missionary school in south India), he argued,
“so much at least is clear, that Indo-Arya remained extensively under the infl uence
of northern blood and stands even today, albeit in pronounced admixture with
non-Aryan elements.” 540
In aggressively defending the idea of an epic, Āryan Gītā, Hauer was pursuing two
related goals. First, he wished to establish the existence of a cultural and racial tradi-
tion (his so-called Indogermanien or Indo-Germania) that extended “from the shores
of the North Sea and the Baltic across the wide plains of north India all the way to
the sea in the east and the south [i.e., the Bay of Bengal and the Indian Ocean].” 541
Second, he wished to show that “in the two burning centers [Brennpunktsgebieten]
of this great expanse, in Indo-Arya and in G ermania , we fi nd, even in the religious and
spiritual attitudes and formations, an unmistakable kinship, one that extends all the
way to their roots.” 542 It was in order to distill this common root that Hauer under-
took his reconstruction of the Bhagavadgītā. As he put it, “if there is something char-
acteristic of the northern spirit, it is the extraordinary vigor that courses through
it. . . . Ever again, the Indo-Germanic community has been forced to the most inten-
sive activity in a struggle for the unity of forces that threaten to pull apart.” 543 Th e
Bhagavadgītā off ered him a paradigmatic example of the resolution of this struggle.
By reconciling the contemplative, inward-turned aspect of the Indo-Germanic soul
with its active, outward-turned aspect, he thought the Bhagavadgītā held the key to
how Germans could meet the challenges arising from their unique place in the world.
Drawing on the concept of Yoga (especially as elucidated in chapter 12 of the Gītā),
he argued “for everyone who is still on the way the solution does not hold: either
activity or meditation, but rather, both: the turn inward as well as the turn to the
world; contemplation as well as a ction .” And then he emphasized, “ Th e combination of
the two to a polar tension is in the fi nal analysis the great secret of all men that create out
of the ground .” 544
Hauer, however, was not arguing that the German people take over this insight
one-to-one from the Indian text, even if, as he conceded, the same “spirit from
our spirit has been at work in it [the Bhagavadgītā].” 545 As he further expanded
in chapter 3 (“Th e Purifi cation of the Will and the Formation of the Spirit as a
Precondition for the Right Action”), the Bhagavadgītā’s solutions “[could] not sim-
ply be carried over into our sphere.” “Attempts to introduce Yoga methods of the
539 . Ibid.; the reference is to Egon von Eickstedt’s R assenkunde und Rassengeschichte der
Menschheit , originally published in 1933 but then continuously revised until by 1960 it had
expanded to a three-volume work titled Die Forschung am Menschen . Hauer could have been
citing either the edition of 1933 or the revised and expanded edition of 1934.
540 . Hauer, E ine indo-arische Metaphysik , 2.
541 . Ibid., 2.
542 . Ibid., 3 (Hauer’s emphasis).
543 . Ibid.
544 . Ibid., 38 (Hauer’s emphasis).
545 . Ibid., vi.
276 Chapter 03
Indian style indiscriminately among us would inevitably cause damage.” And yet, if
there was any value to the study of Indian texts, it lay in the fact that they gave
valuable indications as to how Germans could master their situation. As he put
it, “research into these solutions that is appropriate to our essence [eine wesens-
gerechte Erforschung dieser Hilfsmittel] gives us hints as to an inner training that
is born out of our own nature, for a cultivation of the spirit, without which there is
no true work.”5 46 Th e Bhagavadgītā, which according to him held “the question and
answer of our own innermost essence,” took fi rst place in this task.5 47
Th us, his next book, Glaubensgeschichte der Germanen (Religious History of the
Germans), published just a little after his Gītā interpretation, absorbed large parts
of E ine indo-arische Metaphysik des Kampfes und der Tat into the central portion of the
text. At the same time as Hauer saw this new book as being “the result of [his] Indo-
Aryan researches during the last years,” he also thought that this “new beginning”
(as he explicitly called it) for the fi rst time presented these researches in the appro-
priate—racial and world-historical—light. As he put it, “the religion historical facts
must lead us so that we encounter this vital inner realm and are creatively moved by
its meaning.” 548 Yet, the problem was not simply one of self-understanding but also
of historical understanding. Hauer explicitly intended his book, which he subtitled
Das religiöse Artbild der Indogermanen und die Grundtypen der indo-arischen Religion (A
Portrait of the Religious Nature of the Indo-Germans and the Basic Types of Indo-
Aryan Religion), to be a contribution to the determination or identifi cation of the
diff erent “races and peoples” of the world although the idea of racial phenotypes now
could be extended to encompass not only physiognomic traits but also spiritual and
cultural attitudes. For instance, right at the outset, he noted: “Th e India of today is
not I ndo-Arya , even though even now more of the Aryan spirit is present in India than
one generally assumes. Of course, one cannot specify a moment in time after which
non-Aryan forces so transformed the Indo-Germans who had immigrated [into India]
in waves that a new type [Wesensform] of religion arose, the Hindu religion, to which
we also accord late Buddhism.” 549
It would be easy to dismiss the work of Hauer as an aberration in the history
of German Indology and many contemporary Indologists have indeed done so. In
the 1930s, he was in great demand as a public speaker and his Gītā interpretation
was at least partly addressed to a popular audience. (As he summed up the Gītā’s
message, it was intended to inculcate the values necessary for citizens to be active,
useful participants in the National Socialist state: “In this way [i.e., having under-
stood the Gītā’s teaching that the tragedy of life can only be mastered by action], we
help to shape the community, people, and state [Gemeinschaft, Volk, und Reich] out
of the eternal creative forces and thus ourselves reach the higher goal, for which we
are destined, namely ‘conquest over the Self’: that means, in the fi nal analysis, to
546 . Ibid., 37.
547 . Ibid., vi.
548 . Jakob Wilhelm Hauer, G laubensgeschichte der Germanen , part I: D as religiöse Artbild
der Indogermanen und die Grundtypen der indo-arischen Religion (Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer,
1937), vii.
549 . Ibid., viii.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 277
become victorious heroic individuals [sieghafte, heroische Menschen].”5 50 ) But it is
important to note that apart from his Āryan excesses, his reconstruction was actu-
ally quite mainstream for the time. Although he overlaid his account with the over-
wrought language of race and duty fashionable at the time (words like “Blut,” “Sippe,”
“Wesen,” “Erbe,” “Ursprung,” “Ehre,” “Pfl icht,” “Schicksal,” and “urindogermanisch”
or “indogermanisch” abound; almost every fourth line is emphasized), his work was
fairly consistent with German ideas of the original Gītā. Like Garbe and Jacobi before
him, he thought that the original Gītā was concerned with the epic situation of the
warrior on the battlefi eld (although he then gave this situation a distinctly contem-
porary twist by relating it to the confl ict of duties and to the tragic downfall of the
German people). Borrowing ideas of “critical” reconstruction from his teacher Garbe,
Hauer off ered yet another Gītā tailored to distinctly German needs. As with all other
Indologists, his scholarship was placed entirely in the service of religious, nation-
alistic, or ethnocentric needs. Yet, it could be so only because he was drawing on a
broad continuity in German Gītā scholarship. A comparison of his Gītā with those of his
predecessors reveals that his reconstruction was essentially an amalgam of Jacobi’s and
Otto’s views. From the former he borrowed the theory of an “epic” Gītā; from the latter,
the theory of an “esoteric” or “supernatural” Gītā. Th us, whereas Jacobi considered only
verses 2.1–37 and 18.37 to be original and Otto verses 2.1–37, 10.1–8, 11.32–34, and
18.73, 551 Hauer considered the original Gītā to have been comprised of verses 2.1–38,
11.15–34 (and possibly more; he is not explicit on whether he includes all of chapter 11
or only the core theophany), and 18.73.5 52 Th e main diff erence consisted in the interpre-
tation he gave these verses: whereas Jacobi had tried to transpose himself into ancient
times and imagine the situation from the perspective of an epic poet, Hauer’s main inter-
est in the poem was as a source of guidance for the present. Th e ultimate signifi cance
of the poem, according to him, “led far beyond the domain of religion-historical or
religion-philosophical observations.” Its true signifi cance lay in the fact that “here
fundamental human insights have come to light that are of vital importance for all of
us, especially in the current epoch of West-Indo-Germanism with its powerful urge
toward shaping the external world.”5 53
THE METHOD BECOMES AUTONOMOUS
Since its origins German Gītā scholarship had been a theological undertaking answer-
ing to theological needs (the pantheism controversy, criticisms of the priesthood,
550 . Hauer, E ine indo-arische Metaphysik , 65.
551 . Note that all three are ambiguous about whether they include chapter 1 in the Gītā.
All make use of it in setting up and formulating the problem, but no one explicitly lists it
among his Gītā verses, possibly because they more or less saw chapter 1 as belonging to
the Bhīs ̣maparvan. In other words, there could be no question of its authenticity as, for all
three, it belongs manifestly to the narrative rather than the didactic portion of the text.
552 . Hauer also includes 18.78 though without commenting on it. It forms the last line
of his book, so evidently he attached great signifi cance to it.
553 . Ibid., 39.
278 Chapter 03
rejection of salvation through works, historicization of faith, the attempt to refound
religion on a personal experience of the divine, the search for primordial Germanic
religion). Yet when scholars in the mid-twentieth century cast about for a method to
continue research into the Gītā, they once again took up the pseudocritical method
of the German scholars. Although Indologists from Holtzmann to Hauer had used
the method as a means of critiquing Brahmanism, these theological origins of the
method were not immediately apparent to most. Indeed, German scholars had so
completely laid hold of the title of universal, objective, secular scholarship, it seemed
inconceivable to international scholars to pursue scholarship on Indian texts in any-
thing other than a German key.
By the mid-twentieth century, the historical-critical method had become norma-
tive not only in Germany (where it received a fresh impetus due to the evangelism of
Paul Hacker 554 ), but also in the United States, France, and the United Kingdom. Even
a subsection of Indian scholars adopted it in the meanwhile, leading to the impres-
sion that it was the method of critical scholarship tout court. Yet, from the questions
asked (historical rather than philosophical-soteriological), to the methods applied
(deconstructive rather than integrative or exegetic), and to the attitudes embod-
ied (antitraditional, anticlerical), at every turn this method revealed its origins in
Protestant theology.
One of the most striking consequences of this institutionalization of Protestant
theology in Indology was the fact that those scholars who did not share the concerns
of the Indologists, who rejected their solefi deanism and insisted on the exegetic
tradition as the best guide to understanding these texts, now appeared as religious
zealots. In order to be taken seriously as scholars, they would now have to deny their
own tradition, inculcating instead the values or concerns of the German critics. Th ere
could be no more striking illustration of Levenson’s principle, “Th e academy must
refuse everything to scholars as faithful members of religious communities, but it
must give them everything as individuals; they must become critics.” 555
A further consequence of this institutionalization was that the method, which
had been created for certain reasons, now became autonomous. Within Indology,
the method had run on two principles: the fi rst was fundamentalism; the second,
anti-Brahmanism. Th us, for authors from Holtzmann to Hauer, it was necessary to
show the existence of “hidden texts” lying beneath or behind the texts of the tradition,
i.e, texts that had existed in a pure state prior to their corruption and defacement at
554 . Of course, Paul Hacker did not reveal his evangelical motivations when defending the
method. However, as we have shown in a recent article, at the back of his carefully concerted
program of advancing German “critical” scholarship in theoretical statements and refl ec-
tions on the text critical method lay an extreme evangelism that culminated in his making
calls to cut funding for the Indian churches unless they pursued the task of conversion more
aggressively. See Joydeep Bagchee and Vishwa Adluri, “Th e Passion of Paul Hacker: Indology,
Orientalism, and Evangelism,” in T ranscultural Encounters between Germany and India: Kindred
Spirits in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries , ed. Joanne Miyang Cho, Eric Kurlander, and
Douglas T. McGetchin (New York: Routledge, 2013), 215–29.
555 . Jon Levenson, Th e Hebrew Bible, the Old Testament, and Historical Criticism
(Louiseville: Westminster/John Knox, 1993), 118.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 279
the hands of the Brahmans. Indology essentially ran on this “hidden text” principle.
But by the mid-twentieth century, this assumption had become so well established
within scholarship that it was no longer even necessary to defend the use of these
alleged originals. Whereas Holtzmann and his successors had still needed to create
complex narratives explaining why the pure texts postulated by them were no longer
available—explanations that always required a recourse to the principle of Brahmanic
corruption—by the mid-twentieth century scholars could simply begin working with
one or more of these alleged originals without needing to justify this decision.
Th is is not to say that anti-Brahmanism disappeared from Indology; it merely
went underground. Anti-Brahmanism, as we have seen, was a structural principle of
Indology. Because Indologists had essentially defi ned their public mission in terms
of an opposition to Brahmanism, that is, as liberators or educators of the Indian
mind from its dependence on the Brahmans, they could not make a case for them-
selves absent this contrast. 556 Th us, even as anti-Brahmanism became more fi rmly
556 . Th e best source for this is Goldstücker’s comment in his essay, “Th e Inspired
Writings of Hinduism,” Th e Westminster Review n.s., 25 (1864): 44–169; reprinted in
Literary Remains of the Late Professor Goldstücker , vol. 2, 50–85, see especially the conclu-
sion on pp. 168–69: “We may, therefore, still entertain the hope that the regeneration of
Hinduism will proceed from these schools, provided that they possess the energy to refuse
any compromise with sectarian worship, which has brought Hinduism into contempt and
ridicule. Th e means which they possess for combating that enemy is as simple as it is irre-
sistible; a proper instruction of the growing generation in its ancient literature, an instruc-
tion, however wholly diff erent from that now constituting the education of a Hindu youth;
to whom reading the Veda is jabbering thoughtlessly the words of the verse, or intoning it
to the melody of a teacher as ignorant as himself of its sense; who, by studying grammer,
understands cramming his memory with some grammatical forms, without any notion as
to the linguistic laws that regulate them; who believes that he can master philosophy or
science by sticking to the textbook of one school and disregarding its connexion with all
the rest of the literature. Th at such a method and such a division of labour do not benefi t
the mind is amply evidenced by the crippled results which they have brought to light. Th e
instruction which India requires, though adapted to her peculiar wants—religious, sci-
entifi c, and political—must be based on that system which has invigorated the European
mind; which, free from the restrictions of rank or caste, tends to impart to it independence
of thought and solidity of character.” Th at the implicit model on the basis of which this
emancipatory history is being construed is the Protestant Reformation is amply shown
by the comments on pp. 150 (“In the worst days of Roman Catholicism, when the multi-
tude professing that religion was steeped in ignorance and its worship was no better than
idolatry, there was still a considerable portion of its priesthood fully acquainted with the
text-book of Christianity. It was no doubt, with its priests a question of policy whether
their fl ock should be admitted to the knowledge which they possessed, and restored to a
purer faith; but that they had the power to work that change is borne out by the history
of Protestantism.”) and 154–55 (“Th e inspired network of the hymnic portion of the three
Vedas, called the Yajur-, Sâma-, and Atharva- Veda, is apparently closer drawn than that of
the other writings just named: but now that it is laid open before the investigating mind
of modern Europe and India; now that the spell is broken which made the study of the
Veda consist of intonating its verses to the melody of the Guru, and mechanically commit-
ting them to memory; now that native and European industry has given us in print not
merely the obscure words of the hymns, but also the commentaries which lead us to their
inner meaning, no Hindu can shrink from the duty of examining the grounds on which
the inspiration of these three Vedas rests.”) And see also Garbe’s Indische Reiseskizzen and
280 Chapter 03
entrenched in Indology, it actually began to disappear from sight—the ultimate
triumph of the ideology of critique. Th us, by the mid-twentieth century, we fi nd
Indology going through a process of professionalization. In place of the long nar-
ratives of Brahmanic malfeasance, the exuberant prose, the popular tone, we fi nd a
more sober positivist philology. Th e prejudices are by no means lost: they are merely
concealed within a more technical and more impenetrable style. (In fact, it would
be interesting to speculate that this deliberatly complex, condensed style, so rich
in abbreviations and technical symbols, was evolved precisely to make their work
less accessible to public scrutiny, thus preserving its racial, antidemocratic biases.)
Few “reconstructions” in the history of German Gītā scholarship demonstrate this as
clearly as the “Brahmanic Gītā” of Simson.
I n his article titled “Die Einschaltung der Bhagavadgītā im Bhī ṣmaparvan des
Mahābhārata ,” Simson set out to revive the theory of the entire Bhagavadgītā as
an interpolation into a preexisting K ṣatriya warrior epic. Although initially pro-
posed by Garbe in 1905, the thesis had lain dormant for nearly a generation, as
German Bhagavadgītā scholars had experimented with diff erent reconstructions
of the Gītā. 5 57 Yet in 1969, as part of his pseudocritical analyses of the war books
of the Mahābhārata focusing on the text as a war epic,5 58 Simson once again took
up the thesis, claiming to have found new evidence in support. His central claim
was the “text-critical” argument that the line b hrāt ṛbhih ̣ sahito rājan putro duryodha-
nas tava (Mahābhārata 6.42.2ab) could not be the correct reading in that passage.
Challenging the editor’s choice of this reading (the line is marked as uncertain in
the critical edition since the northern and southern recensions have divergent read-
ings here), Simson claimed to have found a better alternative: the reading b hrātus
tad vacana ṃ śrutvā rājan putro duh ̣śāsanas cited in some northern manuscripts.5 59
Arguing that this reading was to be preferred to the reading of the critical edition,
Simson then proposed excising the Bhagavadgītā completely from the Mahābhārata
on the basis of yet another “text-critical” observation, namely that the line b hrātus
tad vacana ṃ śrutvā rājan putro duh ̣śāsanas was now incongruous in context, neces-
sitating a diff erent arrangement to the text. “We must, he declared, “look for a ref-
erence point for the reading b hrātus tad vacanam ̣ śrutvā, which [now] hangs in the
air.” 560 Simson argued that such a reference could be found “in the sixteenth Adhyāya,
Th e Redemption of the Brahman , both cited earlier, for further examples of how German
Indologists sought to defi ne their role vis-à-vis the traditional authority fi gures of the
Indians.
557 . Garbe, Die Bhagavadgîtâ , 167.
558 . Th is was in Simson’s dissertation, never published, Altindische epische
Schlachtbeschreibung, Untersuchungen zu Kompositionstechnik und Entstehungsgeschichte
der Bücher Bücher VI bis IX des Mahābhārata, Habilitationsschrift, University of
Göttingen, 1974.
559 . Specifi cally, these were the Bengali (B1.2.3.4), Devanāgarī version of Ānandamiśra
(Da1.2), Devanāgarī version of Nīlakan ̣tḥ a (Dn1.2) and a handful of other Devanāgarī
manuscripts (D4.5.8). B Da Dn D4.5.8 read bhrātus tad vacanam ̣ śrutvā putro duh ̣śāsanas ;
K4 T4 G M only read d u ḥśāsanas in place of duryodhanas .
560 . Simson, “Die Einschaltung der Bhagavadgītā im Bhī ṣmaparvan des M ahābhārata ,” 161.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 281
in Duryodhana’s speech to Du ḥśāsana (6.16.11–20) [where] the king of the Kauravas
[i.e., Duryodhana] commands his brothers to focus especially on protecting Bhī ṣma,
their grandfather and generalissimo of the Kaurava forces.” Reasoning that “we can
now close the gap: 6.42.2 [must] follow[s] directly after [6.]16.20,”5 61 he off ered the
following reconstruction of the epic. Th e text, originally an unambiguous descrip-
tion of the war, had been added to in two stages. Originally, verse 6.16.20, a verse in
which Duryodhana commands his brother Duh ̣śāsana to protect Bhī ṣma, had been
followed immediately by verse 6.42.2. In this line, Du ḥśāsana, having heard these
words, advanced with his troops. At some stage, however, unnamed Brahmans took
control of the text. Th ey used this opportunity to introduce their ideology into the
text, in the form of a long “interpolation” from 6.16.21 to 6.22.22 (as well as one
line, later displaced in the wake of a second interpolation, to 6.42.1). At a still later
date, another group of Brahmans, also unnamed, took control of the text from this
fi rst group. Th ey in turn added to the text, specifi cally inserting at the end of 6.22
the Bhagavadgītā (from 6.23.1 to 6.40.78) and the Pā ṇḍavas’ visit to Bhī ṣma (from
6.41.1 to 6.41.104). At the end of this “secondary interpolation,” they then resumed
the earlier narration with the fi nal line of the “primary interpolation” (now displaced
to 6.42.1). Th is line in turn resumed the original narration from 6.42.2. (Recall that,
as Simson tells the story, verse 6.42.2 originally followed 6.16.20.)
Simson argued that once these two passages were removed, we would substantially
regain the epic in its original form. Yet, matters are not so simple. First, his claim that
bhrātus tad vacanam ̣ śrutvā rājan putro du ḥśāsan as was the correct reading of the origi-
nal was clearly a feint. Th e passage had been chosen with the explicit intent of enabling
the removal of the Bhagavadgītā from the epic. Th e reading is not found in the Śāradā
manuscript, found to be the best of the manuscripts collated for the Bhī ṣmaparvan.5 62
It is also not found in any of the Kashmiri manuscripts allied with the Śāradā version.
It is found only in the Bengali and Devanāgarī manuscripts, both late groups.5 63 It is
not found in D2.3.6, the three manuscripts that demonstrate independence from the
late Northern group (i.e, BD).5 64 It is only found in Da, which is closely related to the
B group; in Dn, which is an eclectic manuscript; in D4 and D8, which are contaminated
with B; and in D5.5 65 In contrast, the older and superior manuscripts, the manuscripts
of the ŚK group, are unanimous in reading bhrāt ṛbhih ̣ sahito rājan putro duryodhanas
tava .5 66 Even K4, which often shows a tendency to agree with the B manuscripts,
features this reading.5 67 Th us, against Simson’s claim that he had found the correct
reading, the manuscript evidence is clearly in favor of the reading b hrāt ṛbhih ̣ sahito
rājan putro duryodhanas tava . Simson had been misled by the presence of a wavy line,
561 . Ibid., 162.
562 . S. K. Belvalkar, ed., Th e Bhī ṣmaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited (Pune:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1947), cv.
563 . Ibid., cix–cx.
564 . Ibid., cx.
565 . Ibid., cix and cxv.
566 . Ibid., cv–cvi.
567 . Ibid., cvi–cvii.
282 Chapter 03
indicating uncertainty, beneath the passage, which had led him to jump to the conclu-
sion that the editor had been hesitant between the readings b hrāt ṛbhih ̣ sahito rājan
putro duryodhanas tava and b hrātus tad vacanam ̣ śrutvā rājan putro duh ̣śāsanas . (He had
not: the passage is marked as uncertain in the critical edition only because of the dis-
crepancy between the northern and southern recensions and not because the editor
even for a moment considered the reading of BD as potentially correct.)
Further compounding his error in reading the manuscript evidence with a misap-
prehension regarding the principles of textual criticism, Simson also claimed that the
reading bhrātus tad vacana ṃ śrutvā rājan putro duh ̣śāsanas was the lectio diffi cilior and
therefore was to be preferred. His exact argument was as follows: “A grammatically
unobjectionable, well-attested reading, albeit one that is not quite fi tting in terms
of content and [furthermore] is apparently not due to a [scribal] error cannot be set
aside in favor of one that is less well attested, but [more] fi tting in terms of content.” 568
Unfortunately, the argument is nonsense: the criterion of lectio diffi cilior applies only
when the manuscript evidence is not clear. In this case, bhrāt ṛbhih ̣ sahito rājan putro
duryodhanas tava is found in the older and less contaminated group. It is clear that
bhrāt ṛbhih ̣ sahito , not bhrātus tad vacanam ̣ , is the lectio diffi cilior that has given rise
to the variants b hrātus and b hrātur by emendation. It is grammatically quite cor-
rect in context. And as for Simson’s claim that bhrātus tad vacana ṃ śrutvā rājan putro
du ḥśāsanas was less fi tting in context, this could only be true if, as he argued, the ref-
erence of this passage, that is, Duryodhana’s instructions to Duryodhana, had been
left twenty-fi ve chapters behind. If, as he claimed, 6.16.20 had been followed imme-
diately by his emended 6.42.2, then bhrātus tad vacana ṃ śrutvā rājan putro duh ̣śāsanas
would not have been the lectio diffi cilior . It would have made perfect sense in context.
Simson’s reasons for excising the Bhagavadgītā were thus very weak. He had
neither understood the process of critical edition nor had he read the manuscripts
correctly. Setting out from an alternative reading of the critical apparatus, he had
expanded this one point of contention into a comprehensive theory of the epic’s
“redactions.” He had no evidence for these “redactions.” Even if he had been correct
about the reading of the passage, it would not have given him reason to argue for
an original heroic epic. Th e only thing that follows from the fact that certain manu-
scripts contain a better reading is that those manuscripts contain a better reading
and not, for instance, that there existed a heroic war epic. In this case, the only thing
that would have followed, had Simson been correct, is that the reading of BD would
have had to be substituted for the reading of ŚK in the critical edition. It does not follow
that the Bhagavadgītā is an “interpolation.” Further, when considering whether a sec-
tion of a text should be included in its critical edition, an editor may consider only the
evidence of the manuscripts for that section. He can only argue against its inclusion
if the manuscript evidence for that section is inconsistent. He cannot, for instance,
argue against its inclusion because he thinks some other section confl icts with it
or because he has an a priori theory of what the original might have looked like. In
claiming that the Bhagavadgītā should not have been included in the critical edition,
568 . Simson, “Die Einschaltung der Bhagavadgītā im Bhī ṣmaparvan des M ahābhārata ,” 161.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 283
Simson was eff ectively setting aside the principles of textual criticism (though under
the pretext of off ering a “text-critical” refl ection on the epic). He was going beyond
what could legitimately be shown using the methods of textual criticism, to return to
enduring German prejudices to the eff ect that the epic was originally the document
of a heroic Indo-Germanic civilization.
Why then insist on the Bhagavadgītā’s removal? For the answer, we must turn
to Simson’s concrete reconstruction. As Simson analyzed the relevant sections (i.e.,
lines 6.16.20–6.42.2 of the Mahābhārata), he thought the original epic had ended at
6.16.20 with Duryodhana’s speech encouraging his brothers to march into battle. In
his opinion, however, later “redactors” had added to this unambiguous war narrative
in two stages. First, from 6.16.21 to 6.22.22, they had added more extensive descrip-
tions of the opening of battle as follows:
Line/section Contents Simson’s characterization
numbers
6.16.20 Duryodhana’s speech Original epic
(end of the original text) (unambiguous war narrative)
6.16.21ff . Muster for battle “Will hardly have belonged to the earliest
6.17 Description of portents layers of the Mahābhārata; on the other
6.18 Description of the Kaurava forces hand, it contains nothing that identifi es it as
6.19 Description of the Pā ṇḍava forces especially late.”
Dh ṛtarā ṣtra inquires about which
side the signs favor; Sa ṁjaya
responds that the signs favor the
Pā ṇḍavas
6.21.1–11 Reference to the triumph of the “Adhyāya 21, which now follows, raises
gods over the asurās; virtue and greater doubts [than the preceding addi-
justice determine victory or defeat tions] . . . [it is an] ideological coloring of the
battle.”
6.21.12–17 Where there is K ṛ ṣ ṇa, there is “Even more suspicious than this ideological
victory coloring of the battle of the Pā ṇḍavas is the
mythic elevation of K ṛ ṣ ṇa, doubtless the
work of the later sectarian revisionists to
whom we owe the Bhagavadgītā.”
6.22 Glorifi cation of the Pā nḍ ạ va heroes; “A piece of Brahmanic poetry.”
priests utter magic incantations
to ensure Yudhi sṭḥ ira’s victory; he
rewards them with gifts and wealth
6.22.17–19 and Dh ṛtarā ṣtṛa’s questions “Tries with Dh ṛtarā ṣtṛa’s questions to go over
6.22.20–22 (Sa ṁjaya does not answer, but to the actual commencement of battle.”
responds with a description of the
noise created by the armies)
284 Chapter 03
Th ereafter, Simson argued, the fi rst group of “redactors” would have ended their “pri-
mary interpolation” with Dh ṛtarā ṣtṛa’s question from line 6.42.1 (which was origi-
nally contiguous with his other questions in lines 6.22.17–19 and 20–22, but was
displaced to some twenty chapters later by the “interpolation” of the Bhagavadgītā).
However, at this point, a second group of “redactors” took control of the text and
inserted a “secondary interpolation” from 6.23 to 6.41 as follows:
Line/section Contents Simson’s characterization
numbers
6.23–6.40.78 Th e Bhagavadgītā “Th e diaskeuast of the Bhagavadgītā introduction
Introduction has dropped the motivation for Duryodhana’s
Description of the heroes speech. Duryodhana here lists [the names of] the
most important heroes of the two armies to his
teacher Dro ṇa (but why, really? Th e names should
all be familiar to him!) and ends with the com-
mand: ‘You all should protect Bhī ṣma’. But instead
of Dro ṇa reacting in any way to Duryodhana’s com-
mand, Bhī ṣma, who was not addressed in any way,
blows his horn to encourage Duryodhana. Th ere
follows a general noise of music instruments (23.19
sa gho ṣo Dhārtarā ṣtṛā ṇām appears out of place after
the listing of the Pā ṇḍava heroes). . . . Th e blowing
of horns is a sign of proud battle-readiness, so that
Arjuna’s sudden change of mood appears strange. So
too [is] the demand to K ṛ ṣ ṇa to station his chariot
before the armies so that he can see whom he must
fi ght completely unmotivated: as though he did not
know who was standing opposite him.”
Nighttime visit to “Adhyāya 6.41, the last of our insertion, manifests
Bhī ṣma just as late and unrealistic an account [as
the Bhagavadgītā] . . . . In response to Yudhi ṣtḥ ira’s
question, how he may be defeated in battle, Bhī ṣma
replies (6.41.43) that he does not know of any foe
who can overcome him. Th e time for his death
has not arrived as yet; Yudhi ṣtḥ ira should come
once again. Th is is a clear reference to 6.103 where
Yudhi ṣtḥ ira’s second visit to Bhī ṣma is described. . . .
He [Bhī ṣma] reveals to them that he will not fi ght
against Śikha ṇḍin who was born as a woman. Arjuna
can therefore cause him to fall if he were to use
Śikha ṇḍin as his shield. . . . It is thus likely that the
visit of the Pā ṇḍavas to Bhī ṣma in 6.103 is just as
late an insertion as its counterpart in 6.41.
(Continued)
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 285
(Continue)
Line/section Contents Simson’s characterization
numbers
Th e motivation for both interpolations is clear and
corresponds to that for the Bhagavadgītā inser-
tion: the later Brahmanic revisionists thought they
had to justify the conduct of the Pā ṇḍavas during
the battle; fi rst, the battle against the grandfather
and teacher required an ideological justifi cation
(Bhagavadgītā); thereafter, the base trick by means
of which the Pā ṇḍavas defeated Bhī ṣma had to be
excused: the victim himself makes the suggestion
and the killers cannot be criticized when they accept
his suggestion. Th is becomes quite clear in the
conversation of Yudhi ṣtḥ ira with Dro ṇa, whom he
visits next after Bhī ṣma. . . . Regarding the question
of how he may be defeated, Dro ṇa indicates the
sole means that would motivate him to lay down
his weapons. . . . To be sure, this is not as direct a
demand to use an unfair trick as that in 6.103, [but]
the intent of the author is manifestly the same: the
justifi cation of the ignoble [unritterlich] tactics of
the Pā ṇḍavas, which must have been embarrassing
to the devout Brāhman ̣as of the later age.”
6.42.1 Dh ṛtarā ṣtṛa’s question,
with which he attempts
to pick up the question he
had raised in 6.22.18 (but
which was left unanswered
by Sa ṁjaya)
In the introduction to his article, Simson characterized his interpretation as a
contribution to “textual criticism” of the Bhagavadgītā. In the very fi rst sentence,
he wrote that “scholarship appears to be largely unanimous regarding the relatively
old age of at least the oldest parts of the B hagavadgītā ” and he cited the work of
Holtzmann Jr., E. W. Hopkins, and Richard Garbe as evidence.5 69 Further noting that
scholars were not clear about whether “these oldest portions [of the Bhagavadgītā]
had belonged to the Mahābhārata from the beginning, or whether the Bhagavadgītā
was an insertion that had previously existed as an independent work,” he argued that
569 . Ibid., 159.
286 Chapter 03
it appears “not totally superfl uous to investigate once again whether text critical rea-
sons can be found for an interpolation in order to clarify at least a partial aspect of
the complex of questions surrounding the Bhagavadgītā.”5 70 Th us, he presented his
work as a contribution to critical scholarship on the Indian text.
Yet, even a brief look at Simson’s reconstruction suffi ces to demonstrate that
his “researches” were completely subjective, ideologically driven, and lacked all
grounding in fact. For all that he aff ected a realistic, historicist attitude, his ideas
of the Mahābhārata were based on nothing more than a German prepossession in
favor of a heroic epic—a prepossession whose roots, we know, ultimately lie in the
Romantic movement. Borrowing ideas of an original epic from his predecessors,
Simson described the changes to this alleged original in terms that basically reprised
the century-old Holtzmannian narrative of a war narrative interpolated with
“Brahmanic” and “K ṛ ṣ ṇaite” elements. For instance, he claimed of sections 6.16–19,
which describe the muster for battle, that they “will hardly have belonged to the earli-
est layers of the Mahābhārata; on the other hand, it contains nothing that identifi es
it as especially late.” 571 In an echo of Holtzmann’s thesis of a three-stage redaction of
the epic (Buddhist, Brahmanic, and Purā ṇic), he also claimed that this “fi rst inser-
tion ocurred in the framework of the great revision of the Mahābhārata to which
we owe the account of battle in its present form; the poet at work here still had an
immediate interest in the battle, the dark signs announcing it, the great heroes and
the splendor of the armies arrayed on the battlefi eld.”5 72 With this claim, Simson was
eff ectively pruning back the Mahābhārata’s literary descriptions of war, to create the
simple, primitive heroic composition Holtzmann had posited as being at the heart of
the Indian epic.
Like Holtzmann, Simson thought that the original epic would have been an
unambiguous war narrative. Like the Freiburg scholar, he thought that longer, more
detailed descriptions of battle must have been added to the epic as part of the trans-
formation in its nature from a historical recollection and song of praise to a more
elaborate literary and philosophic work. Subscribing to a theory of “epic” as essen-
tially a violence-fi lled work recording the military triumphs of a primitive people, he
argued that these passages already refl ected a change from the heroic age to a more
refi ned, sophistic, and, ultimately, immoral age. As compared to the heroic epic, with
its white-on-black confl ict between two tribes or two peoples struggling for superi-
ority, he thought that the reference to a mythic and/or metaphysical dimension in
sections 6.21–22 (a reference to the eternal confl ict between the gods and titans as
the mythic background of the epic and to the fact that victory ultimately accrues to
the just) already indicated a shift to a new, sophistic outlook. Th us he claimed that
these sections, even though occuring as part of the “primary interpolation,” “fall out
of the framework [of the fi rst interpolation] and we may, at least partially, presume
a later origin for them.”5 73 Declaring that section 6.21 “raises greater doubts [than
570 . Ibid., 159–60.
571 . Ibid., 165.
572 . Ibid., 167.
573 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 287
the preceding additions],” he argued that it represented an “ideological coloring of
the battle.” 574 From his perspective, by introducing the question of right and wrong,
this section already prejudiced the evaluation of the primal tribal confl ict, disposing
the mind of the reader positively toward the Pā ṇḍavas. Indeed, he claimed that the
following section (6.21.12–17) with its “mythic elevation of K ṛ ṣ ṇa” was “even more
suspicious than this ideological coloring of the battle of the Pā ṇḍavas. . . .” Echoing
Holtzmann’s views of K ṛ ṣ ṇa as a cipher for the Brahmanic takeover of the epic, Simson
claimed that this section was “doubtless the work of the later sectarian revisionists to
whom we owe the Bhagavadgītā.”5 75 He cited the presence of the expression “where
there is Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa, there is victory” in this section (verses 12 and 14) and he insinuated
that this was compelling evidence of an attempt to justify the Pā ṇḍavas. Likewise,
he claimed of section 6.22 (the Brahmans perform rites to ensure king Yudhi ṣtḥ ira’s
victory, and he rewards them with gifts) that it was “a piece of Brahmanic poetry
[Brahmanenpoesie]” and then he asserted: “we can do without it.” 576
Simson not only adopted Holtzmann’s theory of a heroic epic later reworked
to a piece of Brahmanic apologetics but also tapped into a pervasive current of
anti-Brahmanic sentiment. Even though he was writing nearly a century and a half
after that father of German racial anti-Semitism, Christian Lassen, it seemed German
hatred of the priests was unappeased. Th us, when he turned to the second of his two
“interpolations,” he raised arguments in the most ad hoc manner—all designed to
show that the Bhagavadgītā could not have been part of the original Mahābhārata.
For instance, he claimed that the opening chapter of the Bhagavadgītā was probably
borrowed from (or fashioned after) chapter 6.47. According to Simson, the descrip-
tion of the heroes “made much more sense in this, the source [Vorlage] from which
they were taken.” He described Duryodhana’s actions in fulsome terms and claimed
that “his speech is addressed to the assembled generals [Führer] of his army, not, as
in the Gītā, to Dro ṇa.”5 77 Likewise he claimed that “the diaskeuast of the Bhagavadgītā
introduction has dropped the motivation for Duryodhana’s speech. Duryodhana
here lists [the names of] the most important heroes of the two armies to his teacher
Dron ̣a” and then he added parenthetically: “But why, really? Th e names should all be
familiar to him!”5 78 According to Simson, although Duryodhana ends his speech with
the command “ ‘You all should protect Bhī ṣma’ . . . instead of Dro ṇa reacting in any
way to Duryodhana’s command, Bhī ṣma, who was not addressed in any way, blows
his horn to encourage Duryodhana” and from this he seemingly concluded that the
passage was not genuine.5 79 (Confusion in battle is admitted by German Indologists
as an argument against events following a precise order only when what is at stake
is demonstrating the existence of an original, heroic Indo-Germanic epic; at all other
times lack of order is a sign of changes to the “Vorlage.”) Likewise, he claimed that
574 . Ibid., 166.
575 . Ibid.
576 . Ibid.
577 . Ibid., 170.
578 . Ibid., 170–71.
579 . Ibid., 171.
288 Chapter 03
the line s a gho ṣo Dhārtarās ̣ṭrā ṇām (6.23.19) “appears out of place after the listing of
the Pā ṇḍava heroes. . . . Th e blowing of horns is a sign of proud battle-readiness, so
that Arjuna’s sudden change of mood appears strange. So too the demand to K ṛ ṣ ṇa
to station his chariot before the armies so that he can see whom he must fi ght is
completely unmotivated: as if he did not know who was standing opposite him.” 580
Simson’s anti-Brahmanism reached a climax in the concluding section of his arti-
cle, when discussing the story of the Pā ṇḍavas’ nighttime visit to Bhī ṣma. He claimed
that “adhyāya 6.41, the last of our [secondary] insertion, manifests just as late and
unrealistic an account [as the Bhagavadgītā],” 581 and then argued that this episode
was inserted as an obvious reference to section 6.23 (Yudhi ṣtḥ ira’s second nighttime
visit, when Bhī ṣma reveals the means by which he may be defeated) and he clarifi ed
the function of this section as follows:
He [Bhī ṣma] reveals to them that he will not fi ght against Śikha ṇḍin who was born
as a woman. Arjuna can therefore cause him to fall if he were to use Śikha ṇḍin
as his shield. Th e Pā ṇḍavas return to their camp, where their briefi ng continues.
Arjuna has qualms about killing his own grandfather. Th en K ṛ ṣ ṇa reminds him of
his K ṣatriya duties and utters a B ṛhaspati word. Without raising further objections,
Arjuna now suggests the same trick as Bhī ṣma had just given them. . . .5 82
Th en he summarized:
It is thus likely that the visit of the Pā ṇḍavas to Bhī ṣma in 6.103 is just as late an
insertion as its counterpart in 6.41. Th e motivation for both interpolations is clear
and corresponds to that for the B hagavadgītā insertion: the later Brahmanic revi-
sionists thought they had to justify the conduct of the Pā ṇḍavas during the battle;
fi rst, the battle against the grandfather and teacher required an ideological justifi -
cation (B hagavadgītā ); thereafter, the base trick by means of which the Pā ṇḍavas
defeated Bhī ṣma had to be excused: the victim himself makes the suggestion and
the killers cannot be criticized when they accept his suggestion. 583
Simson no doubt saw his work as off ering a “critical” explanation of the Mahābhārata’s
progression. From his perspective, these hypotheses and arguments, ad hoc and
subjective though they were, seemed to off er a kind of rational explanation of why
certain sections of the Mahābhārata, such as the Bhagavadgītā and the episode of
the nighttime visit to Bhī ṣma, occurred where they did. Even though his arguments
were quite tenuous, being self-referential circular, and completely devoid of positive
verifi cation, he likely thought that he had, in the course of his “researches” into the
war books of the Mahābhārata, found at long last the key to the “interpolation” of the
580 . Ibid.
581 . Ibid.
582 . Ibid., 172.
583 . Ibid., 173.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 289
Bhagavadgītā.5 84 And yet, what he did not notice was that all his arguments derived
from a priori assumptions concerning the origins of the epic as a Kaurava epic and
the nature of the epic as a war narrative. Every argument he provided to buttress his
idea of the epic’s “composition technique and genesis [Enstehungsgeschichte]” was
in fact a priori. For instance, as “proof” of his thesis of the episode of the nighttime
visit, he advanced the observation that “this [i.e., the motivations of the “redactors”
for inserting this episode] becomes quite clear in the conversation of Yudhi ṣtḥ ira
with Dron ̣a, whom he visits next after Bhī ṣma. . . . Regarding the question of how
he may be defeated, Dron ̣a indicates the sole means that would motivate him to lay
down his weapons. . . . To be sure, this is not as direct a demand to use an unfair trick
as that in 6.103, [but] the intent of the author is manifestly the same: the justifi -
cation of the ignoble [unritterlich] tactics of the Pā ṇḍavas, which must have been
embarrassing to the devout Brahmans of the later age.” 585
Th e more serious problem, of course, concerns Simson’s anti-Brahmanism.
Even though he presented his work as a contribution to “textual criticism” of the
Mahābhārata, the entire reconstruction was, in fact, driven by his anti-Brahmanism.
Setting out from a priori assumptions about the nature of Brahman interests, Brahman
politics, and Brahman ideology, he actually geared the entire reconstruction to bear
out these assumptions. Th roughout his work, he repeated the motif of “Brahmanism,”
either referring to the addition as “a piece of Brahmanic poetry” 586 or declaring that
“the later Brahmanic revisionists of the Mahābhārata believed that they had to justify
the conduct of the Pān ̣ḍavas during the battle”5 87 or claiming that responsibility for
these changes had to be laid at the doorstep of the “devout Brahmans of the later
age.” 588 In his concluding summary, he once again reprised these claims, describing
the changes to the Mahābhārata as “a late piece of Brahmanic apologetics.”
Let us summarize the results of our investigation: the repetitions we have dis-
covered and the context of the initial verses of the description of battle (6.42.2)
584 . Actually, his work was not even as original as he claimed. Before him, Holtzmann
had already claimed that the plan to defeat Bhī ṣma came, not from the grandfather, but
from Arjuna and Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa (see Holtzmann Jr., Arjuna. Ein Beitrag zur Reconstruction des
Mahâbhârata , 25–26). According to him “the present redaction of the epic did everything
possible in order to absolve its favorite, Arjuna, of all sin vis-à-vis his grandfather. In the
old poem, Arjuna killed his grandfather and teacher, the unconquerable hero, through
deceit following the instructions of Kr ̣ ṣ ṇa . . . [whereas] [t]h e narrative of the fall of Bhīs ̣ma,
as it is present now to us in the fi nal chapters of the sixth book, shifts all blame from
Arjuna.” Ibid., 27–28. For “our poem, where it really acknowledges this [i.e., that Arjuna
killed Bhī ṣma], says that Arjuna at least acted without sin. Hence the piece mentioned
earlier in which Bhīs ̣ma himself tells his foe of the means by which he can be killed was
inserted.” Ibid., 29. In fact, the only part of Holtzmann’s accusations against the Pā ṇḍavas
Simson d id not reprise is the former’s suggestion that “possibly Arjuna’s ‘wrongdoing’ went
even further: he fought disguised as Çikha ṇḍin; the latter [disguised] as Arjuna.” Ibid., 30.
585 . Simson, “Die Einschaltung der Bhagavadgītā im B hī ṣmaparvan des M ahābhārata ,”
173–74.
586 . Ibid., 166.
587 . Ibid., 173.
588 . Ibid., 174.
290 Chapter 03
with a verse lying far back cast light on the technique of the later redactors of the
Mahābhārata , who must already have had the Mahābhārata before them in a written
form [Holtzmann’s Buddhist poet!]. We have brought the fi rst part of the inserted
section (6.16.21–6.22.22) into association with the fi nal great revision or elabora-
tion of the report of battle for reasons pertaining to its content. In contrast, the
Bhagavadgītā, which follows thereafter, turned out to be a later insertion because of
its introduction modeled on 6.47.1ff . Likewise, in the Pān ̣ḍavas’ visit to the enemy
camp which follows after the Bhagavadgītā , we see a late piece of Brahmanic apolo-
getics, which, just like the second visit to Bhī ṣma (6.103.40–84), was added as a
moral justifi cation of the Pā ṇḍavas. 589
And then he added in a footnote to this paragraph: “Th e fi nal turn to a crusader ide-
ology [Kreuzzugsideologie] is demonstrated in 6.62.34 and 13.153.39: yata ḥ Kr ̣ ṣ ṇas
tato dharmo yato dharmo tato jaya ḥ .”5 90
It was for good reason that Simson’s Bhagavadgītā was chosen as the fi nal itera-
tion of the German Gītā in this book. It represents the culmination of a long tra-
dition of German anti-Brahmanic sentiment. More importantly, however, it shows
that the Indologists’ anti-Brahmanism was not simply an accompanying phenom-
enon, b ut the central principle that endowed their reconstructions with legitimacy . In the
absence of this prejudice, namely, that Brahmans corrupted the texts and that they
did so for ideological and apologetic reasons, their reconstructions would not have
been possible. Indeed, there would have been no history to tell, because the history
German Indologists were interested in telling was not objective history, but the his-
tory of Brahman domination of India . Th e history Indologists were interested in telling
was essentially the history of the mind’s ascent to freedom and self-determination—
a history in which Brahmanism as the stage immediately preceding Western schol-
arship had to be seen as a stage of dogmatism and subjugation to authority. It was
the main obstacle to critical thinking of the kind espoused by the Western scholars,
and they did not hesitate to make the least sign of allegiance to tradition an obsta-
cle to the respective scholar’s participation in the Western “critical” enterprise. For
instance, when it came to the reason why the editor of the Mahābhārata critical edi-
tion had rejected the reading favored by him, Simson did not simply attribute this
disagreement to a diff erence in judgment. No, the editor’s “error” (an “error” only
from Simson’s perspective) had to be attributable to his entanglement in tradition,
an entanglement that directly aff ected his ability to carry out critical, methodical,
self-refl exive research. Th us, placing Belvalkar in a long tradition of Brahman apolo-
getic scholarship, Simson argued that the reason he (i.e., Belvalkar) “did not see or did
not want to see the passage [i.e., 6.11.16–20, which according to him was the immedi-
ate antecedent to 6.42.2]” was because he was a “devout Hindu [frommer Hindu].”5 91
He attributed similar motivations to Belvalkar as to the anonymous redactors of
589 . Ibid., 174.
590 . Ibid., 174, n. 17.
591 . Ibid., 161.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 291
the text, to whom “the ignoble [unritterlich] tactics of the Pā ṇḍavas . . . must have
been embarrassing,” and implied that even the contemporary critical edition was of a
piece with the long history of the epic in which its original heroic, K ṣatriya character
had been obscured in favor of a more theosophic or philosophical air. Indeed, he used
practically the same expression—“devout Hindu”—to characterize the editor as he
had these anonymous redactors, who were “devout Brahmans” in his argot.
Th ere can be no more striking illustration of how German Indologists, although
they thought of themselves as the epitome of secular, enlightened scholars, were in
fact using ideas of critical scholarship to pursue religious, apologetic ends. Other
scholars would accept their work, even welcoming their researches as scientifi c
knowledge, 592 only because they had not understood the deeper processes at work
in this tradition of scholarship. Th ey had simply accepted the German Indologists’
narrative of an antithesis between modern, critical scholarship and traditional schol-
arship, where the former not only supersedes the latter but is able to reveal it for
what it is. Th ey had not examined the role played by this narrative in the Indologists’
own institutional constitution and praxis. Specifi cally, they had overlooked three
crucial aspects of this relationship: (1) modern scholarship did not supersede tradi-
tional scholarship, but asked diff erent sorts of questions aiming at diff erent sorts of
ends (intervention in Indian history or confi rmation of a German anti-Semitic and
anticlerical prejudice), (2) modern scholarship did not replace traditional scholar-
ship, but made a diff erent sort of knowledge available (information or data on the
text rather than understanding), and (3) modern scholarship was ultimately not
valued—not even among the Indologists—for the kind of knowledge it made avail-
able, but for the identity it gave the scholar (affi rmation as secular, enlightened, and
postconfessional).
But here, at the end of our discussion of Simson’s Gītā, itself the last in our list of
German Gītās, it suffi ces to note that German Indologists’ “philological” tools fell far
592 . See, for instance, Brockington, Th e Sanskrit Epics , 146–47 claiming that “Georg
von Simson has demonstrated the mechanisms by which the Bhagavadgītā was included
within the Mahābhārata and has shown that the repetition in Mbh. 6.95.4–23 of Mbh.
6.16.11–20+42.2 reveals that originally the whole block from 16.21 to 42.1 was absent;
this includes most of the more extended B hagavadgītāparvan (Mbh. 6.14–41), where the
prediction of Bhī ṣma’s death and of the mourning for him in some sense provide a specifi c
rationale for Arjuna’s revulsion. Th ere are in fact two stages of interpolation: the fi rst after
6.16.20 provides the connection between Duryodhana’s speech and Du ḥśāsana’s reaction
to it and, through Dh ṛtarā ṣtṛa’s question at the end of a dhyāya 22, forms a transition to
the actual start of the battle at a dhyāya 42; at this point the second stage of interpola-
tion inserts the B hagavadgītā (Mbh. 6.23–40) and the visit of the Pā ṇḍavas to Bhī ṣma and
the gurus, before taking up again in 6.42.1 the bridging question by Dh ṛtarā ṣtṛa from the
fi rst stage of interpolation. A signifi cant indicator of this process is the extent to which
6.18 borrows from elsewhere in the parvan , not only from 6.42 but also from later in the
book. Th e fi rst insertion (6.16.21–22.22) clearly occurred as part of the great revision of
the Mahābhārata to which we owe the account of the battle in its present form, whereas
the Bhagavadgītā is revealed by its preamble in 1.2–19, which draws on 6.47.2–30, to be
later still. Also, the visit of the Pā ṇḍavas to the enemy (6.41) following the B hagavadgītā ,
forms a late piece of brāhman apologetic, which equally with the second visit to Bhī ṣma
(6.103.40–84) must have been inserted for the moral justifi cation of the Pā ṇḍavas.”
292 Chapter 03
short of their “critical” aspirations. Th ey could only carry out their so-called historical
reconstructions of the text because these reconstructions were premised on a priori
ideas of the epic’s origins. Since they all subscribed to common ideas of Āryan origins
and Brahmanic corruptions, their reconstructions appeared plausible, at least within
their narrow circle. And as long as these ideas were not questioned, their institu-
tional hegemony would be secure.
As the implicit assumption underlying their reconstructions, German anti-
Brahmanic sentiment thus essentially underwrote two centuries of Mahābhārata
scholarship. Once this principle was questioned, however, the lacunae in their “schol-
arship” became glaring. As our discussion of Simson’s article demonstrates, elemen-
tary principles of scholarship such as the duty to read the manuscript evidence, not
to bear false witness, and so on were sacrifi ced for the sake of a Lutheran agenda.
Fantastic articles of faith from higher criticism overruled objective evidence. Racial
or religious polemics could be disguised behind the mask of scholarship. Occasionally
of course the mask would slip, as for instance when the German Indologist Peter
Gaeff ke launched a fulminant diatribe against calls for reform in Indian studies, tar-
geting among others: women, ethnic Asians, American educators, university admin-
strators, American-born Asians, and the post-Oriental critics. 593 But on the whole,
what we see is that Indology, once again in its long history, has found a way to adapt
593 . See his “A Rock in the Tides of Time: Oriental Studies Th en and Now,” A cademic
Questions3 , no. 2 (1990): 67–74, especially 69 (“Diff erences in sociological climate also played
a signifi cant role. In Europe, it was the gifted children of a middle class sympathetic to
learning who found their way through the gymnasium to the university, eventually ascend-
ing to the prestigious position of university professor. In the United States, on the other
hand, it was mostly the off spring of missionaries or clerics with an interest in and love
for Eastern peoples who became Orientalists. (Later, members of ethnic groups from the
Orient who had an intrinsic interest in their own traditions also undertook the serious
study of classical Eastern languages.) Furthermore, due to the more private character of
higher education in the United States and its dependence on irregular public funding,
Oriental studies developed more erratically than on the Continent, and consequently
was, and is, more vulnerable to internal and external pressures.”), 71 (“Serious scholars
in the East familiar with the work of Western Orientalists published in French, German,
Italian, and Russian, wisely refrained from such 'Orientalist-bashing,' for they knew that
more than blind resentment and unfocused anger about postcolonial politics were need to
unhinge two hundred years of scholarship. Indeed, Edward Said, a Palestinian of Christian
ancestry, who has served as a progenitor of this line of anti-Orientalist propaganda, has
off ered neither a well-argued, nor a scholarly alternative theory about the origins and his-
tory of Islam. As a professor of English, and not particularly knowledgeable in the fi eld
of Oriental studies, he is incapable of such an achievement.”), 72 (“Th at such a superfi cial
and politically motivated critique of Oriental studies could be taken seriously refl ects the
peculiar situation of the American scene in which one fi nds a large immigrant population
of native speakers of Eastern languages, and a heightened demand for professors in vari-
ous fi elds of Oriental learning where trained Americans are scarce. Part of the blame for
this situation has to be placed on the deplorable state of secondary education in the United
States (increasingly emulated in most European countries) which has led to a shortage of
motivated students with a sound basis in several Western languages, and a rudimentary
knowledge of at least one Eastern tongue. In addition, very few c olleges encourage students
to learn more than one foreign language of any sort. Th e result is that American Ph.D.’s—
especially in the social sciences, but also in the disciplines of Oriental learning—often
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 293
to the prevailing intellectual and social climate. It entered into an implicit bargain with
the public whereby, in exchange for distancing itself from the more rabid utterances of
some of its members, it is permitted to continue producing essentially the same kind of
knowledge subscribing to the same kind of ideology. 594
Yet as often as these gestures of ideological purifi cation were repeated, at its core
Indology remained committed to three principles:
1 . Th e fi rst was that native scholars, irrespective of whether they actually subscribed
to the commentarial tradition or were simply “colored,” would always be subject
to a heightened suspicion. Th ey would at every turn have to engage in hyperbolic
criticisms of the tradition, up to and including rehashing Western arguments
about what set critical consciousness apart from traditional scholarship. In eff ect,
they would be placed under a double restriction: to deny not only whatever was
traditional about them, but also to exercise the same kind of supervision over
other native scholars. Under pain of themselves being labeled “uncritical,” they
would be expected to integrate themselves into the academic hegemony. Some
of the most vehement accusations of the native tradition would come from these
native scholars. (Th e German scholars, not realizing the institutional, dogmatic
pressures that had compelled them to this amicicide, would, of course, seize upon
this as confi rmation of their views. 595 )
lack a linguistic base broad enough for a comprehensive knowledge of an Eastern cul-
ture. . . . Th us, instead of patiently grooming their few linguistically gifted students, some
universities have taken a short cut and employed insuffi ciently trained largely because they
can also speak English. Th is has resulted in both a lowering of standards in many institu-
tions and an unnecessary and unwanted specialization, giving weight to Nietzsche’s earlier
criticism.”), and 73–74 (“Unfortunately, it has already become a fact that hiring decisions
regarding Asian area specialists in social science departments are made without consult-
ing its Orientalists. As a result, an increasing crowd of deconstructionists may soon claim
exclusive rights to explain the Orient to us. Another danger to Oriental studies has taken
shape because of university affi rmative action policy. While most Western Orientalists are
indeed white males, the number of excellent women in the fi eld is by no means insig-
nifi cant. . . . Th e diff erence between these scholars and those recruited through affi rmative
action programs is that the former attained their positions under the same conditions and
standards as other Orientalists. Yet nowadays we hear that Oriental studies departments
should hire more women “ ‘to bring in new and creative viewpoints.’ ”
594 . Occasionally, this could take extreme forms, such as the complete sacrifi ce of
Hauer to the Germanists as the price for preserving Indology’s ideological unimpeach-
ability; for relevant passages, see Reinhold Grünendahl, “Wissenschaftsgeschichte im
Schatten postorientalistischer De/Konstruktion,” O rientalistische Literaturzeitung 103, no.
4–5 (2008): 468–77 and see also Hanneder, Marburger Indologie im Umbruch , 51–62. Th e
implicit logic appears to be: if he was a Nazi, he was not one of us (but his “science” was
wonderful nonetheless).
595 . See Hanneder’s recent review of Th e Pandit: Traditional Scholarship in India in
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 155 (2001): 671–72, seizing upon
Aklujkar’s article (Ashok Aklujkar, “Th e Pandits from a pi ṇḍa-brahmān ̣ḍa Point of View,”
in Th e Pandit: Traditional Scholarship in India , ed. Michael Axels [Delhi: Manohar, 2001],
41–59) as support for his view that “the tension between the two methods of scholarship
[i.e., between traditional Indian and Western academic scholarship] . . . is in some respects
294 Chapter 03
2 . Th e second principle was that no source of refl ection, of normative concern, could
be brought from the outside to challenge the sense of superiority of the Indologists.
Th e source of their sense of superiority manifestly did not lie in engagement with
Brahmanic theology. As we have seen, there was no such engagement. On the con-
trary, Indologists invoked the ideology of critique precisely in order to avoid such
an engagement. If historical consciousness, as the latest stage of the evolution
of the human mind, had superseded and encompassed all earlier stages within
itself, what need could there be for an engagement with these stages? What need
was there to talk to the native tradition? And thus, by activating a narrative of
the necessary evolution of human reason (culminating, of course, in the critic’s
own present), German Indologists were able to forego an engagement with Indian
theology, even as what they were doing was theological through and through.
3 . Th e third principle relates to what scholars have referred to as the triumph of
historical consciousness. Myers notes: “as a mode of cognition, historicism has
been a remarkable success story. It has come to dominate our way of thinking
about the past, conditioning us to place the single event in context and then link
it to a chain of other contextually bound events. Its ubiquity has also bestowed a
similar to the relationship between theology and ‘Religionswissenschaft.’ Th eology con-
ceived as the academic side of the practice of a religion can include a scientifi c investigation
of the subject, but for a theologian his subject will always be more than ‘just’ a topic for
research. In a similar way, the pandit’s profi ciency in a subject is often coupled, as Aklujkar
points out, with a certain way of life and it may be diffi cult to divorce the academic aspect
from the Pandit identity. Since he is supposed not only to function as a mere scholar, his
view of the culture he embodies through his erudition is necessarily more holistic. ‘Western’
Indology with its specifi cally historically oriented, critical approach, had to make use of the
Indian pān ̣ḍitya in order to get, as much as possible, fi rst hand information, but it could
not accept its theological dimension without compromising its aims as a historical subject.
Since this source of misunderstanding persists until to date, it should be made clear that
the ‘Western’ approach is not to belittle traditional Indian learning, but a methodological
necessity.” Hanneder, Review of Th e Pandit , 672. In point of fact, however, what Aklujkar
says is quite diff erent. Far from claiming that the pandit is unable “to divorce the academic
aspect from the Pandit identity,” he questions the ground of the opposition, demonstrat-
ing that academic scholarship too is not without its presuppositions. When he notes that
“something in their education [i.e., in the pandits’ education] is seen as preventing them
from studying things diachronically or with a detachment expected of a historian. Th ey
are, at least implicitly, thought of as prone to cultivating knowledge with faith or in an
eternalistic mode” (Aklujkar, “Th e Pandits from a pi ṇḍa-brahmān ̣ḍa Point of View,” 47), it
is clear that the argument at this stage is dialectical. Th e reference is actually to W estern
assumptions of the shortcomings of traditional scholarship, assumptions Aklujkar rejects
(see, for instance, n. 16 on the same page, where he notes that “the phenomenon [of think-
ing the pandits cannot be treated on par with Western, historically trained scholars] is
related to colonialistic assumptions, to the creation of tagged ‘pandit’ positions in Indian
colleges and universities and to the holding of separate p an ̣ḍita-paris ̣ads in the sessions of
the All-India Oriental Conference, World Sanskrit Conference etc. . . .”). When he further
notes that he “should not be understood as holding that Western scholars, as a rule or
almost always handle the historical method well,” he is in fact raising criticisms in tune
with our book (see also the comments on pp. 50–51 questioning the absolute signifi cance
assigned “history”).
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 295
dignifi ed status onto a fi eld of inquiry once deemed a second-tier discipline. . . . 596
Th e triumph of historicism has often been celebrated as off ering a neutral space
for dialogue with diff erent traditions. Yet, as Levenson has exposed in a brilliantly
argued piece, this is not true. “Historicism is not without assumptions of its
own.” 597 Levenson’s conclusion is thought-provoking, and bears repeating: “Th e
belief that the real meaning of religious phenomena is available only to the out-
side observer is a secular analogue to religious revelation. If so, then a system of
thought like historicism, which ‘exempts itself from its own verdict,’ is a secu-
lar equivalent to fundamentalism. For though it subjects all else to critique, it
asserts axiomatically its own inviolability to critique. Demanding to be the norm
by means of which truth and error are disclosed, this type of thinking, by defi ni-
tion, can never be in error.”5 98
Within Indology, we have seen how those assumptions entailed not only ideas of
how texts are to be studied and what questions are worth raising, but also ideas of
the corruption and bastardization of the Indian people, of their inability to carry
out independent, self-critical researches, and of the need for Western, especially
German, critical intervention in their texts. Th e historicism they practiced was
not even the kind of historicism seen in biblical criticism (where it is a matter of
an intra-Christian debate about the correct approach to scripture). Rather, this
was historicism buttressed by a colonial consciousness. In the fi eld of Indian stud-
ies, the triumph of historicism, then, would not mean a development or synthesis
of existing modes of understanding or scholarship available within an existing
tradition (this argument could perhaps be made for Europe), but would necessar-
ily entail the destruction of an entire alternative tradition of scholarship. Next
to the Lutheran deconstruction of Greek ontology and of the Scholastic theology
based upon it, we would be hard pressed to fi nd a more striking example of how
theological concerns led to the erasure of an entire alternative intellectual tradi-
tion—that “other philology” as we have called it, whose roots are not Lutheran
but ancient Greek, Platonic, or Indian, and whose origins lie not in the certitude of
being always already saved but in the argument for the immortality of the soul. 599
Indian scholars, looking to say something about their tradition, now found them-
selves stepping on precarious terrain. If, on the one hand, they raised criticisms from
the perspective of their own normative and philosophical concerns, they risked being
labeled “fundamentalists” or “religious zealots,” or at the very least “uncritical.” If, on
the other hand, they did not raise such criticisms, they risked giving tacit assent to
the dominant paradigm. Since historicism as a mode of thought largely depends for
596 . David N. Myers, R esisting History: Historicism and its Discontents in Jewish-German
Th ought (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003), 5.
597 . Levenson, Th e Hebrew Bible , 119 (and for the full argument, see ibid., 118–20).
598 . Ibid., 117.
599 . Th ere is a link of course. German Indologists, as we have seen in this section, were
essentially fulfi lling Luther’s program when they embarked upon their project of reading
Indian texts independent of their ethical, philosophical, and soteriological concerns.
296 Chapter 03
its legitimacy upon its aura of inevitability, this was tantamount to reinforcing the
German scholars’ sense that their approach had superseded all others. Under these cir-
cumstances, their demand of Indian scholars that they reject and distance themselves
from the native tradition could now appear as a legitimate requirement rather than
the hegemonic demand that in truth it was. Th e method had become autonomous.
THE PREJUDICES ARE INSTITUTIONALIZED
Although the system of compulsions German scholars placed Indian scholars under
was intricate, it did not operate by itself. On the contrary, it required a concerted eff ort
to apply pressure at the key junctures: a statement of method here, a clarifi cation of
the diff erence between pandithood and historical scholarship there, a foreword or an
introduction accusing the tradition of relativism, a dismissal of all Indian scholarship
out of hand, and so on. Th us, we should fi rst look at some of these statements, before
considering some of their consequences for the fi eld of Indian studies. We begin with
the words of Stietencron, already alluded to several times in the course of this work:
Th e analytical thinking of Western scholars trained in historical and philological
methodology stood in contrast to the traditional Indian commentators. Th e latter not
only generously harmonized all the disjunctions in the text but, above all, attempted
to recognise in particular passages of the text their own philosophical and theologi-
cal concepts. Th is was done in order to secure for themselves the divine authority of
K r ṣ ṇ ạ . In this manner, several philosophical schools developed Gītā interpretations of
their own—a spectrum that has been further expanded through politically motivated,
modern interpretations since the beginning of the Indian independence struggle.6 00
Stientencron’s words were followed by several others, among them Malinar (in the
revised English edition of her book on the Bhagavadgītā) and Hanneder (in a review
of Malinar). 601 First, the comment by Malinar:
It [i.e., her book] is not an account of the BhG ’s ‘history of reception’, therefore nei-
ther the later Sanskrit tradition of commentary nor modern Hindu interpretations
of the text are included since each author establishes his own hermeneutics on the
basis of the religious or philosophical tradition he adheres to.6 02
And, thereafter, that by Hanneder:
600 . Heinrich von Stietencron, “Editor’s Introduction,” in Angelika Malinar, Rājavidyā: Das
königliche Wissen um Herrschaft und Verzicht (Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1996), 6–7.
601 . Earlier examples are of course legion (see, for instance, Jarl Charpentier, “Some
Remarks on the B hagavadgita ,” Th e Indian Antiquary LIX [1930]: 46), but we have chosen to
focus on recent examples as a way of demonstrating the currency of the problem.
602 . Malinar, Th e Bhagavadgītā , 17. For a detailed evaluation of these comments, espe-
cially as they relate to her decision to translate rājavidyā by “knowledge of kings” or “royal
knowledge,” see Vishwa Adluri, Review of Th e Bhagavadgītā: Doctrines and Context , by
Angelika Malinar, History of Religions 50, no. 1 (2010): 102–7.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 297
Even though this reviewer is not familiar with the fi eld and [hence] does not see himself
in a position to present a well-founded comprehensive evaluation of the results of this
work, some critical questions, which came up during reading, are raised here. Although
[it is] completely understandable in light of the extent and the amount of preliminary
work to be done, the systematic exclusion of the classical Indian tradition of commen-
tary [such as is undertaken by Malinar] is a possible methodological weakness. For,
one can hardly counter a biased [tendenziösen] interpretation by native commentators
by excluding it; otherwise, one exposes oneself to the danger of also eliminating the
specifi cally Indian “horizon of understanding” along with the native reception, which
[horizon] may possibly preserve something historically correct [historisch Richtiges]. 603
Th ese comments and others like them, echoed and magnifi ed in countless citations,
journals, and even conferences, set the basic tenor for an Indology that had now
become a form of cultural apartheid. Even when scholars did not explicitly voice
these sentiments (and we are convinced that with the exception of a few ideologues,
most scholars were only following German Indology because it was the dominant
approach), their writings and attitudes practically incarnated them. It was not nec-
essary for scholars to explicitly engage in polemics against the tradition of native
Indian scholarship. As was noted, by the mid-twentieth century most of the work
to deconstruct the tradition had been done and scholars were free to begin on fresh
ground, as though the tradition had never existed. Th us, whereas an earlier genera-
tion of scholars such as Roth and Garbe had found themselves to be in competi-
tion with the learned pandits of Benares (and therefore felt the need for extensive
documents refuting or critiquing or mocking them), by the twentieth century the
struggle for authority over these Indian texts had been settled. A massive transfer of
epistemic authority had taken place from the Brahmans, the traditional preservers
and interpreters of these texts, to the modern critic. But in the very act of setting out
from a specifi c range of problems, in the very act of considering some questions to be
worth asking (a text’s date or authorship, is it a composite or an interpolated work,
what ideologies or sectarian groups are represented in it, etc.) and others not (what
was its ontology, how it could be effi cacious in salvation, how it off ered avenues for
self-transformation), scholars were now manifesting their beholdeness to this new
tradition. Without knowing it, and thinking they were surveying the Indian texts
from a timeless perspective, they were actually giving testimony to the triumph of
German Indology over the tradition. Th e prejudices were institutionalized.
AN ESSAY IN UNDERSTANDING?
At the end of this long review, extending across three chapters, of German schol-
arship on the Mahābharatā and Bhagavadgītā, what conclusions can we draw for
the wider phenomenon known as German Indology? As we have shown, Indology
603 . Hanneder, Review of Rājavidyā: Das kö nigliche Wissen um Herrschaft und Verzicht , 240.
298 Chapter 03
cannot be adequately understood in terms of an institutional tradition or even
in terms of a body of (scientifi c) literature. Even though these aspects doubtless
existed and were essential for its public visibility, they were in a sense second-
ary to the ideological aspects of the discipline. Nor can Indology be understood
in terms of a tradition of critical scholarship, for, as we have seen, what was spe-
cifi cally “critical” about this scholarship was not its methods or its results (which
were often arbitrary, inconsistent, and prejudicial) but its application of a “herme-
neutics of suspicion.” A hermeneutics of suspicion is the view that the received
narrative cannot be accepted at face value. Hence, it must be negated in its con-
tent to reveal a deeper imperative or imperatives that it is unaware of. In the case
of the Indologists, they saw their task as essentially one of bringing to to light a
truth that the the tradition had either forgotten or tried to elide. In the case of the
Mahābhārata, this was the truth that the epic was essentially a historical recollec-
tion; in the case of the Bhagavadgītā, that the poem was a composite text, that it
lacked a coherent theology, and that it hence could not be effi cacious in salvation.
Th e specifi c details of the “truth” discovered in each case, however, were less impor-
tant than the underlying assumption that the tradition was the product of a false
consciousness. Th is tradition was therefore fundamentally in error—and not just
in one or more incidental aspects. Indeed, it was not just in error, but in untruth,
suspected not simply of committing an error but of being the error . No engagement
with tradition was possible, because to engage with it was to dignify falsehood and
to readmit to the circle of possible discourse false doctrines. Can it surprise us,
then, that Indology, in its inception, manifested as an extreme refl ex against of
tradition?
Th us, what is ultimately at stake in the encounter between Western and Eastern
scholarship is not simply the engagement with an alternative scriptural hermeneutics
(alternative, that is, to Protestant scriptural hermeneutics). Rather, at stake is the very
possibility of discriminating between truth and error—in Foucault’s terms of estab-
lishing “the ensemble of rules according to which the true and the false are separated
and specifi c eff ects of power attached to the true.” 604 Th e tradition is b y defi nition
dogmatic, blind, erroneous, and misleading. In contrast, modern scholarship, as the
antithesis to tradition, is by defi nition critical, self-aware, scientifi c, and objective. 605
604 . Michel Foucault, “Truth and Power,” in E ssential Works of Foucault, 1954–1984 , ed.
Paul Rabinow, vol. 3, P ower , ed. James D. Faubion (New York: New Press, 2000), 132.
605 . Th is fact must be borne in mind when evaluating why German scholars developed
such a wide-ranging and sophisticated response to Indian tradition. As has been noted, of
all countries in Europe it was precisely Germany that invested the most time, eff ort, and
money in the development of Sanskrit studies (see McGetchin’s and Rabault-Feuerhahn’s
respective books, both cited earlier). Th is fact cannot be ascribed simply to the Germans’
penchant for dressing up in costume (alongside Āryanism, there were several other
contenders for the role of German identity as detailed by Goodrick-Clarke in his book;
Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke, Th e Occult Roots of Nazism: Secret Aryan Cults and their Infl uence
on Nazi Ideology [New York: New York University Press, 2005]). Rather, what is entailed in
the engagement with Indian antiquity and mutatis mutandis with antiquity of any kind is
the very possibility of constituting oneself as critical, self-aware, and scientifi c.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 299
Under these conditions, who could wish to take sides with tradition in the strug-
gle for truth? But before we give our assent to this narrative (and join the German
Indologists in their overhasty dismissal of tradition), it is worthwhile to examine
its consequences for our understanding of the texts and of ourselves. We shall focus
here on two facets: (1) the disenfranchisement of the text and its consequences for
Hindu theology, (2) the rise of Indology and its consequences for Western scholars’
understanding of Indian texts, and (3) rethinking our engagement with Indian texts
after Indology.
1 . Th e Disenfranchisement of the Text and its Consequences
for Hindu Th eology
Th e application of a hermeneutics of suspicion to the text appears, initially, to be
incomparably more sophisticated than a straightforward reading of the text. Such
a hermeneutics might justly be considered one of the founding intellectual ges-
tures of our age. In our modern age, there is no accusation we fear more than that
of U nmündigkeit (naïveté or lack of maturity, understood as the bond of faith in
spiritual authority). Yet one of the inescapable consequences of the hermeneutics
of suspicion is that it introduces a disparity between the critic and the text. As S. J.
McGrath writes:
A hermeneutics of suspicion is necessary when reason is not in command of the
discourse but is the product of “false consciousness.” Th e most explicit example of
how this works is classical psychoanalysis. In the Freudian model the analyst and
the analysand are not on equal footing. Assuming that the analysand is lying both
to himself and to her, the analyst is primarily concerned not with what the analy-
sand says but with how he says it. In the sutures of the analysand’s narratives the
analyst traces the hidden motives holding his illusion together. Th e relation is non-
dialogical, or one-sided. Th e analyst gives little of herself to the relationship while
the analysand must be trusted to hold nothing back if the cure is to work. . . . Th e
analysand is on trial; his language is not taken at face value. He is denied rationality,
the ability to say what he means and mean what he says. His discourse is interpreted
in light of assumptions that the analyst makes without telling him; his narrative is
understood in terms of unconscious motives that are assumed to be revealed and
concealed in the way he speaks or refuses to speak. 606
Th e application of a hermeneutics of suspicion is justifi ed only where we have reason
to believe that the text is a product of false consciousness, that is to say, where we
suspect that we are being lied to. But in the case of Indian tradition the only reason,
606 . S. J. McGrath, H eidegger: A Very Critical Introduction (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 2008), 4–5.
300 Chapter 03
historically speaking, for the application of a hermeneutics of suspicion was that the
texts were assumed to espouse false doctrines and that they were assumed to be
priestly products. Both reasons are in fact theological assumptions, raised from the
perspective of a Protestant critique of religion. Th ey were never actually shown to
be true of Indian texts. Although every German scholar set out from the assump-
tion that Indian texts were corrupt, no scholar actually tried to demonstrate in what
way this was so.6 07 (Corruption—that theological cipher par excellence—was trans-
formed into the philological category par excellence and yet lost none of its ethical
overtones.) Indeed, as we have seen, German Indologists went out of their way to
evade an engagement with the Bhagavadgītā’s philosophy. Under the pretense of a
critical analysis of the text, they in fact set aside the question of its truth-claims.
Th e text was reduced—in the strict sense of Freudian psychoanalysis—to the analy-
sand. Th e application of a hermeneutics of suspicion to the Bhagavadgītā had the
eff ect of denying it any meaning or value and, above all, any philosophical or ethical
dimension. 608
Once this was done to one of the central scriptural texts of Indian tradition, an
engagement with Hindu theology also became superfl uous. It was no longer neces-
sary for German Indologists to engage in long study of Indians texts. as had an earlier
generation of scholars such as the Jesuit missionaries Th omas Stephens (1549–1619)
and Étienne de la Croix (1579–1643) encountered a literary tradition that was still
vital. Both scholars produced their own Purā ṇas—the former a Christa Purā ṇa in
1616 and the latter a Peter Purā ṇa in 1629—showing that this genre was still vital as
late as the seventeenth century.6 09 Arriving in India, Western missionaries still felt a
607 . To be sure, German Indologists buttressed this assumption with all sorts of posi-
tive “evidence” (we need only think of the narratives of Holtzmann, of Garbe, of Otto, of
Hauer, of Simson, and so on). But insofar as this “evidence” mainly consisted in stating
in the form of conclusions what was already assumed as the incontrovertible truth about
Indian tradition, it remains true that a demonstration of the false and misleading nature of
Indian scriptures remains to be undertaken even to the present day. (In point of fact, the
only place where such demonstrations were undertaken was in the writings of the mission-
aries and the publications of the Christian Literature Society and allied associations. Th ese
works, including the extensive publications of the CLS on the Bhagavadgītā, are deserving
of a separate and even more thoroughgoing study, because they truly give expression to
what the Indologists were trying to accomplish in a confused and self-deluded way. Th e
missionaries had this advantage that they were unimpeded by the secularization narrative
the Indologists had in the meanwhile told themselves.)
608 . Th e exclusion of especially philosophical and ontological insights does not confer
scientifi city on an arbitrary method and yet this was the fundamental assumption that
underwrote Indology, its birth hour so to speak.
609 . Th e former was called a Purā ṇa only from its 1649 edition onward; its original title
was Discursos sobre a vida de Jesu Christo nosso salvador ao mundo, divido em dous trata-
dos or Discourse on the Coming of Jesus Christ our Savior into the World, divided into Two
Treatises. Th e latter was never offi cially called a Purā ṇa; its offi cial title was Discursos sobre
a vida do Apostolo Sam Pedro em que se refutam os principais erros do gentilisimo deste
Oriente or Discourse on the Life of Apostle St. Peter in which are refuted the Chief Errors
of the Religion of the Gentiles. See Ludo Rocher, Th e Purā ṇas (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,
1986), 74–75.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 301
need to engage with Purā ṇic literature as a source of theological and salvifi c author-
ity, even though this engagement was characterized by religious rivalry. It is only
with the advent of historical-criticism that the question of the theological and sal-
vifi c signifi cance of these texts could be set aside—not through demonstrating that
they were erroneous, but through setting that question itself aside as no longer rel-
evant in the wake of the Lutheran equation of faith with salvation. In eff ect, German
Indologists—though interested “solely” in the “philological” question of the original
form of the text— had accomplished something Jesuit missionaries over generations
had struggled to do: they had found a way to make Hindu theology—at least from
the perspective of those who were always already saved—redundant.
2 . Th e Rise of Indology and its Consequences for Western Scholars’
Understanding of Indian Texts
As problematic as this evangelical aspect of Indology was, its impact on the praxis
of reading texts was ultimately more damaging for intellectual history. Indology
was baleful not only for Indian tradition but also for the Western understanding of
Indian texts. Although the German engagement with Indian texts began in the con-
text of more wide-ranging philosophical, literary, and theosophic explorations, the
emergence of this new class of professional interpreters seriously restricted Western
authors’ scope for reading the texts. Th ey now had to overcome not only a cultural
and linguistic barrier but also these new professionals, who had in the meanwhile
inserted themselves between the texts and the reading public. Th us while it was
still possible for Goethe, Schopenhauer, and Schlegel to approach Indian texts with
a certain degree of freshness and wonder—leading to creative encounters such as
Schopenhauer’s appropriation of the Indian concept of m āyā in his D ie Welt als Wille
und Vorstellung or Goethe’s appropriation of the opening of Kalidāsa’s Śakuntalāi n his
Faust —once the Indologists arrive on the scene, we fi nd German interest in Indian
thought decreasing to an ever smaller circle of specialist problems. In seizing the
Indian texts, the Indologists impoverished not only Indian tradition but also German
cultural life. As they consolidated authority in their hands and moved aggressively
into the university, demanding their own departments and titles, they eff ectively
ended the brief but extremely rich encounter between Eastern and Western thought
that had been a hallmark of the Goethezeit. In place of the imaginings of dramatists,
philosophers, poets, or statesmen, a small class of bureaucrats entrenched itself—
jealous of its privileges, practicing an esoteric and undefi ned method, and reacting
with extreme belligerence toward any attempt to illuminate its praxis. 610
610 . See Walter Slaje, “Was ist und welchem Zwecke dient die Indologie,” Z eitschrift der
deutschen morgenländischen Gesellschaft 153 (2003): 311–31, especially 311 for the text of
an imagined exchange between an Indologist and the layperson in which the layperson is
described as “the Evil One [Gottseibeiuns; colloquial fi gure of speech for the Devil]” and 312
for the accusation that the raising of “utilitarian and commercial whys? and h ow muchs? ”
with respect to “scientifi c research and education” is evidence that a “palpable educational
302 Chapter 03
Herling has recently proposed that we look at the German engagement with the
Bhagavadgītā in terms of a dialectical process. 611 According to him, we need not
choose between the alternatives of either a hermeneutical consciousness or a criti-
cal consciousness, as formulated by Ricoeur. 612 Rather, he suggests that we look at
the history of German scholarship on the Bhagavadgītā as a story of unavoidable
misconceptions, leading to many fl awed interpretations, but on the whole carried
forward by a genuine interest in comprehending the Indian text. Herling’s view thus
echoes the stance of Wilhelm Halbfass, who writes:
Th ere is certainly no coherent history of [the] European search for India. Yet, there
is an identifi able historical path leading to the situation of modern Indological
research and of intercultural communication. It is a process which accompanies
and refl ects the development of European thought in general—a process in which
Europe has defi ned and questioned itself, and in which misunderstandings and
prejudices may be as signifi cant as the accumulation of factual truth and correct
information. 6 13
For Herling, “misapprehensions . . . are [thus] affi rmed as part of this dialogical pro-
cess as the interpreter ‘reintegrate[s] misunderstanding into understanding by the
very movement of question and answer’.”6 14 He sees the German encounter with the
Bhagavadgītā as an essentially sincere, benign process, hampered only by its defi cits
of knowledge about the text. Th us he sums up, “German Orientalist understanding
of India was never purely a function of power, nor did it always make progress; the
truth resides somewhere between.” 615
Unfortunately, Herling’s account does not work. As we have seen, there was
no progress in the German understanding of either the Mahābhārata or the
Bhagavadgītā. More importantly, there was no desire for progress, measured as a
desire to understand the text. Nearly a hundred years after the German experiment
with the texts fi rst got underway, German scholars were still repeating clichés of
unscrupulous Brahmans who had taken over a heroic K ṣatriya text and/or puzzling
over whether the theistic or pantheistic “layers” of the poem were more original.
Th e were simply unable to see that the idea of a heroic K ṣatriya epic had originated
defi cit has long since begun to make its eff ects felt in the universities and educational
ministries [of the country].” And see also ibid., 314 for objections to the “fundamental
intellectual categories and commercial principles of operation” of a “mercantile class” that
have in the meanwhile begun to threaten “intellectual freedom at the universities.”
611 . Bradley L. Herling, “Either a Hermeneutical Consciousness or a Critical Con scious
ness: Renegotiating Th eories of the Germany-India Encounter,” Th e Comparatist 34
(2010): 63–79.
612 . Ibid., 63–64. Th e reference is to Paul Ricoeur, “Hermeneutics and the Critique
of Ideology,” in Hermeneutics and the Human Sciences , ed. and trans. John B. Th ompson
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 63–100.
613 . Halbfass, I ndia and Europe , 434–435.
614 . Herling, “Either a Hermeneutical Consciousness or a Critical Consciousness,” 63;
the quotation is from Ricoeur, “Hermeneutics and the Critique of Ideology,” 83.
615 . Ibid., 77.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 303
in a German prejudice against the priesthood and that the term p antheism had fi rst
acquired signifi cance for the Bhagavadgītā in the context of a German critique of
Catholicism. Further, contrary to Herling’s account of “misapprehensions” being
reintegrated into the interpretive eff ort on the way to a better understanding, we
found that no German scholar actually made productive use of the misapprehensions
of his predecessor. Indeed, earlier interpretations appeared as misapprehensions to
the respective scholar only because they were at odds with his own equally idiosyn-
cratic theory and not because he had realized their fundamental variance from the
meaning of the Bhagavadgītā. On a more technical level, it is diffi cult to speak of
progress in understanding the Bhagavadgītā within this discipline, because scholars
could not even agree on a basic text of the poem. For all that they claimed to be
off ering an interpretation of t he Bhagavadgītā, they were actually interpreting (if
we can call it that) vastly diff erent texts. Likewise, we also cannot make the case
that the quality of the philological work done improved over this period, since one
of the latest Bhagavadgītā interpretations reconstructs the Indian epic, not on the
basis of the available manuscript evidence (i.e., whether the Bhagavadgītā occurs in
all manuscripts of the Mahābhārata collated for the critical edition), but on the basis
of a convenient theory about the potential addressee of a passage rejected from the
critical edition of the text. And as for Sanskrit, the Indologists—as they were only
too well aware—would always come a distant second to the traditional speakers of
the language. 616
3 . Rethinking our engagement with Indian texts after Indology
Th ese problems with the standard account of the Western discovery and of
engagement with the Orient suggest that we might start looking for alternative ways
to characterize German Gītā scholarship. On the basis of the extensive reconstruc-
tions of this chapter and the last, we can now identify a few salient features charac-
teristic not only of this scholarship but also—assuming German Gītā scholarship is a
fair representative of the wider tradition—of German Indology as a whole. With this
we simultaneously conclude our historical presentation of German Indology is; in the
remaining two chapters, we shall move on to an evaluation.
616 . Th is anxiety haunts German Indology from its fi rst moments (see the comments by
Goldstücker, cited earlier) to its latest (see the comments by Gaeff ke, also cited earlier). It
is the root anxiety, explaining not only much of Indology’s polemics against Indian tradi-
tion, but also its need to create new ideals of specialization. Th e anxiety so besets Indology
that it even becomes the subject of worried refl ections in a satirical journal: a student
wonders aloud whether she might not be better off learning Sanskrit in India (“Lieber
Vidūs ̣aka, mein Professor sagt immer, nur in Indien könne man Sanskrit richtig erlernen,
weil ja die Sprache von dort kommt. Was meinst Du? Weißt Du Rat? Deine treue Leserin
Sabine F. aus H.”) and Vidū ṣaka, a kind of agony aunt for Indologists, reassures her that the
fact that birds can chirp does not make them ornithologists (“Sind Vögel Ornithologen,
weil sie zwitschern?”). Letter to Vidū ṣaka, D er Vidūs ̣aka. Herausgegeben vom Weimarischen
Indologenkreis 4 (2010): 2; http://vidushaka.de/Vidusaka-4.pdf.
304 Chapter 03
1 . A desire to appropriate Indian texts. As we have seen, German scholars were
not interested in texts for the sake of the texts. Th ey took up the study of the
Mahābhārata and the Bhagavadgītā only insofar as these texts could be used to
confi rm ideas of the German people. As Holtzmann Sr. put it at the outset of the
German experiment with the Mahābhārata: “Th e legends I recount here are thus
in a certain sense our property; they are to an extent Ur-German [urdeutsch],
albeit already with a completely Indian coloring; and it is therefore appropriate
that we Germans are the fi rst in Europe to open our ears and hearts to these
sounds of the deeper [i.e., more ancient] Orient.” 617
2 . A desire to use these texts to refl ect (ideas of) German culture. From Herder to
Hauer (with the possible exception of Humboldt), German scholars were only
interested in using the texts to make one or more polemical points against per-
ceived fl aws in German culture. For Herder, concerned with the separation of
reason and feeling in the Enlightenment, India off ered the paradigmatic exam-
ple of a holistic culture in which the separation of immediate forms of intuition
(sensation, perception, feeling) from mediated forms of knowledge (reason,
understanding) was yet to occur. For Schlegel, concerned with the dominance
of Protestantism, India off ered the paradigmatic example of a decadent culture
in which the rise of rationalistic strains of thought had led to spiritual enerva-
tion, ending in pantheism. For Holtzmann, Garbe, Jacobi, Oldenberg, Otto, and
Hauer, the Gītā likewise off ered an occasion to make polemical points about one
or more facets of their own tradition. To borrow Jacobi’s expression, German Gītā
scholarship can best be understood as a series of (dead) letters passed by Western
authors to each other “under the rose of friendship.”
3 . Absence of shared eff ort: If Gadamer’s analysis of “play” as the “mode of being
of the work of art itself” is correct, there must be always be a shared goal in any
hermeneutic enterprise. 618 Th is goal—playing—itself determines the partici-
pants and their play. Play has no end outside of itself. In the case of German Gītā
scholarship, there was no such goal. No German Gītā interpreter was willing to
risk himself in the play. Contrary to Herling’s account of an essentially integra-
tive eff ort, there was no cumulative eff ort at understanding in the history of the
German reception of the Bhagavadgītā. Every scholar was essentially playing only
with himself. It was as though Garbe, throwing a ball at Jacobi, was surprised to
fi nd a shuttlecock being thrown back at him.
4 . Hypertrophied self-consciousness, bordering on a narcissistic disorder: Again,
contrary to Herling’s account, no scholar made productive use of the eff ort at
understanding of his predecessor. Rather, each made use of his predecessor’s
work as a foil against which to show off his own brilliance. Th us, at the end of a
two-century period, we fi nd only a series of assertions and no attempt at inte-
grating them into a coherent hermeneutic theory. Instead of a single eff ort ori-
ented toward a single goal (i.e., understanding the Indian poem), German Gītā
617 . Holtzmann Sr., Indische Sagen , xxxii.
618 . Hans-Georg Gadamer, T ruth and Method , trans. Joel Weinsheimer and Donald
G. Marshall (London: Continuum, 2004), 106.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 305
scholarship fractured into a series of eff orts, each oriented toward a diff erent goal
(i.e., affi rmation of Protestant faith, establishment of primordial Germanic reli-
gion, and so on). Th e German experiment with the Bhagavadgītā off ers us the
paradigmatic example of the negation of Gadamer’s principle of “the primacy of
play over the consciousness of the player .”6 19 For each of the participants in this tradi-
tion, it was more important to affi rm his self-consciousness than to enter the play.
Th us, criticism of the tradition was extended even to his immediate tradition (i.e.,
the scholar who just preceded him). Th is kind of hypertrophied critical conscious-
ness is, of course, the opposite of what Gadamer means when he uses the term. 620
5 . We also fi nd a complete lack of understanding of the concerns of Indian com-
mentators, who were now collectively labeled “dogmatic.” Even though native
commentators had spent over a thousand years glossing over these texts, few
German Indologists were willing to let themselves be guided by them. Th e com-
mentators had debated their meaning down to minute details (Indian com-
mentators tend to gloss the text word-by-word so that even innocuous seeming
particles can be assigned enormous signifi cance). Th ey had worked out extraordi-
narily sophisticated hermeneutic theories—theories that were by no means dog-
matic. Rather, questions about the nature of ultimate reality, about the nature of
the fi rst principle (whether one or many, eternally independent of the manifest
creation or involved in it in some way, whether partless or not, and so on) had
been raised in the context of logical, ontological, epistemological, and ethical
discussions—the whole always undergirded by the touchstone of personal veri-
fi cation ( svānubhāva ). And yet, such was the rhetorical potential of the new ideol-
ogy of critique that their work was swept away without thinking. By dismissing
this knowledge, and seeking to create in its place an ersatz intellectual tradition,
however, German Indologists did themselves no favor. Th eir trivial discoveries
such as the fact that an identical word or phrase also occurred in another text
could not replace centuries of exegesis and philosophical debate. Indeed, German
Indologists were never able to explain why exactly scholarship had to begin
anew—as though no one had attempted to clarify these texts before. As a group,
they were willing only to acknowledge the work of their German predecessors
(Lassen, Roth, Weber, and so on), often in hyperbolic terms. Th e loss ultimately
was not so much the tradition’s, but the Indologists’, because it limited their
insight into the texts.
6 . Desire to dominate: From the perspective of critical theory, the objections are even
more damaging. German Indological scholarship was essentially a discourse of
domination and dispossession.6 21 As we have seen from the beginning, its aim was
619 . Ibid., 109 (Gadamer’s italics).
620 . See ibid., xxiv: “A new critical consciousness must now accompany all responsible
philosophizing which takes the habits of thought and language built up in the individual in
his communication with his environment and places them before the forum of the histori-
cal tradition to which we all belong.”
621 . In addition to the passage from Holtzmann Sr., cited earlier, see also Hermann
Oldenberg’s comments in “Über Sanskritforschung,” Deutsche Rundschau 47 (1886): 386–
409; Oldenberg claims that while physical possession of India “can never be the case for
306 Chapter 03
to control rather than to understand the Indian textual tradition. As Williamson
has shown, Indian texts arrived in Germany in the context of a renewed national
preoccupation with itself. 6 22 Th us, from the beginning, German Indological schol-
arship placed its technical expertise wholly in the service of nationalistic concerns.
Even though it proclaimed itself the “science of India,” it was actually unconcerned
with the reality of India. Eff orts to actually understand Indians, to enter into con-
tact with them were few and far between, and remain so to this day.6 23 (Indeed,
as we shall see in the fi fth chapter, German distance from India was such that
Oldenberg was forced to make a methodological principle of it.)
7 . Lack of any positive, humanistic contribution. Further, for all that German
Indologists claimed to be concerned with Brahmanic oppression of the lower
castes, they made no serious eff orts at its abatement. Th eir Brahmans were crea-
tures of their own imagination, caricatures of rabbis drawn with brown chalk.6 24
None of the Indologists we studied in this book undertook sociological or eth-
nographic researches on the Brahmans. Th e few who had had fi rsthand encoun-
ters with them, such as Garbe, saw that the Brahmans were highly regarded
individuals in their communities, and nonetheless came back and wrote books
affi rming European/German stereotypes of the Brahmans. For all their feigned
morality, Indologists did not contribute in any positive way to the alleviation of
India’s social problems. Rather, the implicit bargain was that in return for being
uplifted to the status of a “white” brethren people (at least in their origins, if
us,” we should not forget “the possession that belongs to us [that is, India’s intellectual
rather than her material wealth] and which we must administer in the best interests of all.”
“We, too, after, all,” he concludes plaintively, “have a signifi cant role to play in the picture
of the world that the present is creating.” Ibid., 406.
622 . Williamson, Th e Longing for Myth in Germany , cited earlier.
623 . See Slaje, “Was ist und welchem Zwecke dient die Indologie,” 311–31, especially
327, n. 17 (“then one would have to consider the fact that it is once again Europe itself
that, in the broken perception of its Indian refl ection, is now struggling with something
that is not essentially alien [to it], but with something that is originally its own.”), 330
(“Someone who studies Indology gains something whose lack is today loudly lamented on
all sides: an education in the sense of a formation of mind and personality. A strict training
in grammatical and philological categories of refl ection, a guide to logically correct thought
in complex argumentative contexts in the interpretation of texts, training of the faculty of
conceptual abstraction, and mental fl exibility. All this against the challenging background
of having to free himself from the inherited intellectual categories of an European through
a methodically accompanied self-refl ection in order to penetrate into the strange intel-
lectual worlds of (ancient) Indian heads, to reconstruct their mental world, to analyze it
and, fi nally, to translate it conceptually into the horizon of intelligibility of Europe.”), and
330–31 (“If we for once look away from the side-eff ect of a sharpening of Indian conscious-
ness for its signifi cant role for [world] civilization in the spiritual and cultural development
of humanity, what is at stake in the fi nal analysis is the location of our own European
cultural-sphere.”) Oldenberg’s narrative of German superiority (see later) has given way to
a narrative of European superiority, but for all intents and purposes the justifi cation for
Indology has remained the same.
624 . Among those to have studied the relationship of Jews and Brahmans within
German discourse is Dorothy L. Figueira; see her Aryans, Jews, Brahmins , cited earlier.
Figueira focuses on how Western scholars from Voltaire onwards used Indian texts to dis-
place the Jews, “the great plagiarizers of history” (ibid., 17), from their central place in
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 307
not throughout their history), Indians would confer upon Germans the title they
so desparately longed for: members of the most ancient cultural tradition of the
world, exceeding Greek-Latinate culture in its antiquity. 625
8 . Insistence on institutional autonomy. In spite of all the problems in their reading
of the Mahābhārata and the Bhagavadgītā, German Indologists remained hostile
to any form of collaboration right until the end. Th is hostility extended not only
to the thought of including Indian scholarship or Indian ideas, but also to the
thought of incorporating literary, philosophical, or hermeneutic approaches taken
from German intellectual life . Indeed, throughout its history we see that the para-
digmatic struggle for German Indology was not against the Indians (how many
Brahmans after all were competing with the Indologists for chairs at German uni-
versities?) but against other German disciplines. Th e heightened rhetoric about
critical consciousness, about scientifi city, about rigor, about a body of indepen-
dent work, about uniquely Indological methods was aimed—in the fi nal analy-
sis—not at Indians scholars but at German university administrators. It was grist
for public consumption, produced by a discipline that always had a tenuous claim
to legitimacy within the Continental intellectual tradition.
9 . Insistence on German superiority. Even three-quarters of a century after the world
had broken with narratives of Āryan superiority, German scholars continued to
affi rm the narrative of German superiority. Scholars as problematic as Holtzmann,
Garbe, Otto, and Hauer were reintegrated into a narrative of “critical” scholarship,
while the abiding geniuses of the Indian tradition (Śa ṁkara, Rāmanūja, Madhvā,
and so on) were castigated as “uncritical” for “establish[ing] [their] own herme-
neutics on the basis of the religious or philosophical tradition [they] adher[e]
to.”6 26 In a similar vein, scholars continued to try to revive the Āryan K ṣatriya
myth, while decrying Indian philosophical interpretations of the text as being
motivated in Brahmanic ideology. 627 Th e problem thus cannot be reduced to that
of a few problematic fi gures (Hauer, Frauwallner, Waldschmidt, et al.6 28 ) within
an otherwise unproblematic tradition. Rather, prejudice against Indian tradition
is so deeply ingrained within Indology that we see that it constitutes its most
the Creation drama. However, Figueira does not close the circle to demonstrate how, from
the mid-nineteenth century onwards, Brahmans were themselves cast in the role of rab-
bis who had corrupted the original revelation. If it is true that German researches into
ancient Indian texts played a formative role in the growth of anti-Semitism, it is equally
true that those researches, from their very inception, were already shaped by German
anti-Semitism.
625 . For the role played by the rivalry with France in the development of Indology in
Germany, see McGetchin, Indology, Indomania, and Orientalism , 18, 21, 55, and 69–72.
626 . Th e quotation is from Malinar, Th e Bhagavadgītā , 17, cited earlier.
627 . See Georg von Simson’s Das Mahābhārata: Die Große Erzählung von den Bhāratas (the
relevant passages are all cited earlier).
628 . Ernst Waldschmidt, former chair of Indology in Göttingen, was a Nazi, member
of the Reichsbund der Deutschen Beamten as early as 1934 (the organization was only
founded in 1933), the NSDAP (Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei) in 1937,
and the NSDDB (Nationalsozialistischer Deutscher Dozentenbund) in 1938. See Anikó
Szabó, Vertreibung, Rückkehr, Wiedergutmachung: Göttinger Hochschullehrer im Schatten des
Nationalsozialismus (Göttingen: Wallstein, 2000), 132, n. 223. (None of these facts are
308 Chapter 03
basic methodological principle. When Stietencron, Malinar, and Hanneder seek
to clarify the distinction between German scholarship and Indian scholarship in
terms of the greater self-consciousness of the German scholars, they are not giv-
ing expression to a personal opinion, but rather articulating the basic assumption
of all Indological scholarship. Th e discipline as a whole, and not just a few indi-
viduals, is tainted. 629
Herling’s eff ort to understand the German encounter with the Gītā in terms
of a narrative of progress thus does not work. Th ough laudable in intent, it is too
uncritical of the work of the Indologists. Herling is far too trusting as regards the
narrative of an unscientifi c, Romantic Indology (in the work of Herder, Schlegel, and
Humboldt) being replaced by a scientifi c, philologically founded Indology.6 30 As this
is precisely the impression the Indologists wish to convey, it makes sense to suspend
faith for a moment to ask whether this narrative is an accurate description of the
actual state of aff airs. Because what was at stake in this scholarship was never the
text itself (i.e., a work that had something to say), the thesis of a progressive unfold-
ing of hermeneutic consciousness is an incorrect way to approach the Indologists’
work. Th e correct analogy for Indology in Herling’s inquiry is not the process of
reception of a text, but the institutionalization of other pseudoscientifi c fi elds of
inquiry in nineteenth- and twentieth-century Germany, such as the various attempts
to classify racial phenotypes in the disciplines of Rassenkunde or R assentheorie (race
science or racial theory) or to draw consequences for society from this knowledge in
the discipline of R assenhygiene (racial hygiene).6 31 Yet, because Herling’s suggestion
is well intended, we should ask under what conditions it might be true. We off er three
suggestions.
mentioned on the webpage of the Ernst-Waldschmidt-Stiftung or in the obituary pub-
lished in the Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft or on the homepage of
the University of Göttingen. Th ey are also not mentioned on the webpage of the Stiftung
Preußischer Kulturbesitz, which lists the Ernst-Waldschmidt-Stiftung as one of its bene-
factors and partners.)
629 . See preceding note; the fact that important details have been elided from these
offi cial accounts is further evidence that there is a problem with Indology as a whole and
not just a few representatives.
630 . See Herling, “Either a Hermeneutical Consciousness or a Critical Consciousness,”
70 (“Classicist philological sensibilities and Romantic enthusiasm, which persisted beyond
Schlegel’s own disillusionment, were in fact crucial elements in the construction of a viable
hermeneutical location for the new discipline of Indology.”) and see also ibid. for the claim
that Schlegel’s Bhagavadgītā edition of 1823 “reveals that a new interpretive structure is at
work in the examination of Indian sources: that of philological science.” Also see the claim
on p. 70 that “philological prejudices, which led to many fruitful avenues of reception,
tempered the excesses of bygone enthusiasms and led ultimately to a measured account
that is noteworthy even to this day” and on p. 74 that “some room [must be] made for the
possibility of refi nements in understanding and logos is the name for the application of
technique and method to the project of cross-cultural understanding (here the application
of philological, exegetical tools to a text like the G ītā is an example.”
631 . In addition to the “archaeology” of Indology that comprises this book, a sociology
of the fi eld remains a future task. Th at it cannot be undertaken in the present book is
clear enough. Similarly wide researches must determine how the discipline was set up,
309
A
S
NOITCURTSNOCER
ĀTĪG
NAMREG
FO
NOSIRAPMOC
A
1.3
elbaT
drahciR
groeG
mlehliW
bokaJ
floduR
nnamreH
nnamreH
ebraG
flodA
nosmiS
nov
reuaH
ottO
grebnedlO
ibocaJ
lanoitidda
;5091
(
.rJ
namztloH
fo
raey(
emaN
)9691(
)7391(
)4391(
)9191
(
)8191(
)4191
ni
segnahc
)3981(
)noitcurtsnocer
-retni
yradnoces“
a ātīG
scisyhpatem“
a
ātīG
stnemele
ylnO
ni
meop
eht
ot
yeK
cipe
ylnO
citsieht
ylnO
citsiehtnap
ylnO
→ siseTh
eht
gniwollof
”noitalop
”noitca
dna
elttab
fo
ot
gnitaler
gnihtyreve
;93.2
era
stnemele
era
stnemele
era
stnemele
.hc
ātīG
noitalo.pretni
tsrfi
ats1
”noitautis“
s’anujrA
sgnoleb
retfaereht
lanigiro
lanigiro
lanigiro
fo
rebmun
latot(
22.02.6–12.61.6
morf
ātīG
;lanigiro
era
citcadid“
eht
ot
↓ )sesrev
1.24.6
dna
ecnatsni
cissalc
eht
”meop
suonimun
eht
fo
fo
ecneirepxe
muiretsym
eht
mudnemert
devomeR
,33–82
c ?74–1
74–1
74–1
?74–1
91–1
91–1
b ?74–1
)74(
1
54
,24–83
devomeR
,12–11
,7
27–93
27–83
d 01–1
27–83
27
,71
27
,71
?27–1
)27(
2
,03
,82–32
.detresni
03–82(
cioreh
,83–1(
,43–13
)51
retfa
retfaereht
;ātīG
,83–73
ro
73–11(
fo
noitidda
,14–93
ylbissop
72–62
)agoY
,05
,94–74
)detalopretni
,75–55
yradnoces
27–93(
07
,56–06
)ātīG
)deunitnoC(
310
)deunitnoC(
1.3
elbaT
drahciR
groeG
mlehliW
bokaJ
floduR
nnamreH
nnamreH
ebraG
flodA
nosmiS
nov
reuaH
ottO
grebnedlO
ibocaJ
lanoitidda
;5091
(
.rJ
namztloH
fo
raey(
emaN
)9691(
)7391(
)4391(
)9191
(
)8191(
)4191
ni
segnahc
)3981(
)noitcurtsnocer
devomeR
,8–4
devomeR
devomeR
ātīG
yradnoceS
devomeR
32 ,81–9
32 ,81–9
?34–1
)34(
3
,61
,51–9
,91
,81–71 ,12–02
,62
,52–22 ,82–72
,33
,13–03 ,53–43 ,14–63 34–24
devomeR
,8–6
devomeR
devomeR
ātīG
yradnoceS
devomeR
,23–13
,42
,23–13
,42
24–3
)24(
4
,71–61
53–43
53–43
,12–81 42–32
devomeR
01
devomeR
devomeR
ātīG
yradnoceS
devomeR
,01
,7–6
,01
,7–6
devomeR
)92(
5
,22–61
,22–61
62–42
62–42
devomeR
,6–5
,1
devomeR
devomeR
ātīG
yradnoceS
devomeR
23–72
23–72
devomeR
)74(
6
,51–01 ,81–71 22–91
311
devomeR
11–6
devomeR
devomeR
ātīG
yradnoceS
devomeR
,11–7
,11–7
devomeR
)03(
7
,91
,51–41
,51–41
,62–52
,62–52
,91
03–92
03–92
devomeR
,01–9
,7
devomeR
devomeR
ātīG
yradnoceS
devomeR
,4–1
,4–1
devomeR
)82(
8
22–81
82–02
82–02
devomeR
,6–4
,3–1
devomeR
devomeR
ātīG
yradnoceS
devomeR
,6–1
,91–61
,6–1
devomeR
)43(
9
01–7
92
,91–61
92
devomeR
,31–21
devomeR
24–9
ātīG
yradnoceS
devomeR
24–21
24–21
devomeR
)24(
01
,02–91 14–83
devomeR
,91–51
55–1
,61–51
,31
,7
ātīG
yradnoceS
devomeR
,31
,7
,31
,7
devomeR
)55(
11
,03–82
ohcniM
,04–73
,91–81
,61–51
,61–51
33–23
55–25
,91–81
,91–81
04–73
04–73
devomeR
8–6
,2
devomeR
devomeR
ātīG
yradnoceS
devomeR
02–1
02–1
devomeR
)02(
21
devomeR
92
devomeR
devomeR
devomeR
43–1
,4
,2
devomeR
)43(
31
,81–21 ,82–72 33–03
devomeR
91
,8–3
devomeR
devomeR
devomeR
devomeR
72–1
72–62
devomeR
)72(
41
devomeR
—
devomeR
devomeR
devomeR
devomeR
02–1
51–21
devomeR
)02(
51
)deunitnoC(
312
)deunitnoC(
1.3
elbaT
drahciR
groeG
mlehliW
bokaJ
floduR
nnamreH
nnamreH
ebraG
flodA
nosmiS
nov
reuaH
ottO
grebnedlO
ibocaJ
lanoitidda ;5091
( .rJ
namztloH
fo raey(
emaN
)9691(
)7391(
)4391(
)9191
(
)8191(
)4191 ni segnahc
)3981(
)noitcurtsnocer
devomeR
—
devomeR
devomeR
devomeR
devomeR
42–1 42–1
devomeR
)42(
61
devomeR
—
devomeR
devomeR
devomeR
devomeR
82–1 82–32
devomeR
)82(
71
devomeR
,62
,9 ,2
devomeR
,17–26
,75–1
devomeR
87–47 ,27–1
,55–1 ,64–54
devomeR
)87(
81
,64–14
87–47
87–76 ,45–05
,84–74
87–47
,94
,b84
,06–05 ,26–16 87
,37
f)%0(
0
— )%02(
041
)%68.91(
931
58 rehtiE
)%41.21(
58
353 825
)%34.32(
461
deniater
sesreV
85 ro
)%41.21(
e )%75.94( )%34.57(
-rep( 007
fo tuo
)%92.8(
)deniater
tnec
.sesrev
deteled
setacidni
hguorhtekirtS
eno
sesicxe
rohtua
eht
erehw—noiteled
sefi ingis
der roloc
eTh
.rohtua
hcae yb edam
segnahc
ro
snoiteled eht
htiw
gnola ātīgdavagahB eht
fo sretpahc
neethgie
eht stsil elbat
siTh
. a
erew
sesrev
eht taht
sefi
ingis
kcalb
roloc
eTh .der
ni srucco
devomer
drow
eht ,retpahc
eritne
eht
sesicxe eh erehw
;der
ni deton era srebmun
esrev eht
,retpahc
eht
morf sesrev
erom
ro
.ylevitcepser
,ātīG
yradnoces
a fo
trap sa deniater
sesrev
dna
sesrev
fo noitisopsnart
yfingis
yarg dna eulb
sroloc
eht ,yllanoitiddA .ytniatrecnu
setacidni
kram
noitseuq
a ;deniater
eht
fo
dne
eht
ta serugfi
egatnecrep
eht
,suTh .seod
eh taht
emussa
dna
elbatirahc
eb
ot nesohc
evah
ew ,sesrev
eht
sedulcni
rohtua eht rehtehw
tuoba
tbuod
emos
si ereht reverehW
. b
.nigram
reppu
eht tneserper
elbat
dewollof
ylekil
hcihw
,IX
retpahc
ni noisiv
eht fo dna
,evoba
dekramer
sa
,II retpahc
ni noitasrevnoc
feirb a fo desirpmoc
saw meop lanigiro
eht noinipo
sih
ni“
taht
stnemmoc
reuaH
. c
,scisyhpatem
ro yhposolihp
nayrĀ-odnI
na fo eniltuo
sih ni
sesrev
fo rebmun
a fo snoitalsnart
sedulcni
osla eh ,revewoH
.7 .n ,27 , kisyhpateM
ehcsira-odni
eniE
,reuaH
”.noitasrevnoc
siht
eht
;snoiteled
s’reuaH
fo
tnetxe
eht
setacidni tsrfi
eTh
.snmuloc
owt
derutaef
evah
ew
,snrecnoc
sih fo yrotalaver
yllaicepse era seciohc eseht
sA ”.ātīG
lanigiro“
sih edistuo
llaf hcihw
.)kooltuo nayrĀ
na
fo
saedi
sih htiw
etanoser
ot dnuof
yltnerappa
ecneh
dna(
setalsnart eh sesrev eht
fo weivrevo
kciuq
a redaer
eht sevig
dnoces
emos
etalucitra
ot
seirt
lareneg
ni
dna
,srohtua rehto
htiw
flesmih
etaitargni
ot seirt
,flesmih
stcidartnoc
netfo
eH
.ātīG
lanigiro eht fo tnetxe
eht tuoba
eugav
yllacipyt
si grebnedlO
. d
.eh
si desufnoc
os
,ruof
ro
eerht
detsil
evah ylisae
thgim
ew
hguoht
,mih
rof serugfi
owt
era
ereht
ecneH .)sweiv
gnitsixe
lla fo egareva naem
fo dnik
a ,yllautca(
weiv
susnesnoc
fo dnik
.ztinretniW
yb
desivda
sa
,ātīgdavagahB
eht morf
sesrev
571
lanoitidda
na devomer
ebraG ”,ātīG lanigiro“
eht gninimreted
ta tpmetta
dnoces
a nI
. e
.%75.141–
ro 199–
:evitagen
eb
dluow nosmiS
rof
erugfi eht ,ātīgdavagahB
eht edistuo
snoiteled
eht dedulcni
ew fI
. f
THE SEARCH FOR THE ORIGINAL GĪTĀ 313
First, no rhetoric against “Indians.” If the interest in Indian texts is genuine, there
will be no rhetoric against Indian tradition. When reading Shakespeare, we do not
have to declare how stupid the English are. Nor do we have to begin by setting aside
Milton, Dryden, Lawrence, and Auden as “uncritical,” because—allegedly—being
English, they cannot be trusted to arrive at an objective evaluation of his work. When
translated into a European context, we immediately see the off ensiveness of deny-
ing individuals the ability to form independent judgments on the basis of national
origin. Why should the same not hold for Indian tradition?
Second, no rhetoric about the superiority of the Germans. If the aim is to understand
the text rather than to uphold a hegemony, there will also be no rhetoric about the supe-
riority of German scholarship. All such statements should be struck out as irrelevant at
best and prejudicial at worst. Th ere is no Indo-Germanic connection, in spite of the vol-
umes of work written on the topic.6 32 German scholars have to begin, like the rest of us,
with the elementary conditions of understanding. Th ey do not have privileged access to
Indian thought, deriving either from their superior empathy or sensitivity (this was the
Romantic illusion) or from their superior scientifi city (the philological illusion).
Th ird, no rhetoric about the progress of reason. If the aim is not just to master
the text but also to learn something, and to learn something new and diff erent, about
oneself, then there will also be no rhetoric about the necessary progress of reason. Th is
narrative, culminating always in the European present, is itself a remnant of Christian
theology. It is the unquestioned assumption not only of Indology but also of all modern
philology. But as we have seen, there is no greater stumbling block to an understand-
ing of the ancients in their alterity than the assumption that we have nothing to learn
from them, but many things (critical self-consciousness, emancipation of the mind
from dogma, methodological inquiry, comparative research, and so on) to teach them.
German scholarship of the Mahābhārata and Bhagavadgītā can thus be framed as
essentially a problem of reception. Th e problem arose because, irrespective of what
the Indian texts or their commentaries were saying, German scholars were only able
to understand them as dogmatic, theological and/or sectarian works. Th ey were
unable to see that the commentators off ered superb glosses on the source texts, pre-
serving the meaning contained in them, to be sure, but also off ering refi nements
and restatements as appropriate to their historical context. In contrast, they saw
themselves as critical, enlightened, and as having overcome all form of confessional
commitment. Th us, in analyzing this problem of reception, the fi rst question must
be: whence this conviction of having overcome theology in the Enlightenment? Th is
question will lead us to the next constellation of tasks.
who benefi ted from it, what ends it served, and so on. We have chosen to neglect this
institutional aspect of Indology in order to be able to tell the history of its method with
greater clarity.
632 . See the various works by Wilfried Nölle, Ludwig Alsdorf, Sisir Kumar Das,
and Walter Leifer, all cited in the bibliography. McGetchin, Indology, Indomania, and
Orientalism , chapter 7 contains a useful summary of these works. And see Robert Cowan’s
Th e Indo-German Identifi cation: Reconciling South Asian Origins and European Destinies,
1765–1885 (Rochester, NY: Camden House, 2010) for a discussion of the views of some
earlier authors regarding a privileged Indo-Germanic connection.
CHAPTER 4
"
Th e Search for a Universal Method
Th e Protestant pastor is the grandfather of German philosophy, Protestantism its peccatum
originale . . . One need only utter the words “Tübingen School” to get an understanding of
what German philosophy is at bottom—a very artful form of theology. . . .
Friedrich Nietzsche, Th e Antichrist
INTRODUCTION
Th e preceding look at the critical method as applied in German Mahābhārata and
Bhagavadgītā scholarship brought to light a number of problems. Although German
scholars claimed to take a scientifi c approach to the epic, their interpretations were
at best tangential and at worst irrelevant to the text at hand. No German interpreter
in a period extending one hundred years (i.e., if we take Lassen’s 1837 article on the
Mahābhārata as the starting point and Hauer’s 1937 book on the Bhagavadgītā as
the end point) had succeeded in presenting a coherent, philosophically illuminating
interpretation of the Mahābhārata. Th e histories they presented of the epic existed
nowhere else outside their own minds. It is a commonplace to assert that every
attempt at understanding is beset by diffi culties, especially so when it involves two
cultures. But in the case of German interpretations of Indian texts, the problem is
not simply one of the inevitable misinterpretations that beset every hermeneutic
endeavor. 1 Rather, the critical method itself entailed a number of problematic preju-
dices (e.g., the untenability of the exegetic tradition, historical consciousness as a
stage that supersedes and replaces Indian consciousness, and the search for primor-
dial doctrines or Ur-texts).
In light of the problems with the critical method that appeared in the earlier
parts of this book, this chapter seeks to understand the reasons why the Indologists
themselves could not see these problems. It became clear that the historical-critical
1 . Herling argues that such a process is at work at least in the Gītās of the philosophers
Herder, Schlegel, von Humboldt, and Hegel. But whether such a process is at work in the
later German Gītās of the Indologists is doubtful: here, the method has become self-evident
and mechanical, and the goal is no longer understanding but (pseudo)accuracy.
( 314 )
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 315
method was not a method among others, but itself entailed a hidden metaphys-
ics. Yet, instead of undertaking a historical and critical refl ection on this method,
German Indologists insisted on its universal and nondogmatic character. What
historical processes underlie this conviction? In this chapter, we trace the roots of
the critical method from its historical origins in the work of the biblical critics J. S.
Semler and F. C. Bauer to its adoption in the work of Rudolf von Roth, Indologist and
founder of the study of history of religions. Th is chapter is divided into three sec-
tions: fi rst, we look at the scientization of Protestant theology in the critical method,
then at the secularization of Protestant theology in the study of the history of reli-
gions, and thereafter at the institutionalization of Protestant theology in Indology.
Th e key themes we shall focus on are, in the fi rst section, how the historical-critical
method participates in a tradition of projecting a universal history, most characteris-
tic of Christianity; in the second section, how the method makes use of a teleological
narrative of history, where history moves from a state of immaturity (the Kantian
Unmündigkeit ) to an enlightened, free, and critical use of reason; and, in the third sec-
tion, how this narrative was used to justify implantation of an alternative tradition
of textual scholarship in place of the Indian commentarial tradition.
THE SCIENTIZATION OF PROTESTANT THEOLOGY
IN THE CRITICAL METHOD
In the introduction, we already saw that the origins of the historical-critical method
are theological. Th is is true not only in the sense that the method originated with
the Neo-Protestant theologian and biblical critic J. S. Semler but also in the sense
that Semler pursued a specifi c theological agenda. His aim was the delegitimization
of Jewish (Old Testament) scripture. Gerdmar, in his book, refers to Semler’s proj-
ect as being the dejudifi cation of (New Testament) scripture.2 Th e historical-critical
method thus, from its very inception, was a method designed for specifi c theological
agendas. Th ese agendas were both exclusivist (because the method insisted on sepa-
rating out the religious kernel of Christianity from its historical context) and funda-
mentalist (because it advocated a return to the text in the quest for this true salvifi c
core). Nonetheless, we would miss out on the essence of this method if we were to see
it as merely prosecuting theological ends. What is unique about the historical-critical
method is not so much its theological antecedents as the way it gave renewed legiti-
macy to these ends through a scientization ( Verwissenschaftlichung ) of theological
discourse. Understanding this process of scientization that German academic the-
ology underwent in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries is key to
understanding how a discipline could emerge by the mid-nineteenth century that,
although radically theological in its origins and aims, could claim to be a universal,
secular, and rational science of the study of Indian texts.
Commenting on the new W issenschaftsideologie of eighteenth-century Germany,
Howard notes that W issenschaft lost its “grand, idealist associations” over time “and took
2 . See Gerdmar, Roots of Th eological Anti-Semitism , 47, 461, 553, 559, 576, 587.
316 Chapter 04
on a more limited defi nition.” Th is defi nition entailed, in particular, the idea of “empiri-
cal rigour, and the putative ideological neutrality of the scholar.” However, even as the
new scientifi c consciousness turned away from the old ideals of university education (the
sacra facultas ), one fi nds the old theological rivalry invading this new consciousness. “Th e
idea of neutrality—or V oraussetzungslosigkeit (literally, presuppositionlessness)—as a
characteristic of W issenschaft becomes especially pronounced toward the end of the nine-
teenth century; it was often trumpeted by secular and progressive Protestant scholars
to criticize those, notably Roman Catholics, believed to be incapable of producing true
science because of their adherence to confessional goals.”3
Just as the notion of science could be repurposed in service of a Protestant,
German identity, so also theology. Although bitterly attacked by its detractors, 4
German academic theology did not wither away. In fact, one of the remarkable aca-
demic stories of the nineteenth century is how a discipline, whose survival at the
university had been seriously in doubt a century before, reasserted itself by plac-
ing itself in the service of the new Prussian state. With names such as Friedrich
Schleiermacher, F. C. Bauer, and later Ernst Troeltsch and Adolf von Harnack, and
departments at Göttingen, Halle, and Berlin, German academic theology underwent
a renaissance, drawing students from far beyond Germany’s borders. Th e impact
German scholarship made on these foreign students is best recorded in a statement
by an American theologian commenting on his impressions of German academic the-
ology: “Th ere we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, and we were in our own sight as
grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight.”5
To be sure, theology was not immune to intellectual and political currents, espe-
cially the new scientifi c and historical consciousness, sweeping through Germany at
the time. But what is remarkable is that, rather than going under in the face of these
currents, it was able to absorb them within itself. In fact, in a reverse process, it was
able to insert its concerns into the new scientifi c and historical outlook. Nowhere is
this more obvious than in the expectations now placed on science. Howard notes that
“many leading theological voices did not construe W issenschaft —whether in its ideal-
ist or its positivist guise—as a necessary threat to theological verities.”6 “In fact, lib-
eral Protestant theologians often interpreted the critical rigours of modern enquiry
as the logical, historical fruit of the Reformation, which challenged the dogmatic
rigidities of Catholicism. To reject Wissenschaft therefore was tantamount to vitiat-
ing the purest and most progressive form of human religious consciousness: modern
Protestantism. Turning away from the spirit of Wissenschaft , as one theologian put
it, amounted to ‘a defection from the essence of Protestantism.’ ” 7
3 . Howard, P rotestant Th eology , 29.
4 . For criticisms, see Howard, P rotestant Th eology , especially the chapter “Sacra Facultas
and German Modernity.”
5 . For the source, see Howard, Religion and the Rise of Historicism , 23. Th e line is from
Numbers 13:33.
6 . Howard, P rotestant Th eology , 33–34.
7 . Ibid., 34, the reference is to Adolf Hilgenfeld, “Die wissenschaftliche Th eologie und
ihre gegenwärtige Aufgabe. Vorwort des Herausgebers,” Zeitschrift für wissenschaftliche
Th eologie 1 (1858): 2.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 317
Th e historian of science, John Hedley Brooke, also emphasizes the role of
Protestant theology in the birth of this new ideology of science:
A Protestant emphasis on improving the world, under the aegis of providence, could
confer dignity on scientifi c activity that promised both glory to God and the relief of
human suff ering. Conceptions of a better world over which Christ would reign for a
thousand years (the millennium) were later secularized to yield visions of a purely
earthly utopia, in which a perfect human society might be possible in the absence of
coercive measures. Notwithstanding the unbridled optimism of many such visions,
it cannot be denied that one source of the modern idea of progress was the millen-
niary theology of Protestant reformers anxious to transform the world in readiness
for Christ’s second coming. 8
Just as Protestantism came to identify itself with the new scientifi c consciousness,
endowing it with a quasi-religious aspect, 9 it was also instrumental in the rise of
historicism. Howard recounts the following vignette about the historian Jacob
Burckhardt that illustrates how historicism developed from a crisis of faith in
nineteenth-century German Protestantism:
During his years as a theology student at the University of Basel (1837–1839),
Burckhardt came into contact with de Wette’s radical historical criticism and innova-
tive, non-orthodox theology. Burckhardt, son of Basel’s highest ranking Protestant
pastor, experienced a shattering crisis of faith as a result. He vowed to be an “honest
heretic” (e hrlicher Ketzer )—presumably to avoid being a dishonest one—and gave
up theology in favor of historical studies. In 1839, he left his hometown for Berlin,
where he studied history under some of the greatest names of nineteenth-century
German historical scholarship: Leopold von Ranke, J. G. Droysen, Jakob Grimm,
and Franz Kugler. 10
Nor was Burckhardt’s case an isolated incident. As Howard further notes, “Many
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century scholars began in theology. Fifty-six of the
ninety-three holders of historical chairs in Germany before 1800 had received theo-
logical training. Th e major nineteenth-century historians—Ranke, Droysen, and
Th eodor Mommsen, like Burckhardt—all came from pastors’ homes and (except
for Mommsen) had studied theology before experiencing diffi culties and switching
over to history.”1 1 Historicism itself emerges “from long-standing dilemmas inter-
nal to theology and biblical exegesis. . . the cognitive conditions necessary for the
emergence of crisis historicism” are traceable to “hermeneutical and epistemological
8 . John Hedley Brooke, Science and Religion: Some Historical Perspectives (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1991), 23–24.
9 . “Science as religion” is a central theme of German writers such as Schelling and
Fichte. Its infl uence can be seen even in Max Weber’s “Wissenschaft als Beruf.” It will
continue even into the writings of late Indologists, albeit somewhat toned down.
10 . Howard, R eligion and the Rise of Historicism , 5.
11 . Ibid., 5.
318 Chapter 04
reorientations, internal to Protestant theology, that were rooted in the early mod-
ern period and gained prominence during the late eighteenth and nineteenth centu-
ries—before one can properly speak of the disciplinary autonomy of history.” Howard
concludes, “In other words, the category ‘history’ was experienced as a theological and
biblical-exegetical problem long before the popularization of the nineteenth century’s
‘historical method.’ ” 12
Cassirer’s judgment of the Enlightenment as a whole is that of a stage within
Germany’s religious development. “Among thinkers of the German Enlightenment,” he
writes, “the fundamental objective is not the dissolution of religion but its ‘transcen-
dental’ justifi cation and foundation.” 13 Th e question for us thus becomes, as Howard
argues: “Might then a secular historical outlook, born in the wake of the German
Enlightenment, retain traces, revealing elisions, hereditary marks that betray signifi -
cant continuities between premodern-theological and modern-historical ways of think-
ing? Karl Löwith has pointed out that even outspoken critics of Christianity in the
nineteenth century were for the most part theologically educated Protestants.”1 4
Against this background, we can now understand how the application of the
historical-critical method to Indian texts could embody an ideology. Th e dialectical
structure of the historical-critical method, originally developed to accommodate the
contrast between a pagan or Jewish and a Christian outlook, could now, when applied to
Indian texts, provide further confi rmation of the validity of the method. As we saw ear-
lier, the historical-critical cannot get underway unless one fi rst posits a diff erence in the
text. It is in this sense that the method is critical at all (Greek krinein , to discriminate, to
separate). Once this diff erence is posited, the method can then be used to separate out
the ideologies or elements posited. In Semler’s case, the elements had been the Jewish
and historical-mythic aspects of the text and the true Christian revelation. But what is
more relevant for our inquiry is the way Semler developed this contrast in terms of the
distinction between particular and universal history.
Th e Christian religion is for all people, the Jewish is only particular . . .; therefore it
had to be annulled ( aufgehoben ), to give space to the Christian universal ( allgemein )
religion, which has completely diff erent books as its sources and evidence and prom-
ises an entirely new covenant and a more perfected order of religion to all men. 15
Semler argued that the particular nature of Judaism meant that it could never fulfi ll
the task of bringing about man’s perfection. Th us, although certain elements in its
books have moral value and certain individuals (e.g., Abraham) had a true intuition
12 . Ibid., 14.
13 . Ernst Cassirer, Th e Philosophy of the Enlightenment , ed. James P. Pettegrove, trans.
Fritz Koelin (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1951), 136.
14 . Howard, R eligion and the Rise of Historicism , 3.
15 . Cited and translated in Gerdmar, R oots of Th eological Anti-Semitism , 40–41; the quota-
tion is from Leopold Zscharnack, L essing und Semler. Ein Beitrag zur Entstehungsgeschichte
des Rationalismus und der kritischen Th eologie (Gießen: Töpelmann, 1905), 112–13.
Zscharnack himself cites Semler’s Canon , vol. 1, 143, as the source, but we have been
unable to fi nd the passage in Semler.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 319
of God and the moral law, as a whole the Jews are limited by (defi cient) culture and
intelligence. 16 Th e task falls to Christianity, which, as the true universal reason, was
not only the logical, historical culmination of the Jewish faith but also destined to
bring about a true critical stance on the latter. Th is now leads to the problem of how
to read Jewish scripture (critically). Writes Semler:
When we now on the other side consider that among other nations [Völkern] divine
providence has enabled many more moral truths, a much greater culture of the
capacities of a lively reason and so wisely has caused it to be so kindly, which now
takes place much more among us, the ones called Christians, with regard to the
education and instruction of certain individuals, then can we really affi rm that we
should really read all those parts of the Book of Moses, of Joshua, of Judges, etc.
with a consistent and constant attitude and judgment all the time, one that encom-
passes an immediate god-worshipping focus, prayer, thanks, over and above the
great value and advantage contained in doing so, that is, encompasses a constant
worshipfulness both prior to and after [our reading]?1 7
Th is question is answered in the negative by Semler. Because these books are “par-
tially provincial, partially family histories,” there is “nothing in them of immediate
signifi cance for other people (except the Jews) with respect to moral perfection in the
use of reason and the will necessary for them at the present according to present cir-
cumstances.”1 8 Hence, the Christian has no obligation to read these works seriously.
What holds for the average Christian holds even more so for the historical-critical
scholar. As Semler clarifi es at the end of the section, this is what is meant by “a f ree
investigation of the so-called canon [ freie Untersuchung des sogenannten C anons ]
of the Jews and Christians.” 19 Th e investigation is “free” because it is not bound by
Jewish views of the canon.
16 . Semler argues that “Th e use [or the practice] of so-called natural truths has been
made easier and aided in some men, which has not as yet occurred in others. Th e former
are thus truly further [along the path], as regards the moral evaluation of these truths as
compared to the common heap [der gemeine Haufen] of Jews and of the fi rst Christians;
and they can thus do without certain preparations and instructions that are very neces-
sary and useful for the common heap.” Semler, Abhandlung vom freien Canon , vol. 1, 22.
Although Semler’s main intent is to demonstrate that certain (inspired) individuals pos-
sess ideas of morality even without having read (or needing to read) the Old Testament, he
also suggests that this faculty is divinely ordained (ibid.), implying a naturalization of this
diff erence. He also makes it clear that Jews are not defi cient with regard to just any race,
but specifi cally vis-à-vis Christians, among whom “divine providence has truly enabled
many more moral truths, a much greater culture of the capacities of a lively reason.” Ibid.,
50. Gerdmar is guarded on the question of the extent of Semler’s anti-Semitism (noting
that it was far less pronounced than that of the English Deist, Th omas Morgan), but there
is no doubt that Semler too resorts to the stereotype of the uncultured and unenlightened
Jew to make certain points regarding the development of free, universal reason.
17 . Ibid., 50.
18 . Ibid., 51.
19 . Ibid., 52 (Semler’s emphasis).
320 Chapter 04
F . C. Bauer largely followed the contours of Semler’s program, except that he
introduced an explicitly dialectical moment into the method. Christianity emerges
from the two antipodes of paganism and Judaism. As thesis and antithesis, respec-
tively, the two come together and undergo dissolution, yielding a higher, ethi-
cal religion: Christianity. Th is development is conceived of by Bauer as a spiritual
development. It is the history of the spirit coming into its own: self-consciousness.
Bauer argues that the Jews lacked a consciousness of the fi nitude of the δ ι α θ κή η
(i.e., covenant or testament). Th is fact was the “limitation in their consciousness
that, as long as they remained standing [on this level], made them Jews forever.”
Meanwhile, the “advance [Fortschritt] from Judaism to Christianity could only
occur in that one became conscious that Judaism was a mere fi nite form.”2 0 Th is
realization paves the way for Christianity as a purifi ed—that is, spiritualized and
inward-turned—Judaism.
Bauer’s combination of Hegelian dialectic with Semlerian theology yields a notion
of Christianity in which Christianity has become an idea. Christianity is nothing but
the idea in history working itself out, proceeding always in the direction of greater
self-consciousness and freedom.2 1 Th is notion was crucial to Bauer’s concept of
Christianity as an ethical religion. Whereas the “Christian faith is accomplished in
the spontaneity of the ethical, through the free will power of man and his innate
consciousness,” 22 the Palestinian Jews “had to be lifted out of their narrowness into
Alexandria, where purifi cation occurred.”2 3 Th e realization of self-consciousness
implies a corresponding turn inward: interiority.
Christianity, for Bauer, is thus less a religion with defi nite customs than a “ spiri-
tual power, the absolute Principle through which the self-consciousness of the Spirit
is carried on, where spiritual is understood as inward in contrast to outward.” 24 In
contrast, pre-Christian or non-Christian faiths are characterized as outward-turned,
lacking in self-consciousness, and subject to (Oriental) despotism. It is only
through contact with Occidental cultures, that is, with the exposure to their free,
self-conscious, and critical thinking, that the Jews can be lifted out of their religious
and political morass. Whereas Semler had merely assigned Jews to a lower stage of
20 . Bauer, P aulus, der Apostel Jesu Christi , 142.
21 . Bauer speaks of how Paul, although able to penetrate “all the moments of subjec-
tive consciousness,” nonetheless “focused principally on the objective course of develop-
ment conditioned by the absolute idea of God; in that he saw major, historically-given
oppositions [and] universal forms of religious development in heathenism, Judaism, and
Christianity, he did not focus merely on individuals, but rather on the masses; out of the
self-certitude of his Christian consciousness, all questions and riddles of the world became
clear to him in a single glance, so that, ultimately, everything must be subordinated to
the absolute idea of God, permeated by it and taken up into its unity.” Bauer, Paulus, der
Apostel Jesu Christi , 289. Although Bauer is speaking of Paul, it is clear that this account
is simultaneously a statement of his own views on Christianity. Even though Christianity
initially appears as a m oment in the evolution of the idea, it is clear that the fi nal state, the
absolute idea, is attained with the self-refl exive recognition of Christianity made possible
through historical consciousness.
22 . Gerdmar, Roots of Th eological Anti-Semitism , 113.
23 . Ibid., 119.
24 . Ibid., 112–13.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 321
the (moral) evolutionary scale, Bauer rejected that they even have the capacity to be
aware of this diff erence. It is only through contact with Christianity as the stage that
has superseded them that they can even become aware of their defi cits vis-à-vis the
latter.
Th is application of the historical-critical method, however, not only entails the
scientization of a view of history (one whose roots are essentially theological) but
also leads to a theologization of the method itself. If all of history is moving toward
ever greater self-consciousness, then the method by means of which one surveys or
evaluates that movement itself becomes the pinnacle of consciousness attained at a
given moment in time. Th is problem is at the heart of Gadamer’s criticism of histori-
cism: “In relying on its critical method, historical objectivism conceals the fact that
historical consciousness is itself situated in the web of historical eff ects. By means of
methodical critique it does away with the arbitrariness of ‘relevant’ appropriations
of the past, but it preserves its good conscience by failing to recognize the presup-
positions—certainly not arbitrary, but still fundamental—that govern its under-
standing. . . . ”2 5 Th us, at the same time as the historical method legitimized a certain
narrative of history, it also universalized that narrative, including itself within it.
And since this narrative was essentially teleological, this meant that the historical
method, implicitly and to the same extent as it universalized this narrative, also pos-
ited itself as the end of history.
In the introduction to the fi rst edition of his book, Bauer addressed criticisms
of Strauß’s controversial D as Leben Jesu as follows: 26 he argues that there is no con-
fl ict between the historical-critical approach and dogmatic faith in the primacy of
Christianity because the Christian faith (unlike other religions) is cognizant of its
history. Christianity does not just appear within history (as all other religions do),
but insists on the historicity of Christ and of the Gospel (as also of Christ’s second
coming). Th e historical-critical method, by tracing the history of Christianity and
raising it to the level of consciousness, was in fact doing no more than participat-
ing in the historical movement of Christianity. Bauer observes that “the criticism
of evangelical history, since it immediately concerns the life of the founder of
Christianity. . . will remain for long the most important object of critical eff orts in
our time.” But this inquiry must “proximally” take the form of a “historical-critical
investigation of the question . . . [of] how Christianity, which was so closely bound
up with Judaism, tore itself free of the latter, and entered into the sphere of its
world-historical signifi cance,” since it is precisely through this history (which Bauer
conceives dialectically) that Christianity comes into its own. Bauer argues, “If what
encounters us out of evangelical history as the epitome [Inbegriff ] of the historical
signifi cance of the life of Christ” is “the consciousness of the idea of Christianity
and of the principle of the same [i.e., of Christianity],” then the “true object of his-
torical contemplation” must be “the practical realization of this idea.” Th e “practical
25 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , 300.
26 . Strauß was Bauer’s student; they were leading representatives of the Tübingen School.
322 Chapter 04
realization of the idea of Christianity,” however, fi rst comes about once “the idea,
through the death and resurrection of Christ, has penetrated the reality of con-
sciousness and come a vital force within the same [i.e., within consciousness]” and
now “fi nds that the main obstacle to achieving its world-historical reality lies in the
bounds of national Judaism.” 27 Bauer’s conclusion is succinct:
How these bounds were broken, how Christianity, instead of remaining a mere form
of Judaism and ultimately merging into the latter again, transformed itself into an
independent principle, in order to tear itself free of it [Judaism] and to oppose itself
to it as a new form of religious consciousness and life, one essentially distinct from
it and freed of every trace of the national particularity of Judaism—this is by far the
most important point of the early history of Christianity. 28
Even if part of the reason for Bauer’s argument was tactical, there can be no doubt
that in his mind there was a real consonance between historical consciousness and
Christianity. In contrast to Judaism (which lacked the capacity for self-refl ection),
Christianity was from the beginning an open, critical, and self-conscious religion.
Th e emergence of historical consciousness was a natural consequence of these traits
of Christianity; indeed, it could only have emerged out of Christianity. Although he
does not seem to have realized it himself, by making historical consciousness norma-
tive for realizing what was historically unique about Christianity, where this unique-
ness lies precisely in the consciousness of its uniqueness, Bauer was tacitly placing
historical consciousness at the forefront of Christianity. Historical consciousness
explicitly realizes a possibility that is merely implicit in Christianity, the possibility
of undertaking a self-refl exive turn toward oneself in an act of historical refl ection.
Like the latter, historical consciousness, too, claims to off er a universal narrative of
history and, again like the latter, it posits itself as the end and meaning of this his-
torical unfolding. Indeed, by also encompassing Christianity within itself as a stage
in history (one need only think of the work of David Friedrich Strauß), it explicitly
claimed to surpass the former.
Yet, even as the historical-critical method freed itself of its origins in Protestantism,
it nonetheless bore unmistakable traces of these origins. First, as is especially evi-
dent in the work of the nineteenth-century critics, the universality of the historical
method is now opposed to the particularity of other approaches. In the wake of this
shift, all other approaches—allegorical, typological, moral or tropological, and ana-
gogical—now appear as partial approximations of the truth that is provided by the
historical-critical method, just as all other religions are partial approximations of
the truth that manifests in and as Christianity. Second, the historical method entails
a radical relativization and delegitimization of alternative sources of scriptural
authority: alternative, that is, to the Protestant hermeneutic tradition (Semler) or
its modern-day descendant historical consciousness (Bauer). In the case of Indology,
27 . F. C. Bauer, P aulus, der Apostel Jesu Christi: Sein Leben und Wirken, seine Briefe und seine
Lehre. Ein Beitrag zur kritischen Geschichte des Urchristenthums (Stuttgart: Becher & Müller,
1845), 3.
28 . Ibid.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 323
this takes the form of an exaggerated aff ect against all forms of traditional learning
(see next section). One consequence of these historical developments is the way the
weight of providing an absolute, that is to say, theological, interpretation of history
is displaced into the method itself. It is no longer philosophy or religion (whether
Christianity or Judaism or any other) that is called on to provide such an interpreta-
tion, but the scholar himself who, via the methodical application of his technique, is
supposed to be capable of endowing history with meaning.
Th is overview of the scientization of theology that is inherent in the
historical-critical method has been necessary because an insight into the theological
expectations associated with the method allows us to understand its absolute author-
ity in contemporary scholarship. We are no longer required to critique this method,
to ask whence comes its enormous privilege or its enormous power of seduction over
us. Indeed, we no longer ask how a method that arose in Europe at a specifi c moment
in time, within a specifi c intellectual context, and geared to solving a specifi c prob-
lem (preserving a salvifi c core of religion in the face of the radical Enlightenment),
could come to be seen as the method of critical scholarship tout court. Th e scholars
who advocate this method for critical Indological scholarship no longer ask how the
same method can be applied—and applied with similar indiff erence—to Hebrew and
Arabic scripture, to Buddhist texts, or to Hindu texts. 29 Th ey merely assume that
the conditions for a universal refl ection on all these cultures were fi rst generated
in Europe and, in a knee-jerk refl ex, oppose the universality of the critical method
to the particularity of these traditions. Yet, once one asks how this supposedly uni-
versal method relates to its own history—that is, once one asks what the specifi c
historical conditions are that produced this universal historical consciousness—one
sees that this method can only constitute itself on the basis of a concealment. As
has become evident since the much-discussed “crisis of historicism,” the universality
of historical consciousness can be bought only at the price of making an exception
for just this consciousness, and that means that it cannot in fact be the absolute,
universal self-consciousness it claims to be. Th us, along with Gadamer, we shall not
follow this method in its “splendid self-forgetfulness” 30 but will instead trace how the
29 . As we saw, a method can be so applied because it is, in a real sense, indiff erent to the
contents of these traditions. Having reduced them to identical moments, the method is
interested only in the reconstruction of their historical sequence. Th us, not only can the
same method be applied with equal indiff erence to a Buddhist text and a Hindu text, but
it makes no diff erence w ho applies it. It is purely mechanical; a Japanese scholar can apply
it just as well as a German. One requires neither sympathy for the tradition nor a long
acquaintance nor intellectual maturity nor ethical qualifi cations to be able to practice the
historical-critical method. But this indiff erence is not the same as true universality. It dif-
fers from the universality of a plural tradition, which possesses the conceptual resources to
accommodate diff ering viewpoints and to engage in a dialogue with other traditions. Th e
historical-critical method only appears to be universal, inasmuch as it strips traditions of
their unique features and thus reduces them to the same. All traditions everywhere now
become data for this rootless method.
30 . Gadamer, Truth and Method , 453. Gadamer uses the expression of the Greek under-
standing of being as nous , which is divine, but it is also true of his view of historical
consciousness.
324 Chapter 04
application of this method to Indian texts responds to specifi c theological concerns,
ones originating in debates with Catholic theology in the sixteenth century.
THE SECULARIZATION OF PROTESTANT THEOLOGY IN THE
STUDY OF THE HISTORY OF RELIGIONS
Here is where an engagement with the problematic legacy of Protestant theology
for German Indology must begin. In the preceding chapters, we saw that the work
of Indologists from Holtzmann to Hauer was crucially informed by considerations
of a religious nature. Whether seeking a primordial nature religion among the
“Āryans” (Holtzmann) or critiquing the degeneracy of “Brahmanism” (Garbe, Jacobi,
Oldenberg) or searching for clues to Germany’s future spiritual mission (Hauer and
also Springmann, although we did not consider him), religion in one form or another
was always at the center of German Indology’s concerns. Even when Indologists
pretended to be interested in a secular study of religions or a history of religions,
theological concerns were never absent. From Holtzmann to Hauer, contemporary
scholars such as Heinrich von Stietencron have inherited the central function of
Indology as commentary, critique and censure of Indian religions.
But to understand this focus on religion, we must go further back to the fi rst
beginnings of the disciplines of Indology and history of religions. We focus here
on the central fi gure in this process, the Tübingen theologian, Orientalist, Veda
researcher, and scholar of religion, Rudolf von Roth.
Roth belonged to the fi rst generation of Indologists in Germany and, along with
Albrecht Weber and Otto von Böhtlingk, was considered part of the “triumvirate” of
German Indologists.3 1 Born in 1821, Roth studied theology toward the priesthood
but later developed an interest in Oriental languages (he is supposed to have known
Hebrew, Arabic, ancient Persian, and Avestan) and in the world’s religions. After
completing a dissertation in Semitic studies under the celebrated Protestant theo-
logian Heinrich Ewald, Roth went to Paris and London to study Sanskrit. Ewald was
the primary infl uence behind Roth’s decision to off er lectures on the universal his-
tory of religions ( Allgemeine Religionsgeschichte ) on his return to Tübingen in 1849.
Although Roth had studied theology, his work was anything but dogmatic. For
example, he rejected the historical understanding of religion that is characteristic
of Bauer’s work. Whereas Bauer, as we have seen, arranged religions on a contin-
uum depending on the extent to which they approximated the ideal religion (i.e.,
Christianity), Roth rejected Bauer’s historical scheme (as well as the implicit teleology
underlying it). In its place, he advocated studying religions from a geographic and eth-
nographic perspective. As Junginger notes, “Th is requires us to assume the existence
of n atural boundaries between religions. Non-Christian religions are now no longer
interpreted in their relationship to Christianity, but treated as autonomous units, ones
that are culturally, historically, politically, geographically, linguistically, etc., distinct
31 . For the expression, see Rudolf von Roth, 1821–1895: Die Weite Welt nach Tübingen
geholt (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1996), 43.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 325
from each other.” In his lectures on the history of religions at Tübingen, Roth also
clarifi ed that the study of the history of religions is concerned not with religion, but
with religions in plural. “Without stating it explicitly, he acknowledged Christianity
was one religion among many.”3 2
Roth’s approach brought him into confl ict with theology because he was implic-
itly rejecting Christianity’s claim to being the sole true salvifi c religion, and in point
of fact, there is evidence that he was not as closely bound to his faith as his col-
leagues.3 3 Roth had initially wanted to be a priest (and even completed the neces-
sary qualifying exams for the priesthood in 1842). But under the infl uence of his
teacher, Heinrich Ewald, a proponent of historical thinking, he developed an interest
in historical research to the extent of placing history in opposition to Christianity.
Against the Reverend J. M. Mitchell,3 4 who had criticized his book on the Vedas 35 for
taking a “purely literary point of view,” Roth pointed out that “history has . . . under
all circumstances an indestructible right of its own, which may be set aside in def-
erence to none other whatever.” Making it clear that this statement was directed
against the claims of Christian morality, he continued: “Historically established facts
maintain their truth and values, even though they seem to be at variance with the
narrowed Christian apprehension of history.” Of course, ultimately, there was no
confl ict between Christianity and a historical perspective because “a correctly under-
stood Christianity” would be “abundantly strong enough to allow historical truth to
maintain itself without and within its limits, and even to make it subservient to its
purposes.”3 6 Th e remainder of the article is dedicated to defending, against Mitchell,
the intelligence and morality of the Indians, adducing numerous examples from the
Vedas of the consonance between Indian and Christian notions of divinity.
Roth’s inquiring mind and his eff orts at founding the study of religions on the
basis of philology and linguistics were instrumental in the establishment of the his-
tory of religions as an independent discipline at Tübingen and beyond. In a sense, he
led the study of religion out of its theological confi nes and can rightly be considered
the father of secular and historical religious studies in Germany. 37 And yet, when one
32 . Junginger, Von der philologischen zur völkischen Religionswissenschaft, 27.
33 . See Garbe’s biography “Roth, Rudolf,” in Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie , vol. 53 (Leipzig:
Duncker & Humblot, 1907), 553: “freisinnig”; and “Roth, Rudolf” in Beiträge zur Kunde der
indogermanischen Sprachen , vol. 22, ed. Adalbert Bezzenberger (Göttingen: Vandenhoek &
Ruprecht, 1897), 146: “entschiedenen Freigeist.”
34 . Reverend J. M. Mitchell, “Notice of Dr. Roth’s Investigations of the Veda [A review
of Z ur Litteratur und Geschichte des Veda , by Rudolf Roth],” Journal of the Bombay Branch of
the Royal Asiatic Society 11 (July 1847): 404–10. Mitchell’s other contributions to Indology
are discussed in the Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society , Centenary
Memorial Volume (1905).
35 . Rudolf Roth, Zur Literatur und Geschichte des Weda (Stuttgart: Liesching, 1845).
36 . Rudolf Roth, “On the Morality of the Veda,” trans. William D. Whitney, Journal of the
American Oriental Society 3 (1853): 334.
37 . Hubert Cancik discusses the development of religious studies at Tübingen from the
historical-critical method of Bauer all the way to the work of the Marxist philosopher Ernst
Bloch in his “Von Ferdinand Bauer zu Ernst Bloch: religionswissenschaftliche Arbeit an der
Universität Tübingen seit der Spätaufklärung,” S tudi e Materiali di Storia delle Religioni 62
(1996): 75–96.
326 Chapter 04
looks more closely at his work, one fi nds that for all its emancipatory potential, it too
is not free of the religious prejudices of his age.
What were these prejudices? In the main, we can divide them into three: fi rst, the
assumption that every group of peoples has a “religion” on analogy with Christianity;
second, a narrative of historical decline; and third, the assumption that the study
of religions can be founded only on the study of the documents of the past. Because
all three prejudices impact the study of Indian textual traditions, we look at them in
detail here.
1 . Th e Search for Universal Religions
Th e preserved transcripts of Roth’s lectures on history of religions allow us to recon-
struct in detail his views regarding the universality of the phenomenon of religion. Roth
divided his presentation into four main sections: Asia, Europe, America, and Polynesia. 38
Th e fi rst section was further divided into three subsections: the religion of the “Āryan
races” (India and Iran), the religion of the Semitic peoples (Arabs, Babylonians,
Phoenicians, Egyptians), and of the people of north and east Asia (China, Japan, and
other Asian peoples). Th e second main section was devoted to the European religions
of the Greeks, Romans, Celts, Germans, Scandinavians, Slavs, and Finns, and the third
and the fourth sections covered the religions of the American peoples and of the South
Sea peoples.
How did Roth conceive these diff erent religions? First, he saw religion as a tendency
in all peoples. “Religion,” he clarifi ed, “is the immediate expression of the religious senti-
ment of a people.” 39 As the expression of an innate tendency, the religious feeling is capa-
ble of development. For Roth, the study of the history of religions was thus the study
of “the history of the human spirit, as it develops in the contemplation of nature, of the
essence of divinity and of humanity.”4 0 Th is historical perspective was independent of
theological questions, for it merely sought to describe the independent manifestations
of this impulse. Roth argued that “the philosophy of religions [Religionsphilosophie]
has a historical side—one that theology, as it has developed, can neglect only to its own
detriment.”4 1 Th e discovery of the historical dimension was crucial, as it now enabled
scholars to consider the expressions of diff erent cultures as expressions of one and the
same religious tendency irrespective of their specifi c contents. Animistic rites, nature
symbolism, and myth could now all be reduced to the common denominator of religion
38 . Roth did not include Africa in this list, considering its cultures to belong to the lowest
level of religious development. According to him, their “religion” did not extend beyond
the most basic forms of animism and therefore were excluded from purview.
39 . Cited in R udolf von Roth, 1821–1895 , 43. Th e authors refer to Ulrich Nanko, Die
Geschichte des Lehrstuhls für Vergleichende Religionswissenschaft an der
Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen (1848–1945). MA Dissertation, University of
Tübingen, 1980 as the source. Unfortunately, in spite of a request to the author, we have
been unable to source this work.
40 . Ibid., 42 (see preceding note for the source).
41 . Roth, “Zur Geschichte der Religion,” Th eologische Jahrbücher 5 (1846): 346.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 327
and thus studied in a comparative perspective. Roth thus distinguished between peo-
ples who had developed advanced forms of religion from those who had failed to develop
such forms. Th e latter were discussed only at the margins of his work.
But even though this approach seems naturally conducive to a historical perspec-
tive, Roth rejected (as we have seen) Bauer’s approach. 42 In the transcript of one of
his lectures we read: “(according) to the chronological order, we must arrange the
peoples [of the world] as they entered the stage of world-history, but what would we
do then with the peoples who did not appear on this stage, such as the Indians. . . . ”4 3
Rather, he adopted what might be called a morphological approach to the study of
religions, best encapsulated in his statement that “the knowledge of the heathen
religions will have a similar value for the understanding of Christianity, its form and
its history, as the knowledge of other organisms [have had] for the understanding
of the human body.” 44 Undeniably, there is a certain echo of traditional theology
here, which also made place for the study of “heathen” religions under the heading
of “mythology” as a propaedeutic to Christianity. Indeed, at times, Roth appears to
be very close to Bauer’s historical understanding. In one place he states, “In ancient
times, the identity of human nature in all individuals of the race was not thought
of: this much is evident even in the distinction already mentioned as drawn by every
cultivated nation between itself and the barbarians. Th e recognition of this identity
makes its earliest appearance in Hebrew prophecy, shows itself later in Buddhism,
and becomes complete in Christianity. We ought not therefore be surprised, if we do
not fi nd this exalted thought among the ancient Indians, twelve or fi fteen centuries
before Christ.”4 5 Th ere are clear resonances between Bauer’s idea of a continual evo-
lution of spirit in the direction of greater self-consciousness (its ultimate stage, of
course, being found in the practitioner of the historical-critical method) and Roth’s
idea of the progressive emergence of the concepts of individuality and egality. But
if Roth nonetheless rejected a historical perspective, the reasons for this must be
sought elsewhere, specifi cally in a narrative of degeneration that accompanied his
morphological-moral approach to religion.
42 . Roth certainly took history seriously; in fact, he was interested in studying the uni-
versal laws that governed the manifestation and evolution of religions, laws that we might
call laws of historical development. What he rejected, however, was the kind of (Hegelian)
metanarrative Bauer had recounted. Th us, while individual religions may progress or decay
(and accordingly could be evaluated as being more or less advanced), one could not regard
one religion as the logical successor to another. Each retained its morphological unique-
ness; the only perspective from which a universal contemplation of the religions of the
world was possible was hence not Christianity (as it had been for Bauer), but the new disci-
pline of a universal history of religions. And yet, with this move, Roth reinstated (albeit in
secularized and disguised form) the primacy of a Christian view of the world.
43 . Cited in Rudolf von Roth, 1821–1895 , 41. Th e authors cite “die Nachschrift Widmanns”
as the source, but do not provide further information.
44 . Rudolf von Roth, 1821–1895 , 41.
45 . Roth, “On the Morality of the Veda,” 345.
328 Chapter 04
2 . Th e Search for the Causes of Decline
Roth’s motivation for rejecting a teleological narrative of history was in part salu-
tary: he wished to avoid a self-righteous assessment of other religions from the
viewpoint of Christianity, such as that advocated by the Reverend Mitchell. In his
response to the reverend, he opposed that “we shall be best enabled to assign to the
ancient Indians that place in the scale of moral culture to which they are entitled, by
considering what were their fundamental ideas touching the laws of moral obliga-
tion, and the relation of man to the gods.”4 6 One also detects herein a trace of Ranke’s
dictum, according to which the historian’s task was merely to describe “wie es eigentlich
gewesen” (“how it really was”). 47 But there is also a second reason for Roth’s rejection of
Bauer’s teleology, and this was because he advocated an inverse teleology in its place.
Th is reverse teleology comes to light in the exact same text in which Roth rejected
Mitchell’s condemnation of the Vedas from the perspective of his (i.e., Mitchell’s)
nineteenth-century European consciousness. Concluding his refutation of Mitchell
with the words, “No one will hesitate to allow to these conceptions a positive moral
value, and to esteem a literature in which such ideas are expressed,” 48 and admonished:
But the Indian nation has not abode by them. It has, indeed, carefully treasured up,
and at all times regarded as sacred, the productions of its earliest period; but it has
attached the main importance to a worthless supplement, and lost from sight and
from knowledge the truly valuable portion. Only once in the whole long course of its
later history has it enjoyed a period worthy of being compared with that primitive
one: during the fi rst ages, namely, of Buddhism. Th ose, then, who are called to labor
in the wide fi eld of Indian missions may confi dently hold up before the people its
own antiquity as a model: not in order that it progress no further than that; but that
it may see how its ancestors, in their simplicity, were nearer the purity of truth than
their descendants, in their self-satisfi ed arrogance; and how the former cherished
none of those follies and errors in which they themselves are apparently hoping to
fi nd their salvation for now and hereafter.4 9
Wherein did the causes of this degeneracy lie? Roth provided a hint a few lines below.
Whereas in the Vedic hymns we fi nd evidence that the “high spiritual endowments”
that belong “of right to the Indo-European family of nations” are “still fresh and
vigorous in the most eastern branch of [this] family;” later, they are “disfi gured” by
“manifold excrescences of peculiar views and customs.” Roth made no bones about
his distaste for these views and customs. Th ey have, so he claimed, “so deformed
the later Indian people, that, were it not for their language [i.e., Sanskrit, or the
46 . Ibid., 340.
47 . On the history of Ranke’s phrase, see W. P. Fuchs, “Was heisst das: ‘bloss zeigen, wie
es eigentlich gewesen’?” Geschichte in Wissenschaft und Unterricht 11 (1979): 655–67; see
also K. Repgen, “Ueber Rankes Diktum von 1824: ‘Bloss sagen, wie es eigentlich gewesen,’ ”
Historisches Jahrbuch 102 (1982): 439–49.
48 . Roth, “On the Morality of the Veda,” 346.
49 . Ibid., 346–47.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 329
Indo-European family of languages], the European would scarcely recognize them
for his own kindred.”5 0
In his foreword to the Petersburg Sanskrit dictionary, Roth further expanded on
the theme as follows: he fi rst noted the limited value of the later commentarial tradi-
tion in clarifying the Veda. According to him, the classical commentators (he means
Sāya ṇa above all) were excellent guides for the “books of theology and ritual.”5 1 “Here
they are on their ground, where what is at stake is to explain the convoluted, subtle,
and quite often sophistic symbolism of the ritual, [where what is at stake is] to elabo-
rate all the countless minute details, on whose observance during worship eternal
salvation or damnation depend.” “But it is quite a diff erent matter,” he continued,
“when the same men take up the task of an interpretation of the ancient collections
of hymns [Roth means the Ṛg Veda].” 52
Th ese texts are not the creations of theological speculation, nor did they spring
forth from the ground of that precisely regulated and meticulous liturgical praxis.
Rather, they are, for the most part, products of the most ancient religious lyric,
whose artistic practice was as little tied to castes and families as the off ering of daily
sacrifi ce and prayer. In them was vital a world of divinities [and] was refl ected a rit-
ual that was essentially divergent from the system taught in the Brâhma ṇa [texts].
Th ey [i.e., these hymns] spoke a language that was separated from the language of
the Brâhman ̣a (which is hardly anything other than the so-called classical Sanskrit)
by as great a gulf as the Latin of the Salian hymns from that of M. Terrentius Varro. 53
Curiously, as vague as Roth remained on the exact contours of this decline (other
than to reiterate that Hinduism was far removed from the original religion), he was
precise as to where the blame lay:
Th e very same qualities that make commentators preeminent guides to an under-
standing of the theological books make them unusable guides in that far more
ancient and completely diff erent fi eld. . . . 5 4
And it is not just that the later commentators reinterpret (and hence falsify) the
revelation, but that they do it out of ulterior motives:
If the order of the ritual appeared to them as impossible to contemplate as ever
being otherwise and [hence] as existing from the beginning of the world, then the
50 . Ibid., 347.
51 . Rudolf von Roth, “Vorwort,” in Otto Böhtlingk and Rudolf von Roth,
Sanskrit-Wörterbuch , vol. 1 (St. Petersburg: Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaften,
1855), iv. Roth means the Brāhma ṇas here, the primary liturgical texts of the Indian tradi-
tion. Th e Brāhma ṇas are attached to the Vedas and hence the term V eda is often used as a
collective term for the Vedas and their auxiliary texts. However, Roth makes a program-
matic distinction between the former and the latter here.
52 . Ibid., v.
53 . Ibid.
54 . Ibid.
330 Chapter 04
forefathers of the Indian worship of gods must have sacrifi ced in exactly the same
way; if the divine order and the world system of their age were untouchable and
divinely revealed truths, the same [order and the same system] necessarily had to
be found in the kernel of the revelation, namely, in the hymns of the ancient R ṣ hi,
who after all existed in familiar contact with the gods and possessed much greater
wisdom than the later born generations. 55
We shall have to trace this criticism of the priests later because it holds the key to
understanding the Protestant context of Roth’s understanding of religion. But already
we have the answer to our initial question, namely, why did Roth reject Bauer’s teleo-
logical narrative of history, when so much in his work suggests he would be sympa-
thetic to this narrative? Although overtly Roth’s rejection appears to be motivated by
an ethical concern (namely, an insistence that all religions are equally valid and hence
cannot be considered more or less imperfect approximations of Christianity), there
is also a second concern at work here. Roth did not simply defend a morphological
approach to religions, which sees them as static manifestations of the one religious
spirit common to all peoples. Rather, he also detected an internal history to every
religion. According to this view, every religion undergoes a process of development
from a belief in souls (animism) to the personifi cation and worship of natural forces
(nature religion) and, ultimately, faith in a supreme Being (ethical religion). Even
though the world’s religions cannot be arranged along a historical continuum (as
Bauer, for example, argued), one can nonetheless evaluate them with regard to this
internal history. As his biographer, student, and successor to the chair at Tübingen,
Richard Garbe, commented: “Depending on whether the one or the other of these
three roots of religion is developed in an especially pronounced manner, the essence
and character of religions can be distinguished in historical time.” 56 Roth’s complex
relationship to the notion of religious development can be seen from an address writ-
ten to Böhtlingk in 1888, where he referred to a passage of the Atharvaveda that
mentions will-o’-the-wisps. He wrote: “It is fortunate that here, although there are
spooks, they are at least not the wandering souls of some dead people, which we oth-
erwise fi nd at every step in the latest interpretations of myths.”5 7
Roth was thus able to combine a comparative historical approach with an evalu-
ative developmental framework, and the combination of these two lets us fi nally
understand why he rejected the historical approach. As Roth viewed it, every religion
experiences phases of growth, decay, and renewal. Traces of these phases (both the
positive and the negative) are left behind in the documents of the religion, permit-
ting a reconstruction of their (internal) history. Crucially, such a science of religion
also permits us to distinguish relatively pure stages of their genesis from later, more
55 . Ibid.
56 . Garbe, “Roth, Rudolf,” 561.
57 . Cited in Garbe, “Roth, Rudolf,” 561. Garbe gives the source as Roth’s article in the
Festgruss to Böhtlingk (Rudolf von Roth, “Proben aus einer Übersetzung des Atharvan,” in
Festgruss an Otto von Böhtlingk zum Doktor-Jubiläum, 3. Februar 1888 von seinen Freunden ,
ed. Rudolf von Roth [Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer, 1888], 95–99, the quotation is on p. 98).
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 331
corrupt manifestations. And that means we can take up an evaluative stance vis-à-
vis a specifi c religion without having to invoke Christianity as a measure. Rather, as
Roth saw it, our measure now becomes the pure stage of the religion itself. In prac-
tice, of course, that pure stage was most often identifi ed with the origin, as was the
case with Indian religions.
We are now in a position to answer the question of why Roth rejected Bauer’s
historical approach:
1. Rather than apply an external criterion such as Christianity, Roth sought an
internal criterion to evaluate religions.
2. Rather than share Bauer’s Hegelian confi dence in the rationality of history, Roth
emphasized the potential for religious development to reverse its course.
With this move, Roth eff ectively s ecularized the discourse on religions. Bauer still
needed Christianity (albeit already in semisecularized form) to endow his historical
narrative with meaning. Th us, although Bauer’s historical-critical method claimed to
be universal, it still betrayed traces of its origins in a specifi c historical and intellec-
tual context. In contrast, Roth could claim to have overcome the particularity of his
situation: because he no longer requires Christianity to evaluate religions, his new
Allgemeine Religionsgeschichte fulfi lled what the historical-critical method (and before
it, Christianity) had promised but been unable to do, namely, off er a truly universal
refl ection on religion. 58
And yet, when one looks closer, this overt secularization was bought at the
price of an evasion. Roth’s history of religions is also not without its presupposi-
tions. Crucially, in discarding Bauer’s Hegelian understanding of religions, Roth had
recurred to an older conception of history, namely, as a narrative of decline and a fall
away from the origin. Th is narrative, of course, was anything but secular, since its
inspiration (and its divine sanction) could be found in the Bible itself.
3 . Criticisms of the Priesthood
In a recent article, the social scientists Raf Gelders and Willem Derde have shown
how Western conceptions of religion were normative for the encounter with
non-European cultures. 59 Gelders and Derde argue that, in the narrative recounted
by Western scholars, “both the idea of religious degeneration and the role played
by the priests in this process” were key. “On the one hand, the biblical story of a
god-given religion that was subsequently corrupted through the course of time was
the general framework that structured the history of Christianity and of all the other
58 . Obviously, we disagree with this claim. But the argument is dialectical at this stage.
In the next section, we discuss why the history of religions, although widely considered a
secular form of scholarship, is no less tainted by religious prejudices.
59 . Raf Gelders and Willem Derde, “Mantras of Anti-Brahmanism: Colonial Experience
of Indian Intellectuals,” Economic and Political Weekly 38, no. 43 (2003): 4611–617.
332 Chapter 04
so-called religions. On the other hand, because Christianity assigned a primary role
to the clergy, religion was an aff air of the priests only. Consequently, the mechanism
of degeneration had to be found in the priesthood: priests became the instruments
of the devil and began to transform the original god-given religion.” Th is understand-
ing of religion, they suggest, also structured “the European quest for the ‘religious’
elsewhere.”6 0 Th us, while Orientalist scholars “might have presented their case in the
garbs of rationality and open-mindedness,” when it came to “the identifi cation of the
brahmin ‘priests’ as the cause for the degeneration of religion, the enslavement of
the minds of the people, and the preservation of their own caste, their resemblance
to the story told by Protestant zealots is remarkable.” 61
Even though both Judaism and Christianity were familiar with the narrative of
a degeneration of religion, followed by periods in which God renewed his covenant
with his people via one or more elected fi gures, this narrative fi rst acquired its radical
edge with the coming of Protestantism. As the authors note,
Protestantism [did] not alter this conception. On the contrary, Protestant critiques
against the institutionalised church strengthened its hold, albeit in a rather peculiar
manner. In defi ance of the Catholic church, which preserved priesthood exclusively
to the selected few, Protestants argued that all believers could be priests. Th ey con-
demned the institutionalised church as the necessary mediator between man and
god: the church had corrupted the true religion and hence, was nothing but an insti-
tute of the devil. As no shepherd could lead us to god, each one of us was “respon-
sible” for his own salvation.6 2
Protestants accusing clerics of corruption of the Bible could count themselves on
solid theological ground, for had not Luther himself preached against the confusion
of things human and divine? In his preface to his translation of the New Testament,
Luther had already warned his followers “not [to] make a Moses out of Christ, or
a book of laws and doctrines out of the gospel, as has been done heretofore.” “For
the gospel, truly speaking, does not demand works of our own by which we become
pious and blessed; indeed it condemns such works.”6 3 Even more explicit is the brief
essay “Von Menschenlehre zu meiden” (Avoiding the Doctrines of Men). Citing
Deuteronomy 4.2 (“Do not add to what I command you and do not subtract from it,
but keep the commands of the Lord your God that I give you”), Matthew 15:9 (“Th ese
people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me. Th ey worship
me in vain; their teachings are merely human rules”), and 15:11 (“What goes into
60 . Ibid., 4611.
61 . Ibid., 4613.
62 . Ibid., 4614.
63 . Martin Luther, “Vorrede zum Neuen Testament (1522),” in L uther deutsch. Die
Werke Martin Luthers in neuer Auswahl für die Gegenwart , vol. 5 (Göttingen: Vandenhoek
& Ruprecht, 1991), 41. (All citations refer to the electronic version of the ten-volume
edition of Luther’s works edited by Kurt Aland [Martin Luther, Luther deutsch. Die
Werke Martin Luthers in neuer Auswahl für die Gegenwart , vols. 1–10, ed. Kurt Aland
(Göttingen: Vandenhoek & Ruprecht, 1991)], hereafter cited as L uther Werke followed by
the volume and page number.)
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 333
someone’s mouth does not defi le them, but what comes out of their mouth, that is
what defi les them”), Luther accuses the church of introducing rules, religious orders,
and observances that lack scriptural sanction. Th e priests, he says, are “liars, for at
times they introduce and force even holy scripture and the words of the Fathers into
their doctrines, as we see daily. But that is false and a perversion, since the scripture is
completely against them.” 64 Concluding with Proverbs 30.5–6 (“Every word of God is
fl awless; he is a shield to those who take refuge in him. Do not add to his words, or he
will rebuke you and prove you a liar”), he once again emphasizes that one should only
preach the word of God, for as Christ says (Matthew 23:8): “Laßt euch nicht Meister
heißen. Ein Meister ist in euch, Christus.” 65 Commenting on the signifi cance of this
essay, Aland remarks that the title of the essay (“Von Menschenlehre zu meiden”)
“could stand as the title for the entire volume. For this is what is at stake for Luther
in his ‘struggle for the pure doctrine’ 66 : to let God’s word come into its proper right
and to keep all human additions and falsifi cations at a distance from it.” Th ese addi-
tions “lead immediately to error: to Catholicism, to the Spiritualists [Schwärmer], to
the Anabaptists, etc. It is human doctrines that constitute the essence of Catholicism
just as much as of the sectarian movements.” 67
Returning to Gelders and Derde, we observe that this view also infl uenced the
work of early Orientalists. “When Europe confronted the ‘pagan world’ a second
time, the Judeo-Christian theme of an original true religion and its subsequent
degeneration still structured Europe’s conception of the history of the ‘religious.’ ” 68
Consequently, Western scholars tended to assume a similar narrative of degeneracy,
irrespective of the tradition they were studying. In the Indian context, this meant
that Brahmans were “identifi ed as ‘priests,’ who created ‘brahmanism,’ which was
imposed upon Indian society.” 69
Th e mechanism of corruption was also the same. “What they [i.e., the Brahmans]
imposed upon society as part of their religion must have been the work of the devil
as well.” 7 0 As with the church, this imposition mainly took the form of a corruption
of “scripture.” Th us, not only was there a need to identify “religions” among other
cultures, but also there was a need to identify suitable scriptural texts.
Th e search for the carefully hidden “religious texts” became one of Europe’s obses-
sions. Diff erences between the “pure original” as embodied in those texts and that
which the priests imposed upon the laity confi rmed that priesthood was a simi-
lar phenomenon all over the world. Th e Catholic church knew of pilgrimages and
64 . Martin Luther, “Von Menschenlehre zu meiden (1522),” L uther Werke , vol. 4, 38.
65 . Translation from the 1522 sermon. In his 1545 edition, he translates, “Aber ihr sollt
euch nicht Rabbi nennen lassen; denn einer ist euer Meister, Christus; ihr aber seid alle
Brüder.” Th e New International Version reads: “But you are not to be called ‘Rabbi,’ for you
have one Teacher, and you are all brothers.”
66 . “Der Kampf um die reine Lehre” is the title of a book published in 1525 by Luther; it
contains the essay “Von Menschenlehre zu meiden (1522).”
67 . Kurt Aland, “Editorische Bemerkung,” Luther Werke , vol. 4, 341.
68 . Gelders and Derde, “Mantras of Anti-Brahmanism,” 4615.
69 . Ibid., 4611.
70 . Ibid., 4615.
334 Chapter 04
indulgences; brahmanism displayed “ceremonial and pecuniary atonements.” As
the Catholic clergy imposed a system of false prescriptions in its quest for worldly
power, brahmins imposed a system of rules and prescriptions to preserve their
own temporal interests. Th ey had their own secret language too, i.e., Sanskrit, and
eagerly tried to conceal their fraud.7 1
Interestingly, we fi nd all three elements of the Protestant narrative identifi ed by
Gelders and Derde in Roth’s work. First, as we saw earlier, Roth was at the forefront
of eff orts to develop a universal history of religions. Second, he was also active in
sourcing appropriate “scriptural texts” for the diff erent religions he identifi ed. 72 In
his writings, he laments the fact that the textual basis for research into the history
of religions is as yet insuffi cient. Th ird, a brief look at Roth’s writings on religion in
India show how deeply he has internalized the Protestant understanding of history.
Th us, the holy books of the ancient peoples were clarifi ed by later centuries accord-
ing to the dominant systems of theology of the time and according to the higher
or lower condition of science in general. Indeed, they were clarifi ed in such a way
that this interpretation pretended to be the tradition [itself], that is, it claimed an
antiquity and a prestige for itself that it, in truth, did not always possess. Nor has it
occurred to anyone, for example, to make our understanding of the Hebrew books
of the Old Testament dependent upon the Talmud and the rabbis. In contrast, there
is no lack of people who consider it the duty of a conscientious Veda interpreter to
translate according to Sâja ṇa, Mahîdhara, and others. Th us, we do not hold as H. H.
Wilson does, that Sâja ṇa understood the expressions of the Veda better than every
European interpreter, [and] that we hence have nothing more to do than to repeat
after him. Rather, we hold that a conscientious European interpreter can under-
stand the Veda more accurately and much better than Sâja ṇa. We do not consider
it our immediate task to attain that understanding of the Veda that was prevalent
in India a few centuries ago; rather, we seek the meaning that the poets themselves
placed in their hymns and sayings. 73
Th e comparison of Sāya ṇa with a rabbi may seem out of place at fi rst, but one must
bear in mind that in Luther’s polemics against interpretation, the rabbinical tra-
dition represented the paradigmatic instance of how texts could be corrupted by
the tradition. For example, in his “Summarien über die Psalmen und Ursachen des
Dolmetschens,” he explicitly justifi es his translation choices over against those of the
71 . Ibid.
72 . See the materials gathered in R udolf von Roth, 1821–1895 , cited earlier. Also see
“Rudolf von Roth and the South Asia Collection of Tübingen University Library,” paper
presented at the 10th World Sanskrit Conference, Bangalore, India, January 7, 1997, and
“On Manuscripts and Letters from Rudolf von Roth’s Legacy,” paper presented at the 9th
World Sanskrit Conference, Melbourne, Australia, January 9–15, 1994, both by Gabriele
Zeller. Zeller was involved in the exhibition on Roth’s life that led to the book on Rudolf
von Roth, but the book does not have an author or editor.
73 . Roth, “Vorwort,” v.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 335
rabbis. As he notes, he has not “translated as he has out of incomprehension of the
language nor out of ignorance of the comments of the Rabbis, but rather scientifi -
cally and deliberately [wissenschaftlich und williglich].” 74 Toward the end of the text,
Luther provides a theoretical justifi cation for his approach as follows:
Th at we now here and in similar passages at times diverge from the grammarians
and the rabbis, ought not surprise anyone. For we have followed the rule: where
the words permit it and yield a better understanding, there we have not allowed
ourselves to be forced into a worse or a diff erent meaning by the grammar made by
the rabbis. For as all school teachers tell us: it is not the meaning that ought to serve
and follow the words, but the words that ought to serve and follow the meaning.7 5
Roth’s comparison of the Brahmans to the rabbis and of the Veda to the Talmud,
moreover, had theological precedent, for Luther had already equated the papists with
the Jews. By arguing that a conscientious European interpreter could understand
the Veda more accurately than the classical commentators Sāya ṇa, Mahīdhara, or
Mādhava,7 6 Roth was only following Luther in setting aside the patristic tradition for
a return to the fundaments of the faith. But in pursuing this fundamentalism outside
of Christianity, Roth was in eff ect creating a new clergy: the modern scholar of world
religions. As the Protestant pastor was to the Catholic priest, the practitioner of the
historical method would be to the Brahman.
Against this background, we can now understand why Mitchell’s negative assess-
ment, no less than Bauer’s positive outlook, would have been unacceptable to Roth.
Both were at odds with a Protestant narrative of a revealed religion that went
through periodic cycles of decline, each time before a critical reaction set in usher-
ing a renewal. And this narrative is essential to Roth, not because he is a missionary
like Mitchell (in that case, a simple narrative of the evils of heathenism would have
suffi ced), but because he represents a denizen of that new class we might term the
“scientifi c missionary.”
Of course, neither Mitchell nor Bauer can be accused of being advocates of reli-
gious pluralism. Mitchell, a Scottish missionary affi liated with the Free Church of
74 . Martin Luther, “Summarien über die Psalmen und Ursachen des Dolmetschens
(1533),” Luther Werke , vol. 5, 176.
75 . Ibid., 178–79. See also Luther’s comments in “On the Jews and their Lies (1543)”:
“Here in Wittenberg on our parish church there is a sow carved in stone. Under her, young
piglets and Jews lie sucking. Behind the sow stands a rabbi who lifts the sow’s right leg and
with his left hand he pulls her rear over himself. He bends down and looks most studiously
under her rear at the Talmud inside, as if he wanted to read and see something diffi cult and
special. Th is is most likely where they got their S hem Hamphoras from.” Martin Luther, “On
the Ineff able Name and on the Lineage of Christ,” in M artin Luther, the Bible, and the Jewish
People: A Reader, ed. Brooks Schramm and Kirsi I. Stjerna (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2012),
180. (Shem Hamphoras is the rabbinical name for the Ineff able God.)
76 . Roth mentions Mādhava, the brother of Śāya ṇa in his “Ueber gelehrte Tradition im
Alterthume besonders in Indien,” Z eitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft
21 (1867): 1–9.
336 Chapter 04
Scotland,7 7 pursued an aggressively evangelical agenda in India.7 8 In his book A n Essay
on the Best Means of Civilising the Subjects of the British Empire in India,7 9 Mitchell advo-
cated a program of conversion, justifi ed on the grounds that the colonial power had
an obligation to “rescue many millions of our race from a most abject state of civil,
intellectual, moral, and religious degradation; and to bless them with an increase of
the comforts of life, with a participation of the liberties and laws of Britons, and,
above all, with the knowledge of the ‘word of life,’ and the enjoyment of the blessings
of salvation.”8 0 Mitchell described the “morality of the Gentoos” as being “defi cient,
both in extent and in principle.” Th ey had “no perfect standard of morals; none that
is free from superstition, dignifi ed in its motives, and not defective in its prescrip-
tions.”8 1 “Of other virtues of a higher order and more diffi cult attainment, which
require vigour and fi re of soul; of the principles of an elevated philanthropy, of active
heroism, and of a noble generosity, such as Christianity would inspire,” he declared
the Hindus to be “at once ignorant and destitute.”8 2 Bauer, likewise, had made no
bones about which religion he considered the most perfect, although his concern was
directed toward Judaism rather than Hinduism. Against this background, the work
of Roth, a scholar of religions rather than a theologian, appears almost modern by
comparison.
And yet, when one considers the concrete narrative Roth recounts, it is clear that
he was no more secular than the self-righteous reverend. For Roth did not disagree
with Mitchell’s negative assessment of Indian religion; he merely objects to his anti-
fundamentalism. For Roth, the Scottish missionary’s failure would have been pre-
cisely that he failed to recognize the messianic potential of the new science. Mitchell
had simply opposed the true faith to the “false religion” of the Hindus. 83 Even though
he had (citing John 5:20) called Christianity the religion of “the true God and eter-
nal life,” by calling Hinduism paganism, he had recognized its absolute alterity. Th is
alterity could not be subsumed; it could at most be eradicated. To be sure, Mitchell
77 . An evangelical group that split from the Church of Scotland in the Disruption of
1843, especially active in foreign missions.
78 . For a good overview of Mitchell’s literary and missionary activities in India, see Phillip
Constable, “Scottish Missionaries, ‘Protestant Hinduism’ and the Scottish Sense of Empire
in Nineteenth and Early Twentieth-century India,” Scottish Historical Review 86, no. 2: 222
(2007): 278–313. Constable particularly shows how Mitchell initiated “the reconstruc-
tion of Vai ṣ ṇava bhakti as a proto-Protestant Christian doctrine under Presbyterian aus-
pices.” Ibid., 294. Th is would, of course, have been contrary to Roth’s approach, which
valorized ancient Indian texts. For a good overview of how a theory of bhakti as a religion
was constructed in stages by Western Orientalists, see Krishna Sharma, Bhakti and the
Bhakti Movement—a New Perspective: A Study in the History of Ideas (Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal, 1989).
79 . John Murray Mitchell, An Essay on the Best Means of Civilising the Subjects of the British
Empire in India, and of Diff using the Light of the Christian Religion throughout the Eastern
World (Edinburgh: W. Blackwood, 1805).
80 . Ibid., 14.
81 . Ibid., 157.
82 . Ibid., 158.
83 . See ibid., 187–89.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 337
expects divine things to follow from such an eradication. “How delightful the pros-
pects which open upon the eye of faith in prophetic vision!” he exclaimed.
Christianity prevails universally, the consequences are most blissful. Our race
assumes the lovely appearance of one vast, virtuous, peaceful family! Our world
becomes the seat of one grand, triumphant, adoring assembly!—At length the scene
mingles with the heavens, and, rising in brightness, is blended with the glories on
high. Th e mystery of God on earth is fi nished. Th e times of the regeneration are
fulfi lled. Th e Son of God descends. 84
But Roth was now proposing that this alterity could not only be subsumed; it had
already been subsumed through his new Allgemeine Religionswissenschaft . Th e object
of study of this discipline was not merely the diff erent manifestations of the religious
sentiment common to all men. Roth had considered this sentiment to be a natural
and ethical law. Th e morphological and comparative approach was supposed, on the
one hand, to describe the individual religions of each people and of the main geo-
graphic subdivisions (i.e., Asia, Europe, America, Polynesia). On the other hand, it
was also supposed to develop the universal laws governing the appearance of these
forms. In his article on the “basic traits of the science of the history of religions,” 85
Bruno Lindner, Roth’s student 86 and the fi rst chair of history of religions at Leipzig,8 7
clarifi ed the relation of the morphological to the eidetic analysis as follows: the task
of R eligionswissenschaft was “historical research of the individual religions according
to their essence and their historically demonstrable development.” But the discipline
also had a “goal that led beyond that,” namely, “to investigate the laws according to
which the development of religions takes place.” “Only when we may hope,” wrote
Lindner, “really to be able to demonstrate [the existence of] such universally valid
laws are we also justifi ed in speaking of the history of religion, and only then can we
rightly claim legitimacy for the science. . . . One may express it thus: the study of the
84 . Ibid., 232.
85 . Bruno Lindner, “Grundzüge der allgemeinen Religionswissenschaft auf geschich-
tlicher Grundlage,” in Handbuch der theologischen Wissenschaften , vol. 3, ed. Otto Zöckler
(Munich: C. H. Beck, 1890), 565–708.
86 . Roth’s infl uence on Lindner is uncontested. Junginger argues that “Roth’s infl uence
on Lindner is clearly visible therein [i.e., in the ‘Grundzüge’].” Junginger, Von der philolo-
gische zur völkischen Religionswissenschaft , 26.
87 . Lindner had studied with Roth in Tübingen and completed a PhD under him in
1876. In 1877, he was nominated to the chair in Persian and Indian philology at Leipzig.
Lindner off ered a course on Geschichte der indischen und persischen Religion in 1881
and began off ering courses in Allgemeine Religionsgeschichte from 1882 onward. From
1885 onward, he began to alternate irregularly between Allgemeine Religionsgeschichte
and Einleitung in die Religionsgeschichte (listed as “Einführung in die allgemeine
Religionsgeschichte” in the 1890 catalogue). From 1887 onward until his retirement in
1919, his chair was converted into the “Planmäßiger außerordentlicher Professur für
Arische Sprachen und Religionsgeschichte.” A formal chair was fi rst established in 1912
with the nomination of the evangelical theologian Nathan Söderblum in 1912 at the newly
founded Religionswissenschaftliches Institut. Th is was the fi rst and hence oldest chair for
Religionswissenschaft in Germany.
338 Chapter 04
history of religion [Religionsgeschichte] initially has the task of being the history of
religions [Geschichte der Religionen], but, if it wishes to claim the status of an inde-
pendent scientifi c discipline, it can never lose from sight the goal of becoming the
history of religion [Geschichte der Religion].”8 8
Th ere can thus be little doubt that Roth, for his all emancipatory and critical ten-
dencies (and we must never forget that at least some German Indologists, especially
in the early stages of the discipline, took their role as contributing to the humanist
mission quite seriously), 89 was still fundamentally beholden to a Protestant frame-
work. Occasionally, Roth could be quite explicit on the point:
Th eology will not suff er if it goes beyond its immediate boundaries, and discovers
in other periods and other regions the similarities, but even more the diff erences
of religious life. In the center of religion-historical research, however, stand the
holy books of the Aryans as the oldest and richest source for our knowledge of the
forms of faith of two extraordinarily talented tribes [Roth means the Indians and
Iranians], as the sole means of access to the religious primordial history of that
tribe, which is the bearer of Christianity, as well as already since the beginning of
the pre-Christian era [the bearer] of world history.9 0
But for the most part, even when importing elements of the Protestant narrative,
the new practitioners of the method chose to maintain a distance from explicit theo-
logical concerns. Certainly, Roth cannot be compared with Graul or Francke, 91 both
important fi gures in the establishment of Indology at Halle.9 2 And yet, it was precisely
this distancing from explicit theology that was to make his legacy so problematic, for
88 . Lindner, “Grundzüge der allgemeinen Religionswissenschaft,” 569.
89 . An important source text for this view is Josef Körner’s essay “Indologie und
Humanität,” in Festschrift Moritz Winternitz , ed. Otto Stein and W. Gampert (Leipzig: Otto
Harrassowitz, 1933), 117–38. Also important for its profound and cosmopolitan senti-
ments is Wilhelm von Humboldt’s Über die unter dem Namen Bhagavad Gítá bekannte
Episode des Mahá-Bhárata , cited earlier.
90 . Rudolf von Roth, “Ueber die heiligen Schriften der Arier,” Jahrbücher für deutsche
Th eologie 2 (1857): 141. Also see Roth’s “Die höchsten Götter der arischen Völker,”
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 6 (1852): 67, where Roth introduces
his project of illuminating notions of divinity among the Āryans with the words: “the great
family of tribes, to which we also belong.”
91 . August Hermann Francke (1663–1727) was the founder of the Franckesche Stiftung,
a major supporter of the missionary activities of the Dänische-Hallesche Mission. Karl
Graul (1814–64) was the director of the Leizpig Mission and was active in south India. Th e
Evangelisch-Lutheranische Mission zu Leipzig, as it was properly known, was considered
the successor to the Dänische-Hallesche Mission. Its activities led to the establishment of
the Tamil Evangelical Lutheran Church in 1919.
92 . Th e diff ering circumstances of the Halle school of Indology are covered by Hanco
Jürgens in “German Indology a vant la lettre : Th e Experiences of the Halle Missionaries
in Southern India 1750–1810,” in S anskrit and Orientalism: Indology and Comparative
Linguistics in Germany, 1750–1958 , ed. Damodar SarDesai, Peter K. J. Park, and Douglas
McGetchin (Delhi: Manohar, 2004), 41–82; and in “German Indologists A vant la Lettre ,
Changing Horizons of the Halle Missionaries in Southern India,” in Halle and the Beginning
of Protestant Christianity in India , vol. 3, ed. Andreas Gross, Y. Vincent Kumarados, and
Heike Liebau (Halle: Verlag der Franckeschen Stiftungen, 2006), 1047–91.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 339
Roth would not abandon the claim to a superior, critical, and forthright method as
compared with the priests’ manipulations.
4 . Polemics over Method
We have seen how Roth had accepted the Protestant narrative of religious degenera-
tion and sought to demonstrate it of other cultures as well. One might even suppose
that this cyclical structure (i.e., degeneration followed by renewal) constituted one
of those basic laws scholars of religion of the nineteenth century were in search of.
Roth, for example, used the narrative of degeneration as a basic hermeneutic prin-
ciple for making sense of Indian religious history, and once the principle was in place,
he could be quite colorful in his descriptions of the process of ruin. “If one looks,”
he wrote,
at the religious and universal human content of these Vedic gods, at the evenness
of the form, in which they stand with all the freshness of originality before the con-
sciousness of the Indian, far from the monstrousness and hideousness of the later
creations of a perverted fantasy, one will not be able to accept the developments
of the later period as a natural progression; if one furthermore notices the ethical
orientation which manifests itself in the individual forms, the honesty and upright-
ness of the pious feeling in a large number of these hymns . . . one will have to say,
something better was destined for the nation [Roth means the Indians] than it at
any time afterward was able to realize.9 3
And even though he concluded that “the period of this decline, of this perversion of
a beautiful beginning into a bad outcome” is “still quite dark for us,” these defi cits
in historical knowledge did not worry him further. It was evident that the decline
must have taken place as the Āryans (for Roth accepted this category as much as any
scholar of his time) “moved . . . ever further south.” 94 Once again, it was the priests
who were at the forefront of this corruption of the Āryan spirit:
Religion and worship now entered their hands [i.e., the hands of the Brahmans],
and their privileges attached to them, a scholastic theology was developed, all reli-
gious forms became rigid and hence alien to the lively consciousness of the people.
Further, the immense infl uence of the tropical nature surrounding them, the grad-
ual disappearance of the recollection of the holy antiquity in the North, the admix-
ture with other races, whose successor they became—the caste of the Çudra [Śūdra]
is originally absent from the Veda—briefl y, a return to the ancient or its continua-
tion became impossible and whereas on the one hand ancient sacrifi ces and prayers
were ever more precisely determined and became liturgical formulae, on the other
93 . Roth, “Zur Geschichte der Religion,” 357.
94 . Ibid.
340 Chapter 04
completely new and essentially diff erent cults set in, ones as diff erent from the old
religion as can be. 95
Bear in mind this part of Roth’s argument because the narrative of decline (the con-
tent, if one will) was not distinct from the framing of the scholar’s task (the form the
scholarship took). Content and form mutually conditioned each other. In fact, the
former directly engendered the latter. If Indian texts had been correctly preserved
and interpreted, there would be nothing for the critical scholar to do. He could at
most read, learn from, enjoy, and possibly even praise these texts. But the narrative
of decline, introduced uncritically and defended dogmatically, opened up previously
unimagined horizons for scholarship. It practically obligated the scholar to work out
an alternative hermeneutic to Indian texts.
Th e critical potential of this new discipline was, moreover, radically sharpened by
debates that had already been underway within Christianity since the Reformation
concerning the interpretation of scripture.9 6 Th ese debates had culminated in the
establishment of the a ltprotestantische Schriftprinzip of s ola scriptura or the notion
that one can derive the meaning of scripture purely from the text rather than
needing recourse to an interpretive tradition. 97 Th e Neo-Protestant theologians,
however, progressively distanced themselves from this principle. Th is change was
not a break with the principle of sola scriptura (even though it was interpreted as
such by some), but, rather, a further radicalization of the critical potential of the
latter. Luther’s innovation had already initiated a radical turn toward the text.
Traditional biblical hermeneutics had distinguished between the sensus litteralis
(historicus ) and s ensus spiritualis (mysticus ). Luther, however, insisted that “neither
a derivation nor an allegorical meaning be permitted for any passage, so long as
the unambiguous context of the words and the absurdity of the state of aff airs
before one, which confl icts with even a single article of faith, did not demand
it.” Rather, “everywhere one must follow the simple, pure, and natural meaning
of the words, as required by grammar and the use of language as God has cre-
ated it among men.” 98 Commenting on the passage, Krauss notes “that, however,
means: the research into scripture that emerged under the principle of ‘sola scriptura’
must be oriented purely toward the sensus litteralis sive historicus .” 99 Th is emphasis on
literal meaning was the primary impetus for the growth of the historical-critical
school, whose history we have traced here and in the introduction. It also led to
95 . Ibid., 358.
96 . Scott S. Ickert off ers a brief yet illuminating account of these debates in his “Catholic
Controversialist Th eology and S ola Scriptura : Th e Case of Jacob van Hoogstraten,” Th e
Catholic Historical Review 74, no. 1 (1988): 13–33.
97 . For a good overview of the establishment of this principle, see the fi rst chapter of
Hans-Joachim Krauss, Geschichte der historisch-kritischen Erforschung des Alten Testaments
von der Reformation bis zur Gegenwart (Neukirchen: Verlag der Buchhandlung des
Erziehungsvereins, 1956).
98 . Martin Luther, “Vom unfreien Willen (1525),” L uther Werke , vol. 3, 267.
99 . Krauss, G eschichte der historisch-kritischen Erforschung , 8 (italics in original).
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 341
the emergence of new philological methods, of textual criticism, and of literary
and historical criticism.
Roth practically incarnates the new critical consciousness associated with the rise
of historical research. In numerous texts, he opposes his new method to the tradi-
tion. In his preface to the Petersburg dictionary, he compares the critical scholar to
someone who uses his eyes (and believes only what his eyes tell him) as compared
with someone who relies on the words of others (who assert something obviously
contradictory to experience). “Our glance at these books [Roth means the Veda],” he
says, “[must] be more weighty than the testimony of the glossers.”1 00 Th e use of sub-
jective iudicum over the tradition is justifi ed in terms of the fact that “completely dif-
ferent skills” are required for the interpretation of the Veda (i.e., completely diff erent
from those required for the later ritual and theological speculations, the Brāhma ṇas).
Further, here there is also need of “a freedom of one’s judgment, a wider horizon, and
a greater extent of historical insight.” Th e modern scholar clearly takes precedence
over the ancient commentator here, for “freedom of judgment was absent among
all the peoples of heathen antiquity and at no time in the history of India did one
have any awareness of historical development.” Commenting on their own work in
the dictionary, Roth writes: “We have attempted to follow the path that linguistics
[Sprachwissenschaft] prescribes: to extract the meaning from the texts themselves
through collecting all passages that are related [either] in terms of their form or their
content; a long and strenuous path, but one on which neither the commentators
nor the translators have proceeded before us.” 1 01 Elsewhere, he clarifi es the distinction
between a traditional and a scientifi c interpretation thus: “It [the transmission] will aim
at the meaning and content of the whole, without anxiously hanging on to the [individ-
ual] word, whereas the scientifi c interpretation will begin with the individual, the word
and its form, and thence seek to become master of the meaning of the word as well. In
a word, it is grammatical.” 102 Th is is precisely what biblical philology, following Luther’s
principles of translation, demanded. Roth also echoes Luther’s criticisms of Origen and
the Fathers (collectively lambasted by Luther as the “Sophists” in his “Vom unfreien
Willen” of 1525). According to him, the Brāhma ṇas (which we might compare with the
great Summas of the Latin Middle Ages) are the ones that have “damaged the simple his-
torical sense the most and opened the fl oodgates to arbitrariness [of every kind].” Nor
can they claim the weight of tradition, for “however far back we go, we still do not see
any tradition, that is, a continuity of understanding.” 103 Roth’s criticisms of the tradition
reach a crescendo toward the end of his article. He writes:
R esearch and inquiry begins, by nature, where no one any longer knows the answer to
a question out of his immediate knowledge. And what one commonly calls tradition is
nothing other than the history of the attempts at a solution, not the solution itself. 104
100 . Roth, “Vorwort,” iii.
101 . Ibid., v.
102 . Roth, “Ueber gelehrte Tradition im Alterthume,” 5.
103 . Ibid., 7.
104 . Ibid.
342 Chapter 04
Whoever does not fi nd the countless errors and tastelessness suffi cient can con-
vince himself in a historical manner as well that these [interpretations] in them-
selves do not possess any authority; that to invoke them is to give up, unjustifi ably,
[the use of] one’s own judgment and that every scientifi c proof against the entire
tradition insofar as it is founded on evidence must remain victorious, no matter
how great the reputation of the tradition and be it ever so old; that it [i.e., the tradi-
tion] correctly used as an aid can perform the most signifi cant services, but if taken
as a guideline it can only inhibit and mislead us. 105
Roth’s insistence that there is no true tradition is understandable, since the rejec-
tion of tradition is a sine qua non for the emergence of a new class of professional
interpreters. In eff ect, Roth was only transferring arguments that had already been
applied vis-à-vis other theological approaches within the European context to the
Indian context. And he was doing so in full knowledge of the iconoclastic potential
of his criticism. As he clarifi ed in a later essay, “Th e halo that in the eyes of some
surrounded Indian exegesis is thus fundamentally destroyed, and we may now stand
on our own feet.”1 06 Th e former, Roth clarifi ed, was to be rejected because “the intel-
lectual horizon of these monastic [klösterliche] interpreters was extremely narrow
and unchanging.”1 07 Just as attacks on Roman Catholic clergy had been a factor in
the institution of a new Protestant ministry, 108 so would the attacks on Brahmanic
commentators be essential to the institution of Indology.
5 . Universal Consciousness and Eschatological Universalism
Although Roth and other Indologists claimed to be in possession of a superior criti-
cal consciousness, this consciousness, surprisingly, was never itself subject to ques-
tion. One of the most striking things about writings from the period is the complete
absence of self-refl exivity. In histories of the discipline and in public statements
(such as Oldenberg’s fawning 1919 article “Indische und klassische Philologie”1 09 ),
Indologists took the universality of their method for granted. Yet, key aspects of the
narrative Indologists recounted about their discipline (its having overcome particu-
larism and of having attained conditions for a critical, transhistorical, and universal
contemplation) bore an uncanny resemblance to the narrative Protestants told about
105 . Ibid.
106 . Rudolf von Roth, “Zur Geschichte des Sanskrit-Wörterbuchs (Gesprochen in der
Versammlung der Orientalisten zu Innsbruck, am 29. Sept. 1874),” Bulletin de l’Académie
impériale des sciences de St.-Petersbourg 21 (1876): 421.
107 . Ibid., 422.
108 . For a discussion of the role played by Luther’s criticisms in this process, see Marcel
Nieden, Die Erfi ndung des Th eologen (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2006). Of course, the criti-
cisms were only one factor in what was a complex and many-layered process.
109 . Hermann Oldenberg, “Indische und klassische Philologie,” Neue Jahrbücher für das klas-
sische Altertum, Geschichte und deutsche Literatur und für Pädagogik1 7 (1906): 1–9; reprinted
in Hermann Oldenberg, Kleine Schriften , vol. 2, ed. Klaus L. Janert (Wiesbaden: Fritz
Steiner Verlag, 1967), 1515–523. All citations refer to the original.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 343
themselves. Th e universality Indologists professed was disturbingly Eurocentric. 110
Although their methods and attitudes had undergone an overt secularization
(becoming nominally universal in the process), religious concerns nonetheless per-
meated these methods and attitudes at every level. Most signifi cantly, their pro-
fessed universalism had been attained, fi rst, through creating a specifi c narrative of
history (history as the process of progress from particularism to universalism and
from faith to reason) and, second, through extending this narrative of history to all
peoples. What was in reality an artful form of theology (an eschatology, to be precise)
had, through being translated into secular terms, been projected as the necessary
course of evolution of the world (as a teleology, in other words). And because this
evolution had been projected as both necessary and rational (and ethically desirable),
those who rejected it could be portrayed as refusing to participate in the movement
of reason itself.
Yet, as compelling as this narrative was, it implicated the Indologists in a kind
of double bind. Because their interpretations were now tacitly underwritten by
this theoretical premise, a historical metanarrative that conferred universality
and exclusivity on their interpretations, they were now forced constantly to deni-
grate the tradition. What little scientificity their interpretations possessed was
due to the fact that t hey , rather than the tradition, were consonant with the idea
of reason. The tradition had been superseded not through exposing its short-
comings, but by projecting a narrative of historical reason capable of subsuming
all earlier stages of history within itself. No dialogue had occurred, but, more
importantly, no dialogue could occur, because to enter into dialogue with tradi-
tion would mean implicitly to surrender Indology’s claim to being absolute. And
thus, concrete interpretation of Indian texts was indissolubly linked to the task
of a critique of tradition. The tradition is not critical, it is not trustworthy, it is
not self-reflexive, and it is theological, confessionally bound, and so on. Most
of all, there is no true tradition, that is, nothing that can be normative for the
scholar. The movement of reason had simply left the past behind it, so that the
only way left to engage it was to engage it historically. 111
In the case of Indology (as with perhaps all other disciplines that advance totaliz-
ing claims), a history of German Indology was also hindered by the fact that the disci-
pline did not make space for critical self-refl ection. Because it posited itself as the end
of history, part of a process innate to reason itself, it could not use other perspectives
110 . See, for instance, Slaje’s comments in his “Was ist und welchem Zwecke dient die
Indologie,” cited earlier, and see also ibid., passim for his use of “Europe,” “European,” and
“Europeanization.” In all, the terms occur thirty-nine times within the space of twenty pages.
111 . Yet here too the history that the Indologists recounted was alloyed with their own
concerns. Th ey could not develop an objective account of the history of India as long as
their own prestige was based upon polemicizing against the tradition. Th us, although cen-
tral elements of the story Indologists told about India, such as corruption of the priest-
hood, rise of obscurantism and ritualism, and falsifi cation of scripture can be explained
out of their Protestant context, the fact that they n eeded to portray the history of India
as one of religious degeneration cannot be blamed upon Protestantism. It was simply a
consequence of an inner requirement of their discipline.
344 Chapter 04
(such as the Indian tradition) to contemplate and critique itself. And as long as it did
not do so, the fi ction could be sustained that Indology was a universal, necessary,
and hence rational, science. But although it claimed to embody a universal conscious-
ness, it would be more correct to describe it as a form of eschatological universalism.
Whereas a truly universal consciousness is universal in the sense of being turned
toward the whole (the Greek k ata ton holon ), the latter is universal only because it
considers itself to have superseded and subsumed all others within itself. 112
Karl Löwith has suggested that “modern history of philosophy emerges from the
biblical faith in the fulfi llment [of time] and ends with the secularization of its escha-
tological prototype [i.e., of biblical faith].” 113 Löwith therefore does not see a stark
contrast between Christian ideas of the end of days and modern ideas of the fulfi ll-
ment of a necessary historical process with the advent of modernity. Löwith argues
that the characteristic trait of the eschaton is not so much that it “gives an end” to “the
course of history,” but that it “structures and fulfi lls it through a defi nite goal.” 114 As
Link argues, “it is this orientation toward the goal that endows human history with
something it does not and cannot have from itself, its unity , [it is this that] makes it
‘universal’. It [i.e., human history] is understood from out of its end as a uniform pro-
cess and each of its epochs serves as a preparation for this end state, attains q ua a tran-
sitional phase to this goal.” 1 15 Carl Schmitt, too, speaks of the signifi cant concepts of
modern political theory as being “secularized theological concepts.” 116 Although both
Löwith and Schmitt have been criticized by Hans Blumenberg in his Th e Legitimacy of
the Modern Age ,1 17 their analysis is compelling in context. Th e history traced in the ear-
lier sections suggests that even as Indologists thought they were progressing toward
a secular universal science of Indian texts, they were, secretly and unbeknownst to
themselves, merely incarnating an eschatological (Protestant) consciousness.
To be sure, Roth (and after him, Indologists such as Kirfel, Hacker, and Stietencron)
justifi ed his rejection of tradition in terms of (1) the scientifi city of the new meth-
ods (mainly the historical-critical method, but also linguistics and philology), (2) the
agnosticism of the new critical consciousness, and (3) the universality of the new
112 . Th is eschatological universalism may or may not have taken the form of an evangeli-
cal universalism. At least in the case of some Indologists (e.g., Roth, Oldenberg, Hacker,
Stietencron, Hanneder), we found that it did. But whether it did or not, implied in the very
notion of an eschatological universalism is a sense of having superseded the tradition and
thus of being its logical and historical successor.
113 . Karl Löwith, “Weltgeschichte und Heilsgeschehen. Die theologischen Voraussetzungen
der Geschichtsphilosophie (1949/1953),” in S ämtliche Schriften , vol. 1, ed. Klaus Stichweh and
Marc B. de Launay (Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler, 1983), 12.
114 . Ibid., 14.
115 . Christian Link, “Über den biblischen Umgang mit Geschichte im neuzeitlichen Kontext,”
in Das Alte Testament: Ein Geschichtsbuch? , ed. Erhard Blum, William Johnstone, and Christoph
Markschies (Münster: Lit Verlag, 2005), 190–91.
116 . Carl Schmitt, P olitical Th eology: Four Chapters on the Concept of Sovereignty , trans.
George Schwab (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985 [1934]), 36.
117 . Hans Blumenberg, Th e Legitimacy of the Modern Age , trans. Robert M. Wallace
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985), originally published as D ie Legimität der Neuzeit
(Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1966).
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 345
science. Th e commentarial tradition was in contrast criticized as being unreliable,
because (1) it did not have access to modern scientifi c methods, (2) it was beholden
to its dogmas, and (3) it was particularistic, being interested only in its special prob-
lems or, worse, being uninterested in the truth altogether.
But here, too, one must exercise caution. Although Indology claimed to practice a
“methodological atheism” in the sense that it did not see its method as entailing any
theological or metaphysical commitments, in truth the historical-critical method was
atheistic only concerning the possibility of transhistorical meaning. Yet history and
self-consciousness were both apotheosized. Nor were the Indologists able to pres-
ent a critical justifi cation for the method itself. On the contrary, discussions of the
method almost always took the form of a transcendental justifi cation. Th us, instead
of explaining how or why it was necessary to study texts primarily from a historical
perspective, history was simply declared an a priori condition for our being able to
have knowledge of objects.1 18 Just as, after Kant, those who failed to recognize the
role played in constituting objects by the forms of intuition, space and time, and
by the categories of the understanding (V erstand ) were accused of epistemological
naïveté, those who rejected the notion that historical concerns should be dominant
in the study of texts would be accused of methodological naïveté. 119
Under these conditions, it was impossible for a genuine dialogue to develop
between European scholarship and Indian tradition. Th e claims of Indology to embody
a universal consciousness could only be upheld at the price of the destruction of tra-
dition. Indology became extricated in a hegemonic (and quixotic) quest to extend
European categories to Indian texts. In the process it committed itself to upholding
these categories as the only normative ones. Th e sociologist Immanuel Wallerstein
juxtaposes “European universalism” to what he calls “universal universalism.” He
argues that the former has been a “universalism of the powerful,” by which he means
that it has also been “a partial and distorted universalism.” 120 Wallerstein considers
that the struggle between these two competing accounts of universalism—the one a
Eurocentric account that claims to be universal only because it makes its experience
normative for all others; the other a genuine universalism founded on dialogue—to
be “the central ideological struggle of the contemporary world,” one whose “outcome
118 . Th is elevation of history is an innate problem in all of historicism; for a good
account of nineteenth-century historicism and its overcoming in Heidegger, see Charles
R. Bambach, Heidegger, Dilthey, and the Crisis of Historicism (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1995).
119 . Kant’s aim had been specifi cally and explicitly to render “metaphysics” impossible
(by which he meant Aristotelian philosophy and the Scholastic tradition founded on this
philosophy). Th ese antimetaphysical biases nonetheless engendered an entire new philo-
sophical movement. Likewise, the Indologists’ antimetaphysical biases rendered a certain
kind of knowledge impossible and engendered yet another. Th is discourse on India, made
possible by the biases of historical consciousness and sustained by the application of the
historical-critical method, would become a varied and all-encompassing canon for study-
ing the Orient. And yet, as we noted in the introduction, citing Foucault, this discourse
would remain “but the exteriority of accidents.”
120 . Immanuel Maurice Wallerstein, E uropean Universalism: Th e Rhetoric of Power
(New York: Th e New Press, 2006), xii.
346 Chapter 04
will be a major factor in determining how . . . future world-systems . . . will be struc-
tured.” 121 Th e challenge for us, as Wallerstein sees it, is how “we may move beyond
European universalism” (which he calls “this last perverse justifi cation of the existing
world order”) to “something much more diffi cult to achieve,” “a universal universal-
ism, which refuses essentialist characterizations of social reality, historicizes both
the universal and the particular, reunifi es the so-called scientifi c and humanistic into
a single epistemology, and permits us to look with a highly clinical and quite skeptical
eye at all justifi cations for ‘intervention’ by the powerful against the weak.”1 22 How
might Indology, too, have to change to respond to these processes? What kinds of
changes might be necessary to the ways in which we engage with the ancient cultures
of India as we move away from a Eurocentric Indology to a truly global, objective,
and secular engagement with Indian philosophy? If Indology is to cease being a form
of narcissistic self-relation, how might we have to rethink the universalist project?
At this point we might refl ect upon whether the secularization theology under-
went in the history of religions was really as thorough as its advocates argued. In
1908, Troeltsch boasted that the theological faculty had attained a degree of “relative
independence” from “ecclesiastical infl uences.” Protestant theologians, Troeltsch
wrote, “consider Protestantism to be the principle of free research in religious mat-
ters.” Th is, however, he conceded, had given “theological science a new character.
In truth it is confessionless, Protestant only insofar as the freedom of science is
regarded as a Protestant demand.” 123 Th e analysis of Roth’s hermeneutics presented
in this section, however, suggests that matters were quite diff erent in the case of
Indology. In fact, turning Troeltsch’s statement around, one could say: in truth it is
Protestant, confessionless only insofar as the freedom of science is regarded as a con-
fessionless demand. Practically as well, German Indology was to be an overwhelm-
ingly Protestant aff air: of the eight scholars whose Gītā interpretations we studied
here, only one—Hermann Jacobi—was Catholic; of the remaining seven, one was
the son of a Lutheran pastor and, since 1865, principal secretary of the Central
Committee for the Inner Mission ( geschäftsführender Sekretär des Central-Ausschusses
für die Inner Mission ) (Hermann Oldenberg), another a trained missionary from the
Basler Mission (an institution allied with Württemberg Pietism) who worked as a
missionary for four years in India (J. W. Hauer), and another a leading Protestant
theologian (Rudolf Otto). Rudolf von Roth was closely involved with the planning
and administration of the Tübingen Seminary (See table 4.1 for a summary of the
religious antecedents of the leading Indologists of the nineteenth century). Beyond
the fi gures who are the subject of this book, we could expand our inquiries to consider
the precise role played by the personal religious beliefs of Indologists in their work.
Th e authors are currently working toward a future book mapping Hacker’s troubled
relationship to his faith. Further researches along these lines are a clear desideratum.
121 . Ibid., xii–xiii.
122 . Ibid., 79.
123 . Ernst Troeltsch, “Rückblick auf ein halbes Jahrhundert der theologischen
Wissenschaft,” Z eitschrift für wissenschaftliche Th eologie 51 (1908): 100–101; cited and
translated in Howard, P rotestant Th eology , 408.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 347
THE INSTITUTIONALIZATION OF PROTESTANT
THEOLOGY IN INDOLOGY
Although we have focused on Rudolf von Roth in telling this narrative, Roth was not
a lone fi gure. Th e sentiments he voiced vis-à-vis Indian tradition would be echoed
hundredfold by scholars in the following century and a half. Albrecht Weber, for
example, declared in a letter addressed to Karl Otto von Raumer (Prussian minister
of culture between 1850 and 1858):
Th e study of Indian antiquity has, in the last fi fteen years, with the availability
of the oldest holy scriptures of the Indians, the Vedas, gained unimaginably and
increasingly in both practical and academic signifi cance. Th e practical signifi cance
has aff ected England in particular and has been acknowledged both there and in
India, by the Christian missions as well. Th e entire weight of the religious and cul-
tural structure of contemporary India appears to rest on the Vedas. As soon as they
are unveiled from the mysterious darkness surrounding them till now [ sobald nun
diese nicht mehr in ihr bisheriges mysteriöses Dunkel gehüllt sind ], and made acces-
sible to all, all the untruths shall be automatically revealed, and this shall, in time,
put an end to the sorry plight of religious decadence [ dem traurigen Zustande der
religiöser Versumpfung ] of India. Th e critical analysis and publication of Vedic texts
shall assume a role among the Indians, similar to Luther’s translation of the Bible. 124
Suspicion of the tradition, however, was only one side of the coin. German Indologists
also explicitly associated their work with a civilizatory, emancipatory, indeed, a
reformatory mission. Th e German-born and German-educated, but London-based
Sanskritist, Th eodor Goldstücker,1 25 wrote barely ten years after Weber:
124 . Albrecht Weber, Letter to Karl Otto von Raumer, 12.10.1855 (Humboldt University
Archives, P. F. 1433); translated and cited in Sengupta, “State, University, and Indology,”
278–79. Th e exact same lines occur in Weber’s article “Ueber die Literatur des Sâmaveda,”
in Indische Studien. Zeitschrift für die Kunde des indische Alterthums , vol. 1, ed. Albrecht
Weber (Berlin: Ferd. Dümmler’s Buchhandlung, 1850), 27, but there the context is a little
diff erent: explaining that earlier Jesuit and Protestant missionaries alike had neglected
the Vedas, Weber wrote: “. . . [but] now one has begun evermore to seek out the enemy in
his own camp. Th e entire religious and cultural structure of the Indians rests on the Vedas.
As soon as these are no longer veiled in their mysterious darkness, but are available openly
and freely to everyone’s gaze, the false elements in their alleged reasoning must become
evident to all [and] the spirit of religious criticism [Geist der religiösen Critik] awakened
and thus, i n time , [these two shall] put an end to the sorry plight of religious decadence
in India. Whether the Christian Mission will be the winner thereby, as the missionaries
believe, is a diff erent question. At any rate, the critical, unprejudiced publication and clari-
fi cation of these texts must and will, some day , assume a role among the Indians similar to
Luther’s translation of the Bible” (emphasis in original).
125 . Goldstücker was Jewish, which especially makes our point that German Indology
cannot be identifi ed with nationality or religion. Th e Protestantism we have referred to has
to do with a certain constellation of ideas whose history is inextricably linked to German
Protestantism; it does not refer to a specifi c creed or faith and if it does, it refers at most
to a methodological creed.
348 Chapter 04
When, by priestcraft and ignorance, a nation has lost itself so far as to look upon
writings like these as divinely inspired, there is but one conclusion to be drawn: it
has arrived at the turning-point of its destinies. Hinduism stands at this point, and
we anxiously pause to see which way it will turn its steps. All barriers to religious
imposition having broken down since the modern Purânas were received by the
masses as the source of their faith; sects have sprung up which not merely endanger
religion, but society itself; tenets have been propounded, which are an insult to the
human mind; practices have been introduced, which must fi ll every educated Hindu
with confusion and shame.” 126
Once again, when it came to explaining this state of aff airs, Goldstücker turned to
recent European history. He argued that “the causes of the gradual degeneracy of
Hinduism are, indeed, not diff erent from those to which other religions are subject,
when allowed to grow in the dark.” 127 If the diagnosis came from Europe, so, too, the
prescription:
In Europe, religious depravity received its check when the art of printing allowed the
light of publicity to enter into the book whence her nations derive their faith; and no
other means will check it in India than the admission of the masses to that original
book which is always on their lips, but which now is the monopoly of the infi nitesi-
mal fraction of the Brahminical caste able to understand its sense.” 128
Given the dominant role played by the European historical and hermeneutic horizon,
it was unsurprising that Indologists, for the most part, regarded themselves as liber-
ators. Scholarly and charitable concerns coincided. By reading Indian texts critically
(which is to say with a Protestant metanarrative in mind), these scholars really felt
they were advancing the cause of India’s liberation. Rather than seeing themselves
as iconoclasts, they saw themselves as engaged in a humanitarian-historicist proj-
ect to restore Indian texts to their pristine original condition. When needed, they
could make common cause with the Indian public. As Goldstücker argued, “If those
intelligent Hindus of whom we are speaking have the will and the energy to throw
open that book, and the literature connected with it, to the people at large, without
caring for the trammels imposed on caste by the politicians of late ages we have no
misgivings as to the new vitality which they will impart to its decaying life.” 129 Rather
than seeing themselves as fundamentalists urging a return to the “religion of the
book,” they saw themselves as participating in a public-spirited mission—a global
coalition to bring the fruits of enlightened democracy to all peoples. Th e outcome of
these eff orts Goldstücker claimed, was “foreshadowed . . . by what their forefathers
attempted to do, but did not succeed in accomplishing, because they had not the
courage to break through the artifi cial bonds which had already in their day enslaved
126 . Goldstücker, “Th e Inspired Writings of Hinduism,” 163.
127 . Ibid.
128 . Ibid., 163–64.
129 . Ibid., 164.
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 349
Hindu society.”1 30 How, then, could the thought enter their minds that their methods
were not wanted?
Second and third generation Indologists, who were now operating within the con-
fi nes of an institutionalized ideology, were still less capable of attaining self-refl exive
clarity about their discipline. 131 Th ey simply inculcated these prejudices within them-
selves. We may never know how much of this was an attempt to conform to domi-
nant ideology and how much was motivated by genuine racism. By the mid-twentieth
century, as Indian scholars begin to take a more assertive stance, we fi nd a number
of explicit statements decrying those who had mounted an indigenous intellectual
response as being little more than Western-trained agents. 132 What was problem-
atic about this process was not that Indologists were becoming more racist, but that
they were forgetting the reasons for their original disparagement of the tradition—
and that meant they were forgetting the historical processes within Christianity
itself that had led to certain views of texts becoming canonical. Scholars from Peter
Gaeff ke to Paul Hacker, Heinrich von Stietencron, Angelika Malinar, Walter Slaje,
Michael Witzel, and Jürgen Hanneder would make comments that in any other
context would be condemned as racist. To be sure, some such as Hanneder would
attempt to ground racial portrayals in the alleged contrast between the secularism of
the (mainly Western or Western-trained) scholar and the religiosity of tradition.1 33
Th us, Hanneder claims that the reason for excluding the p ān ̣ḍitya from discourse
was “not to belittle traditional Indian learning, but a methodological necessity.” In
his opinion, “ ‘Western’ Indology with its specifi cally historically oriented, critical
130 . Ibid.
131 . Only in a few rare cases have Indologists shown an interest in a critical illumina-
tion of their discipline. Among scholars who have tackled the the problematic legacy of
Indology are Eli Franco and Karin Preisendanz (in their B eyond Orientalism , cited earlier).
Unsurprisingly, they have been attacked as traitors to the cause of Indology.
132 . See, for example, the statements of the University of Pennsylvania professor Peter
Gaeff ke in “A Rock in the Tides of Time: Oriental Studies Th en and Now,” cited earlier,
and see also the comment on p. 71: “With the advent of postwar nationalism in the Th ird
World, the incompatibility of Eastern and Western epistemological approaches suddenly
became a political issue in many regions of Asia . . . [and] Western Orientalist shortcomings
were gradually revealed by resentful Indians. Generally speaking, it was the scholars from
the Near East who found Western scholarship most intrusive, often regarding it as some
sort of usurpation of the past by representatives of the former colonialists. In most of this
basically political debate, the violent attacks came not from scholars in the Orient , but from
Easterners trained in W estern universities who were aware of the internal debates among
Western humanists.” Even though fallacious (the argument is a form of ad hominem cir-
cumstantial), the idea that Eastern critiques of Orientalism are invalid because they are
voiced by Western accomplices rather than authentic representatives of the tradition is
a commonplace among Orientalists. Its origins probably can be traced back to the writ-
ings of Paul Hacker, especially his “Aspects of Neo-Hinduism as Contrasted with Surviving
Traditional Hinduism,” in K leine Schriften , ed. Lambert Schmithausen (Wiesbaden: Franz
Steiner, 1978), esp. 582–83. (Th e article was originally presented at a talk at the University
of London in 1970). For a discussion, see Joydeep Bagchee and Vishwa Adluri, “Th e Passion
of Paul Hacker,” cited earlier.
133 . See his Review of Th e Pandit , cited earlier, pp. 671–72; also see his “Search the
Web: ‘Deutsche Indologie’,” in M arburger Indologie im Umbruch: Zur Geschichte des Faches
1845–1945 (Munich: P. Kircheim Verlag, 2010), 81–87.
350 Chapter 04
approach, had to make use of the Indian p ān ̣ḍitya in order to get as much fi rst-hand
information as possible, but it could not accept its theological dimension without
compromising its aims as a historical subject.” 134
Yet before we accept this dominant narrative, we would do well to inquire into the
historical roots of our own praxis as scholars. Susan Ritchie puts it well, when she
writes that “what is commonly termed ‘secularization’ (the blurring of the bound-
ary between the sacred and the profane, as that which was sacred enters everyday
life) might just as appropriately be referred to as ‘sacralization’ (the blurring of the
boundary between the sacred and the profane, as that which was profane takes on
sacred qualities).” 135 Examining the consequences of this insight for refl exive meth-
odology in “belief studies” in general, Ritchie argues:
Th e sacralization of culture, as the willingness to see ultimate value expressed in or
through even the everyday lives of ordinary people, began with the Reformation,
was motivated by explicitly liberalizing Protestant interests, and was a process for
which folkloristics, and later religious studies, invented special technologies. It is
somewhat disingenuous, then, for belief studies to posit its methodological diffi -
culty as the development of the secular culture that the fi eld itself helped to author,
and from which, in a large part, it achieved its legitimation; nor is it surprising that
refl exive methodologies would fail in the absence of careful attention to such issues
of disciplinary interestedness. Strangely enough for these post-Foucauldian times,
most of the models so far articulated tend to see the promise of self-refl exive and
reciprocal methodologies as lying in the conscious revelation of the individual inves-
tigator’s religious predilections rather than in the disclosure of the religious and
theological interests that still transverse these fi elds. Ironically, here is where we
see these methodologies betray what I argue is their remaining Protestant complic-
ity: faith in most of these models remains a matter of individual expression—some-
thing that is private and invisible until and unless an individual chooses to voice his
or her own conviction—something, in short, about which it is possible to be refl ex-
ive in a personal and individualizing way. Yet the unacknowledged Protestant origin
and alliance of our interpretive technologies insure a continued Eurocentrism to
our work. . . .1 36
Can one in light of these calls for a fundamental reappraisal of the roots of our schol-
arly praxis, continue to sustain the fi ction of a radical separation between “theol-
ogy and Religionswissenschaft’ ”? Can one maintain that Western Indology, with
its “specifi cally historically oriented, critical approach,” cannot reconcile itself with
tradition without thereby “compromising its aims as a historical subject”? 137 Or do
these statements evince a problematic consciousness, problematic because it is based
134 . Hanneder, Review of Th e Pandit , 672.
135 . Susan J. Ritchie, “Contesting Secularism: Refl exive Methodology, Belief Studies, and
Disciplined Knowledge,” Journal of American Folklore 115, no. 457/458 (2002): 444.
136 . Ibid., 444–45.
137 . Hanneder, Review of Th e Pandit , 672.
a DEIDUTS
STSIGOLODNI
NAMREG
FO
SEIHPARGOIB
1.4
elbaT
?aidnI
detisiV
/noitailffi
A
lacitiloP
yranoissiM
srehcaeT/secneufl
nI
lacihposolihP
cimedacA
dnuorgkcaB
ylimaF
ecivreS/noissefnoC
tsigolodnI
ecivreS
b ytivitcA
?gniniart
dnuorgkcaB
emaN
oN
nwonk
toN
enoN
,rehcamreielhcS
hcirdeirF
oN
,13–8281(
ygoloeTh
ni
rosseforp
a rehtaF
ni
raciv
/tnatsetorP
nnamztloH
flodA
enèguE
,knarF
ramhtO
-yfilauq
lacigoloeht
,rehtorb
;ehurslraK
)23–1381(
nrednaK
.rS
fuonruB
,)1381
ni
maxe
gni
,nnamztloH
suiluJ
lraK
c )07–0181(
tirksnaS
,namreG
naigoloeht
lacilegnave
)?–2381(
-nave
eht
fo etalerp
dna
hcruhc
lacileg
oN
negnibüT
eht
fo
tnadnetnirepuS
enoN
hcirnieH
,reuaB
.C. F
oN
,34–8381(
ygoloeTh
,rotidua
roines
rehtaF
eht
ecnis
,tnatsetorP
htoR
floduR
)37–3581(
yranimeS
,fuonruB
enèguE
,dlawE
-yfilauq
lacigoloeht
ylimaf
evitavresnoc
fo tneduts
a
71
fo
ega
d )59–1281(
,rellüM
xaM
,lhoM
suiluJ
,)2481
ni
maxe
gni
-fi ingis
htiw
dnuorgkcab
/yranimeS
negnibüT
eht
,)3481(
dlawE
rednu
DhP
segaugnal
latneirO
detnioppa
srebmun
tnac
eht
nioj
ot
dednetni
dlawE
rednu
noitatilibaH
lraK
,elcnu
;scirelc
doohtseirp
ni DhP
yraronoh
,)5481(
,htoR
hcirdeirF
nnahoJ
)7781(
ygoloeht
yrotsisnoc
fo tnediserp
dnoces
;airavaB
ni
giwduL
lraK
,elcnu
etalerp
a ,htoR
oN
deugra
,snoigiler
naidnI
fo
citirC
enoN
naitsirhC
,relznetS
.F. A
oN
-nal
latneirO
,tirksnaS
fo nos
,suoigiler
ylpeeD
dednetta
,tnatsetorP
rebeW
thcerblA
noitamrofer
a
tuoba
gnignirb
rof
,ppoB
znarF
,nessaL
evitarapmoc
,segaug
tsimonoce
na
ta loohcs
tnevnoc
e )1091–5281(
tnatsetorP
eht
ot elbarapmoc
,htoR
floduR
,nhuK
.A
yrotsih
,scitsiugnil
rotide
/nebelßoR
yduts
eht
hguorht
noitamrofeR
relznetS
rednu
DhP
ehcsitnatsetorP
fo
sa
stxet
naidnI
fo erusopxe
dna
noitatilibaH
,)5481(
nemmitstieZ
serutpircs
eslaf
)8481(
ppoB
rednu
AQ: Please
provide
citation for
Table 4.1
within text.
)deunitnoC(
)deunitnoC(
1.4
elbaT
?aidnI
detisiV
/noitailffi
A lacitiloP
yranoissiM
srehcaeT/secneufl
nI
lacihposolihP
cimedacA
dnuorgkcaB
ylimaF
ecivreS/noissefnoC
tsigolodnI
ecivreS
b ytivitcA
?gniniart
dnuorgkcaB
emaN
oN
nwonk
toN
enoN
/nnamztloH
flodA
oN
ylbissop
,tirksnaS
ni rotsap
rehtaF
tnatsetorP
nnamztloH
flodA
tub
,nwonk
ton
srehcaet
stcejbus
rehto
retfaereht
,grebledieH
.rJ
ni
deiduts
evah
ot nwonk
yrotsisnoc
ni
etalerp
f)4191–8381(
negnalrE
dna
grebledieH
eht
ot nialpahc
dna
;nedaB
fo ekuD
dnarG
a fo
rethguad
rehtom rotsap
,47–3781
ta riahc
eht
deriuqca
,nwonk
toN
enoN
thcerblA
htiw
deidutS
oN
,scitamehtaM
renwo
llim
a rehtaF
cilohtaC
ibocaJ
nnamreH
41–3191
htiw
kcurts
laed
terces
a ni
nnoB
,)27–8681(
rebeW
evitarapmoc
,tirksnaS
g )7391–0581(
ff ohtlA
retsinimsutluK
sennahoJ
rednu
DhP
scitsiugnil
,)2781(
retsiemedliG
rednu
noitatilibaH
)5781(
retsiemedliG
fo
retniW
nwonk
toN
enoN
rednu
noitatilibaH
oN
dna
ygololihp
lacissalC
dna
rotsap
a rehtaF
tnatsetorP
nnamreH
31/2191
)8781(
rebeW
thcerblA
ygolodnI
fo yraterces
evitucexe
grebnedlO
eettimmoC
lartneC
eht
h )0291–4581(
noissiM
rennI
eht
rof
78–5881
lainoloc
hsitirB
eht fo
retroppuS
enoN
htoR
floduR
htiw
deidutS
oN
tirksnaS
yrotcaf
dednal
rehtaF
tnatsetorP
ebraG
drahciR
tlef
eh hcihw
,aidnI ni
ecneserp
rednu
DhP
,)77–3781(
renwo
i)7291–7581(
level rewol
eht
ot
eud defi
itsuj
saw
noitatilibaH
,)6781(
htoR
,secar
krad
eht
fo noitazilivic
fo
)8781(
htoR
rednu
tnemesihcnarfnesid
eht
detacovda
dna
snamharB
fo ecargsid
dna
a ni
tnapicitrap
a sa flesmih
was
gnuoy
hcihw
ni
noissim
gnizilivic
-sinimda
nretseW
ot nrut
snaidnI
serugfi
ytirohtua
ro srotart
dna
21/1191
rof tnemailrap
fo rebmeM
detalpmetnoC
,luaP .tS ,rehtuL
nitraM
retsemes
enO
fo yrotsih
,ygoloeTh
-nave
suoigiler
ylpeeD
tnatsetorP
ottO
floduR
82/7291
,)81–3191(
ytraP
larebiL
eht
,rotsap
a gnimoceb
hcirdeirF
yhposolihp
,snoigiler
ylimaf
narehtuL
lacileg
j)7391–9681(
larutluc namreG
fo retroppus
ni yranoissim
a ro
znarF /rehcamreielhcS
snoigiler
fo
ni yllaicepse
daorba
ecneserp
fo etacovda
,anihC
,knarF nov
dlohnieR
yranoissim
htiw
noitcnujnoc
fo ytiroirepus
eht
drahciR ,gniräH
rodoeTh
cilbup
rof dengiapmac
,seitivitca
htiaf
naitsirhC
ebraG rednu DhP
,ebraG
deltit seires
koob
rof gnidnuf
)5091(
snoigileR
fo yrotsiH
eht
fo secruoS
11–7091
dekrow
,DS ,SS
,PADSN
fo rebmeM
htuos ni
yranoissiM
ebraG
drahciR
oN
emoceb
ot deidutS
suoigiler
ylpeeD
-mem ,tnatsetorP
mlehliW
bokaJ
tfahcsniemeg
sgnuhcsroF
rof
,)11–7091(
aidnI
DhP ,)81–5191(
eht ta
yranoissim
a
ssalc
gnikrow
,stsiteiP
ehcs’nhaH fo
reb
reuaH
fo rotcerid
,ebrenenhA
sehcstueD
eht
fo
rednuof
,)8191( ebraG
rednu
lacilegnavE
lesaB
dnuorgkcab
ni ltfahcsniemeG
k )2691–1881(
ranimeS
sehcsirA
dnuB
renegnöK
ebraG rednu noitatilibaH
,yteicoS
yranoissiM
ni raciv /htuoy
sih
m ,)43–0291(
)1291(
-sih
dna
tirksnaS
retal
)91–5191(
negnibüT
ehcstueD
fo
rednuof
snoigiler
fo yrot
gnugeweb
snebualG n )63–3391(
nem
eseht
,yltneuqerfni
toN
.sdlohesuoh
suoigiler
ylpeed
morf
nem yb no deirrac
ylniam
saw
noitpecni
sti
ecnis
hcihw
,ygolodnI
namreG
fo
dnuorgkcab
tnatsetorP
eht setartsnomed
elbat
siTh
.a
,ibocaJ
nnamreH
,rebeW thcerblA
fo noitpecxe
eht htiW
.htiaf
fo
sisirc
lanosrep a—yldetalernu
ton
dna—ro
stseretni
lacilegnave
rehtie
yb
txet
naidnI
fo
yduts
eht
ot nevird ,srotsap
fo snos
eht
erew
fo
mrof
eretsua
na ,msiteiP
grebmettrüW
.ynamreG
nretsewhtuos
morf lla erew
elbat
siht
ni sralohcs
eht
,ylevitcepser
,grubmaH
dna
,engoloC
,ualserB
ni
nrob
erew ohw ,grebnedlO
nnamreH
dna
.ygolodnI
fo noitamrof
eht
ni elor
laitneufl
ni
yllaicepse
na deyalp
,msinairanellim
drawot
ytivilcorp
decnuonorp
a htiw
msitnatsetorP
ni
llits
era
ew suTh
.seugaelloc
ro/dna
srehcaet
rieht fo
edis
suoigiler
eht gniyalpnwod
ni
detseretni
netfo
erew
ohw ,srohtua
tsigolodnI
morf
decruos
yliramirp
neeb
sah ereh detsil
noitamrofni
eTh
.b
ew
stnuocca
cihpargoigah
eht
dnoyeb
gnidnetxe
seihpargoib
etarucca
erom gnidulcni
sehcraeser
rehtruF
.stsigolodnI
eht
fo seitivitca
suoigiler
eht
ro efil
suoigiler
eht fo stcepsa
ynam
tuoba
krad
eht
.mutaredised
tnegru na
era tneserp
ta
ssessop
.81–61 ,)1881
,tolbmuH
&
rekcnuD
:gizpieL(
31
.lov , eihpargoiB
ehcstueD
eniemegllA
ni
”,flodA
,nnamztloH“
,rerehcS
mlehliW
.c
ehcstueD
eniemegllA
ni ”,)nov(
floduR
)retlaW(
,htoR“
,ebraG
drahciR
;01–901 ,)5002
,tolbmuH
& rekcnuD
:nilreB(
22 .lov
, eihpargoiB
ehcstueD
eueN
ni
”,nov
hploduR
rehtlaW ,htoR“
,ttimhcS
regidüR
.d
galreV
:grebzreH(
42 .lov
, nokixelnehcriK
sehcsihpargoilbiB-hcsihpargoiB
”,]hploduR
retlaW[
floduR
,HTOR“
,gnilesseW
rehtnuG-sualK
;46–945
,)7091
,tolbmuH
&
rekcnuD :gizpieL(
35
.lov
, eihpargoiB
.24–2321
,)5002
,ztuaB
ttoguarT
,koob
s’nihcteGcM
morf
decruos
noitamrofni
lanoitidda(
83–123
:)67–5791(
4–3
aisneniruaT
acigolodnI
”,ygolodnI
ni
reenoiP
A
- rebeW
hcirdeirF
thcerblA“
,htornegroM
gnagfloW
.e
.)reilrae
detic
.06–955
,)2791
,tolbmuH
&
rekcnuD
:nilreB(
9 .lov
, eihpargoiB
ehcstueD
eueN
ni
”,flodA
,nnamztloH“
,mlehliW
hcirdeirF
.f
”,ygolodnI
dna
ytisrevinU
,etatS“
elcitra
s’atpugneS
osla
ees
dna(
92–822
,)4791
,tolbmuH
&
rekcnuD
:nilreB(
01 .lov
, eihpargoiB
ehcstueD
eueN
ni
”,nnamreH
,ibocaJ“
,revlöK
drahnreB
.g
.)reilrae
detic
.8–705
,)9991
,tolbmuH
& rekcnuD
:nilreB(
91
.lov
, eihpargoiB
ehcstueD
eueN ni
”,nnamreH
,grebnedlO“
,mlehliW
hcirdeirF
.h
.96
,)4691
,tolbmuH
& rekcnuD
:nilreB(
6
.lov
, eihpargoiB
ehcstueD
eueN
ni ”,nov
lraK
drahciR
,ebraG“
,nnamff
oH
tumleH
.i
dna
sellA
morf
detnemelppus
si
ottO
rof
noitamrofni
eht(
11–907
,)8991
,tolbmuH
&
rekcnuD
:nilreB(
91
.lov , eihpargoiB
ehcstueD
eueN ni
”,hploduR
siuoL
lraK
,ottO“
,ztaarK
nitraM
.j
.)reilrae
detic
htob
,dnomlA
.48–38
,)9691
,tolbmuH
& rekcnuD
:nilreB(
8 .lov
, eihpargoiB
ehcstueD
eueN
ni
”,mlehliW
bokaJ
,reuaH“
,grebnekceiR
negrüJ
snaH
.k
ega
eht
ta
noisiv
suoigiler
a
dah
evah
ot
demialc
ohw
,)9181–8571(
nhaH
leahciM
nnahoJ
eno
ot
kcab
seog
tces eht
,msiteiP
naibawS
ni stoor
htiw
tnemevom
naitsirhC
lacilegnave
nA
.l
.ynamreG
nretsewhtuos
ssorca
derettacs
seitinummoc
larur
morf
nward
yllacipyt
era
srebmem
stI .neetneves
fo
,lawener
lautirips
dna
yteip
fo
smrof
wen
thguos
puorg
eTh
.erutluc
gnikih
a htiw
tnemevom
htuoy
tnatsetorP
a
denibmoc
dna
selcric
yduts-elbiB
loohcs
morf
degreme
taht puorg
A
.m
.dlof
tnatsetorP
eht nihtiw
tiebla
etagaporp
ot
nageb
dna
,ytinaitsirhC
morf
yawa
denrut
yllaicffi
o
,pihsrow
fo
smrof
”klof“
thguos
gnugewebsnebualG
ehcstueD
eht
,dnuB
renegnöK
eht
ot
noitazinagro
rosseccus
eTh
.n
.noigiler
cidroN
dna
nayrĀ
fo
saedi
THE SEARCH FOR A UNIVERSAL METHOD 355
on a selective and fl awed reading of European history? Th is problematic conscious-
ness has been the major theme of this chapter—and indeed this book. As we have
traced this history here, we have focused on a number of highly specifi c parallels
that connect Protestant theology to Indology. Th ere are, of course, wider factors at
work, but these remain beyond the scope of the present work. It must however be
emphasized that the generalized suspicion of tradition has deep roots in contem-
porary European consciousness. It cannot be eradicated with a few empty gestures
toward greater inclusivity or toward a more perspicuous hermeneutic consciousness.
Ultimately, the roots of this suspicion will be the very same as the fundaments of the
modern hegemony of self-consciousness, as Schürmann has analyzed these in his
magnum opus, Broken Hegemonies .1 38 Th e rehabilitation of tradition cannot therefore
have a restorative intent. Th e modern university serves functions that are essentially
distinct from those of traditional systems of pedagogy. It would be naïve to assume
that a return to tradition is all that is required to correct the defi cits of contemporary
scholarship. Rather, the rehabilitation of tradition must primarily take the form of
a critique and, above all, of a self-critique of modernity. Th e separation of method
from normative, philosophical and historical concerns characteristic of the modern
humanities has been one of the more problematic legacies of the nineteenth century.
Th e infi ltration of knowledge by power, whether in the guise of theological claims or
in the guise of secular claims, means that there can be no form of scholarship exempt
from critique. Given the ideological potential of science (deriving, paradoxically, from
its claimed neutrality), the bar needs to be set especially high when scholars defend
their praxis in the name of science. In the next chapter we therefore undertake an
evaluation of Indology’s claims from the perspective of the philosophy of science.
138 . Schürmann, Broken Hegemonies , see especially part III “In the Name of
Consciousness.”
CHAPTER 5
"
Problems with the Critical Method
And that is that spiritual source of life from which Christianity, and after the killing of it
in Catholicism, true Christian Protestantism has come forth, and with Christianity and
Protestantism, the scholarly spirit of the new European culture.
W. M. L. de Wette, Biblische Dogmatik Alten und Neuen Testaments
INTRODUCTION
Th e birth of Indology takes place at the crossroads of two great intellectual currents
in German history: Romanticism, which gave rise to the search for pristine civiliza-
tions and the interest in myth, and Protestant biblical criticism (and its attendant
phenomenon, historicism), which shaped ideas of what texts are and how they
were to be studied. But the story of the intellectual roots of Indology cannot be told
without also exploring the roots of a third intellectual current of the time: the new
Wissenschaftsideologie of the nineteenth century. Th is ideology was to be a potent fac-
tor in the development of Indology out of the early grammatical, philosophical, and
literary interests of an earlier generation of Orientalists (among them, the Schlegel
brothers and the scholar-statesman Wilhelm von Humboldt).
Th e idea of science or scientifi city as embodying academic rigor, an attitude of skep-
ticism (an ideal with strong moral overtones), and the development of a method tai-
lored to the precise needs of the individual fi eld rapidly led to the professionalization
and specialization of scholarship. Rather than undertaking broad inquiries into human
existence, scholarship came to coalesce around the idea of disciplines or departments.
Within Indology, there was consistent growth in the establishment of chairs and con-
current growth in eff orts by scholars to distinguish their chairs from those of their col-
leagues.1 Yet, it was not Indology, but a related science, classical philology—“our sister
1 . See McGetchin, I ndology, Indomania, and Orientalism , 92–95 for the factors at work
in this process. In spite of the fact that certain schools such as Berlin became centers of
Indology and exported candidates to the chairs at other universities, McGetchin sees the
creation or reinforcement of specializations as one of the main factors responsible for the
rapid growth of Sanskrit philology in Germany.
( 356 )
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 357
science,” as Oldenberg called it in an essay from 1906 2 —that came to epitomize the new
spirit of science in Germany. It was also the discipline on which the most expectations
of making a contribution to humanistic education or B ildung were placed.3 It was no sur-
prise, then, that when Indologists sought to legitimate the wissenschaftliche character
of their discipline, they turned to philology as a prototype, claiming both parallels and
descent from it. By underscoring the philological nature of their researches, Indologists
hoped to capitalize on the reputation of German scholarship in classical studies
( Altertumswissenschaft ). Although an explicit theoretical justifi cation of Indology’s claim
to being a science cannot be found in the writings of the period,4 we do fi nd a broad
acceptance of positivist philology as being basically synonymous with science in general.
In this chapter, we examine some of the strategies used by Indologists to make
the case for their discipline as Wissenschaft and how those strategies relate to under-
standings of science, both historical and contemporary. Th e chapter is divided into
eight sections. Th e fi rst two sections take a look at how, in the work of Hermann
Oldenberg, the leading theoretician of Indology of the day, a new ideal of scientifi c
scholarship on India emerged, and at how this ideal was then grounded in a positivist
philology. Th e next three sections present a brief overview of three scientifi c currents
of the time—positivism, historicism, and empiricism—and show how Indologists
were responding to broader movements in philosophy of science, especially the work
of Auguste Comte (1798–1857), the intellectual father of positivism and historicism.
In the sixth section, we look at criticisms that the positivistic notion of truth has
been subject to in the twentieth century; the next section returns the discussion
to Kant’s critical project and its historical infl uence, already broached in the intro-
duction. Th e eighth and concluding section then presents an overview of Gadamer’s
criticisms of the attempt to construe the scientifi c character of the human sciences
along the lines of the natural sciences. Because of the infl uence of his seminal Truth
and Method on the contemporary self-understanding of the human sciences, we delve
especially deeply into his views. Gadamer’s criticisms of the valorization of method
over truth in the humanities and of the Enlightenment’s suspicion of all traditional
2 . Hermann Oldenberg, “Indische und klassische Philologie,” 3 and 6.
3 . In contrast, Indology was hampered both by its origins in Romanticism and by its
association with the cultures of the Orient. Even after Indologists distanced themselves
from their Romantic heritage (jettisoning scholars such as the two Holtzmanns—though
not their ideas—in the process), they were constantly under pressure to justify their dis-
cipline, whose associations with the Orient somehow rendered it suspect. In an address to
a congress of German philologists, Oldenberg explicitly acknowledged Indology’s limita-
tions vis-à-vis classical philology. He conceded that “what we study does not enrich our
life, or at least not directly and immediately. We cannot off er the great ideals [necessary]
for that; as the educator of our youth and our nation, India may never be mentioned in
the same breath as Greece and Rome.” Ibid., 8. Yet, Oldenberg nonetheless asserted that
Indology had a role to play. Even if the cultures of the East had nothing to teach, “we will
nonetheless fi nd,” claimed Oldenberg, “that there is nonetheless a pedagogic element [ein
erziehendes Element] in the acquisition of such knowledge.” Ibid., 9. He concludes with a
fervent plea that “in view of this” “the educators of our people who draw out of the riches
of antiquity [the classical philologists] will not deny us, too, the right to a place alongside
them.” Ibid.
4 . Th e one exception is the writings of Hermann Oldenberg, which we discuss below.
358 Chapter 05
forms of authority are the vantage points from which we evaluate Indology’s claims
to being part of the human sciences.
STEPS TOWARD A SCIENTIFIC INDOLOGY
Th e development of a new ideal of science at German universities during the nine-
teenth century has been well documented. 5 Scholars note that around the late eigh-
teenth to early nineteenth centuries, the term Wissenschaft took on grand idealist
associations of a system of total and comprehensive knowledge. Th is system inte-
grated both the transcendental principles of knowledge with the more specialized
disciplines that developed from out of these principles and carried forward the work
of enabling knowledge of the objective world. In the works of writers such as Fichte
( Wissenschaftslehre , 1794), Schelling ( Vorlesungen über die Methode des akademischen
Studiums , 1803), Schleiermacher (G elegentliche Gedanken über Universitäten in
deutschem Sinn , 1808), and Henrik Steff ens ( Vorlesungen über die Idee der Universitäten ,
1809), we fi nd this ideal of science expressed not only in quasi-religious terms, but
also closely associated with ideas of national renewal and Germanhood. 6
Th ese claims, however, were not mere rhetoric. R. Steven Turner estimates that
the professoriate expanded in Prussia by 147 percent between 1800 and 1834.
Especially striking was the rise in the so-called lower (that is, philosophical) faculty.
Berlin’s philosophical faculty grew from thirty-two in 1820 to ninety-one by 1848.7
Characterizing this rise, Turner writes: “After 1820 the philosophical faculty began to
expand phenomenally, largely in response to its new role in the education of Prussia’s
secondary teachers. It attracted new groups of students, and its teaching body swelled
with specialists moving into more and more esoteric areas of philology, history, and
the sciences.” 8 Th ere was also a stunning rise in the number of scholarly publications,
learned societies, and journals dedicated to new specialized disciplines. It was not
5 . See R. Steven Turner, “Th e Growth of Professorial Research in Prussia, 1818–1848,”
Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 3 (1971): 137–82 and “Th e Prussian Universities
and the Concept of Research,” I nternationales Archiv für Sozialgeschichte der Deutschen
Literatur 5 (1980): 68–93. Turner has argued that nineteenth-century German attitudes
to science should be seen less in terms of their concrete scientifi c contributions than in
terms of the role of what he calls a “W issenschaftsideologie ,” which played a role in “encour-
aging intensive professorial research throughout the university.” Th is ideology, again
according to Turner, “promoted a lofty, idealistic concept of the universities and also
that absolute devotion to learning stereotypical of the German scholar ever since.” “Th e
Growth of Professorial Research in Prussia,” 153. More recently, Mike Higton ( A Th eology
of Higher Education [New York: Oxford University Press, 2012]) has sought to understand
the growth in German learning in explicitly theological terms.
6 . For a typical example, see F. A. Wolf, “Darstellung der Alterthums-Wisssenschaft,”
in F. A. Wolf’s Darstellung der Alterthumswisssenschaft nebst einer Auswahl seiner kleinen
Schriften; und litterarischen Zugaben zu dessen Vorlesungen über die Alterthumswissenschaft ,
ed. S. W. F. Hoff mann (Leipzig: August Lehnhold, 1834).
7 . R. Steven Turner, “Th e Prussian Universities and the Research Imperative” (PhD diss.,
Princeton University, 1973), 442ff .
8 . Turner, “Th e Growth of Professorial Research in Prussia,” 143.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 359
just that there was a sudden burst of intellectual eff ort, but a change occurred in the
very meaning of knowledge, that is, in the notion of what could be studied, what
was worth studying, and what counted as knowledge. Turner describes the change
in attitudes as follows: “Th e professor of the eighteenth century had considered his
main duty the transmission of established learning to certain professional groups; in
addition to maintaining that goal, his nineteenth-century counterparts tried actively
to expand learning in many esoteric fi elds. . . . Research emerged within university
ideology as a fundamental duty of the scholar, and a reputation within one’s special-
ist community beyond the university became more and more a s ine qua non for even
minor university appointments.” 9
Th is ideology of the scholar as engaged in original research was given explicit
sanction in the writings of Wilhelm von Humboldt. In his essay “Über die innere und
äußere Organisation der höheren wissenschaftlichen Anstalten in Berlin,” which was
to be a major infl uence on university reform, Humboldt argued that what was unique
about the higher educational faculties was that they regarded W issenchaft as a “never
completely solved problem.” Th ey therefore “remain ever at research, whereas the
school is only concerned with fi nished and settled insights.” 10 If knowledge was no
longer a unity, a single science approximating an eternal model as it had been in the
time of the ancients, if knowledge had fractured into multiple fi elds of inquiry, then
original research became a duty of the scholar. Th ere were potentially as many forms
of knowledge as methods for discovering them. As Paulsen commented in 1901,
“Th e 19th century fi rst introduced the requirement of independent research in sci-
ence: only he is capable of being a teacher in science, who is himself actively produc-
tive in it. And correspondingly, the task of university education is not [the handing
down of] mere tradition, but rather, instruction in how to independently bring forth
knowledge.” 11 Among the disciplines (and objects) to be discovered in the nineteenth
century, were psychology (man as the intersection and functioning of his psycho-
logical capacities), sociology (man as social being), philology (text as document), and
biology (life as an organic structure embedded in a specifi c environment). 12
Indology, the new science of the study of India, too, emerged in the nineteenth
century as part of this general expansion of research into all fi elds of human activity.
It is thus no surprise that it conformed to general ideas of science in the air. Although
we do not fi nd an explicit refl ection on its status as science (which perhaps would not
be undertaken until the early twentieth century), in the writings of the Indologists
of the period we do fi nd frequent (and repeated) appeals to the wissenshaftliche char-
acter of Indology. Certainly, the threshold of positivity (to use Foucault’s terminol-
ogy) was crossed quite early in its history, with the thresholds of epistemologization
9 . Ibid., 138.
10 . Wilhelm von Humboldt, “Über die innere und äußere Organisation der höheren wis-
senschaftlichen Anstalten in Berlin,” in Wilhelm von Humboldts Gesammelte Schriften , vol.
10: Politische Denkschriften , ed. Bruno Gebhardt (Berlin: B. Behr’s Verlag, 1903), 251.
11 . Friedrich Paulsen, Die deutschen Universitäten und das Universitätsstudium (Berlin:
Verlag von A. Asher, 1902), 204–5.
12 . See Michel Foucault, Th e Order of Th ings: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences
(London and New York: Routledge, 2002).
360 Chapter 05
and scientifi city being crossed a little later. Key in this process of evolution was the
idea of Indology as a philological and historical preoccupation with the documents of
Indian antiquity, just as the science of classical philology ( Altertumswissenschaft ) was
preoccupied with the documents of classical antiquity.
Before the establishment of the fi rst chair for Indology (at Bonn in 1818; the
fi rst professor to hold the chair was August Wilhelm Schlegel), German intellec-
tuals had carried out studies into Indian literature from a number of perspec-
tives. Johann Gottfried Herder had produced literary translations of verses of the
Bhagavadgītā. Humboldt himself had written an essay on the Gītā, praising it for
its philosophical as well as for its poetic qualities. 13 Schlegel hoped that the dis-
covery of Indian antiquity would provide a similar impetus for the sciences in the
nineteenth century as the (re)discovery of classical antiquity had provided in the
fi fteenth century. 14 He was to be disappointed, however. Initial excitement over
Indian thought gave way to a more philological preoccupation with Indian texts. In
many ways, this transformation parallels wider currents relating to German philos-
ophy. As Howard remarks, “as the nineteenth-century wore on and under the infl u-
ence of positivism, the growth of the natural sciences, disciplinary specialization,
and the exigencies of industrialization and technology, W issenschaft gradually lost
its grand, idealist associations and took on a more limited defi nition with reference
to particular academic fi elds, empirical rigour, and the putative ideological neutral-
ity of the scholar.” 15 Above all, it was the new disciplines of history and classical
philology that were to meet this idea of Wissenschaft . Turner notes: “Th e philologi-
cal and historical disciplines fi rst displayed the intense concern with research and
research training. Only later—during the 1830s—were these commitments widely
adopted by science professors, often in direct imitation of learned values and
institutional models of the humanistic disciplines.”1 6 Indology’s need to establish
itself as a science meant that it quickly imbibed these ideas of disciplinary rigour.
In fact, its evolution traced that of philology, which always remained the science
against which it measured itself. Th us, just as the “critical, analytic tendencies of
the new philology clashed sharply with the philosophic program of a grand synthe-
sis of learning [and] [a] fter 1830 . . . largely replaced the philosophical tradition,” 17
so, too, did Indology see itself in a confl ict with philosophical interpretation. Th e
13 . See “Ueber die unter dem Namen Bhagavad-Gîtâ bekannte Episode des Mahâ-Bhârata
I,” 190, n. 1 (the Gītā is “a work rich in philosophical ideas”) and “Ueber die unter dem
Namen Bhagavad-Gîtâ bekannte Episode des Mahâ-Bhârata II,” 334 (the Gītā, “more than
any other work of this kind, come down to us from any other nation, lives up to the true
and genuine concept of a philosophical poem”) and 340 (“philosophical language is already
far more developed in this Indian work [the Gītā] than the Greek [language] at least at
the time of Parmenides was” and “in every epoch, philosophy had penetrated poetry more
deeply in India than [this was the case] in Greece”). (Both works are cited earlier; all cita-
tions refer to the 1906 reprint.)
14 . Schlegel, Über die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier , 111 and see also ibid., 316.
15 . Howard, P rotestant Th eology , 29.
16 . Turner, “Th e Growth of Professorial Research in Prussia,” 138.
17 . Ibid., 172.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 361
eff orts of an earlier generation of scholars such as Herder and Humboldt were dis-
missed as Schwärmgeisterei .1 8
By the early twentieth century, we fi nd a widespread consensus in the writ-
ings of many Indologists that Indology had to be reestablished along philological
principles. Hermann Oldenberg, in an essay written in 1906, argued that Indology
was concerned with the documents of Indian antiquity, a task that necessitated a
historical and philological approach. With this and other publications on I ndologie
or, as he preferred to call it in explicit contrast to classical philology, on indische
Philologie (Indian philology), Oldenberg rapidly became the foremost spokesperson
for the new science. Between 1875 (the year he published his dissertation, “De sac-
ris fratrum arvalium quaestiones”) and 1920 (the year of his death), he published
six articles or speeches devoted to a theoretical clarifi cation of Indology. Th e ear-
liest of these, “Über Sanskritforschung,” was written in 1886 19 ; the next to fol-
low was “Die Erforschung der altindischen Religionen im Gesamtzusammenhang
der Religionswissenschaft: Ein Vortrag” (1904), 20 while the two years 1906–7 saw
the publication of three of his most important contributions: “Göttergnade und
Menschenkraft in den altindischen Religionen” (1906), Oldenberg’s inaugural lec-
ture on his accession to the rectorship of the University of Kiel2 1 ; “Indische und klas-
sische Philologie” (1906), 22 his most extensive refl ection on the relation of Indian
philology to classical philology; and “Indologie” (1907),2 3 a recapitulation of modern
Indology’s tasks that explicitly closed the door on Indology’s Romantic and humanist
heritage. 24
18 . For the politics of this term, see the informative and lively account by Anthony J. La
Vopa, “Th e Philosopher and the Schwärmer : On the Career of a German Epithet from
Luther to Kant,” H untington Library Quarterly 60, no. 1/2, E nthusiasm and Enlightenment in
Europe, 1650–1850 (1997): 85–115.
19 . Hermann Oldenberg, “Ueber Sanskritforschung,” Deutsche Rundschau 47 (1886):
386–409.
20 . Hermann Oldenberg, “Die Erforschung der altindischen Religionen im
Gesamtzusammenhang der Religionswissenschaft: Ein Vortrag,” Deutsche Rundschau 121
(1904): 248–61, reprinted in Hermann Oldenberg, Indien und die Religionswissenschaft: Zwei
Vorträge von Hermann Oldenberg (Berlin: J. G. Cotta’sche Buchhandlung Nachfolger, 1906),
1–30. All citations refer to the reprint.
21 . Hermann Oldenberg, “Göttergnade und Menschenkraft in den altindischen Religionen,
Rede gehalten beim Antritt des Rektorats der Königlichen Christian-Albrechts-Universität,
5. März 1906,” in I ndien und die Religionswissenschaft: Zwei Vorträge von Hermann Oldenberg
(Berlin: J. G. Cotta’sche Buchhandlung Nachfolger, 1906), 31–57.
22 . Hermann Oldenberg, “Indische und klassische Philologie,” Neue Jahrbücher für das
klassische Altertum, Geschichte und deutsche Literatur und für Pädagogik 17 (1906): 1–9.
23 . Hermann Oldenberg, “Indologie,” Internationale Wochenschrift für Wissenschaft, Kunst
und Technik 1 (1907): 635–44.
24 . Interspersed between these were two Jahresberichte (annual reports) on Indian phi-
losophy (1888 and 1890) written for the journal A rchiv für die Geschichte der Philosophie
( Archive for the History of Philosophy ) and a similar review of research on Indian religion
titled “Indische Religion” published in 1903. Oldenberg’s last such review was the article
“Neue indologische Entdeckungen” published in 1918 two years before his death. No other
German Indologist, before or since, has published more statements on the theoretical
self-understanding of Indology. (See bibliography for complete references.)
362 Chapter 05
What were Oldenberg’s main points? In his 1886 text, he was at pains to contrast
the more haphazard eff orts of British scholars (mainly colonial offi cers such as William
Jones) with the systematic eff orts of German scholars. Oldenberg saw the establish-
ment of the Asiatic Society (Calcutta, 1784) as the birth hour of Indology. He credited
Wilson, Henry Th omas Colebrooke, and others with establishing this “new branch of
historical research.” Yet ideas of historical research—however popular—did not suf-
fi ce to defi ne the scientifi c character of Indology; rather, what was required was a con-
certed eff ort at systematic research. Here, German scholars excelled: “Englishmen
began the work; soon it was taken up by men of other nations and in the course of
time it transformed itself ever more decisively, to a far greater extent than this could,
for example, be said of research into hieroglyphic or cuneiform [writing], into an
aff air of German science [deutschen Wissenschaft].” 25 “While Colebrooke still stood
at the height of his [creative] powers, participation in researches on India began to
awaken in that land which had done more than any other to bring these [researches]
closer to a strict, fi rmly grounded science [Wissenschaft]: Germany .”2 6 Oldenberg
assigned Germany pride of place in this transition from an amateur preoccupation
to a formal d iscipline , the word being used with all its connotations of rigor, dedica-
tion, and a structured program of inquiry. Using the two great Sanskrit dictionaries
of the time (Monier-Williams and Roth-Böhtlingk) as an example, he typifi ed the
contrast between British and German scholarship as follows: “Th e contrast between
the two great periods [of Sanskrit scholarship] could not be more clearly embodied
than in these two dictionaries, in which the development of researches on India is
displayed: here, the beginnings, which the English science standing directly on the
shoulders of Indian pandithood had made; there, the further development, with the
methods of strict philology, in terms of breadth and depth pressing incomparably
ahead of these beginnings, at their head German researchers.” 27
Paralleling the distinction Howard traces between the fi rst and second phases of
Wissenschaftsideologie , Oldenberg also identifi ed two distinct phases of the reception
of Indian thought in Germany. In the fi rst phase, German literature, poetry, and phi-
losophy laid the ground for Indian studies in Germany. As Oldenberg notes, “Th ere
could be no more receptive ground for Jones’ and Colebrooke’s discoveries than the
Germany of that period, full of enthusiastic interest for the ancient, folk [volksthüm-
liche] poetry of all nations, fi lled with great movements in its own literature and phi-
losophy; out of the distance, India’s [literature and poetry] now encountered these
as though related: so to speak, an Oriental Romanticism and a poetic thought that,
in its sweep, sought no less daringly than the absolute philosophy of the Germans
to press forward to the formless primordial source of all forms [gestaltlosen Urquell
aller Gestaltungen].”2 8 Yet, this Romantic heritage could, at times, also be a source
of embarrassment, as Oldenberg lets out in his criticisms of Schlegel. Schlegel, he
argued, had created a “highly infl uential fantasy image of India.” Yet, this image
25 . Oldenberg, “Ueber Sanskritforschung,” 386.
26 . Ibid., 390 (emphasis in original).
27 . Ibid., 402.
28 . Ibid., 390.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 363
was neither “sober” nor “faithful” to the truth. 29 In contrast, it was “B opp , with his
researches into the grammatical structure of Sanskrit, who undertook to base the sci-
ence [Wissenschaft] on the long recognized fact of the relationship of this language
to Persian and to mainly European languages.” 30 Bopp’s approach was more “modest”;
yet, it had “penetrated incomparably deeper” into Indian language and literature. 31
Oldenberg was full of fulsome praise for Bopp’s 1816 work, Conjugationsystem der
Sanskritsprache in Vergleichung mit jenem der griechischen, lateinischen, persischen und
germanischen Sprahe , which he considered to have laid the foundation for scientifi c
study of India. He wrote: “We can here only mention with one word the researches
that have been carried out since the appearance of this work . . . and for which Bopp
laid the foundation at the time. Seldom has more remarkable work been accom-
plished for science [Wissenschaft] than here.” 32
Bopp’s comparative linguistic approach, however, was only part of the story. Th e
other part, which Oldenberg considered to have divided the evolution of the “sci-
ence [Wissenschaft] of India” into “two halves,” was the development of historical
research, aided above all by a renewed interest in the Veda. 33 Here he identifi es three
great names: Max Müller, Rudolf von Roth, and Albrecht Weber. Roth, above all,
appears to have been a paradigm of this new historical consciousness for Oldenberg.
He cites the scholar’s view that it would be a “mockery” if the “criticism and acumen”
of a century that had successfully deciphered the rock inscriptions of the Perisan
kings and Zarathustra’s books, did not also succeed in reading “the history of ideas
[Geistesgeschichte] of this people [that is, the Indians] in this mass of writings with
certitude.”3 4 How far did the renewed interest in researching the Veda go toward ful-
fi lling Roth’s expectations? Although Oldenberg conceded that much of what Roth
had hoped for could not be attained, he argued that “what has been attained has given
a completely new look to the picture, which science [Wissenschaft] had of India.” “Th is
picture appeared to lose itself without a horizon in the misty depths of an unmea-
sured past; now we fi nd the boundaries; an external starting point for history that
can be the subject of our research is within sight. Authentic sources, originating in
the oldest period of India, out of which and concerning which historical sources in the
customary sense of the term can be attained, opened themselves up and, instead of
the twilight traversed by uncertain, shadowy titanic fi gures, in which the epic poems
caused this period to appear, the Veda showed forth a reality that one could hope
to understand. . . .” Even where the Veda did not succeed in enabling historical know-
ledge, this was nonetheless “a gain” because “one then at least knew that the infor-
mation one sought had vanished and what presented itself as this [information] was
now exposed as a fantasy image, one that had emerged from the arbitrariness of later
creators of legend.” Scholarship into the Veda, Oldenberg concluded, had succeeded in
“outlin[ing] the horizon of historical knowledge with signifi cant forms.” 35
29 . Ibid., 391.
30 . Ibid. (Oldenberg’s emphasis).
31 . Ibid.
32 . Ibid.
33 . Ibid., 393.
34 . Ibid., 394; Oldenberg does not cite the source and we have been unable to discover it.
35 . Ibid., 394.
364 Chapter 05
In contrast to the fi rst phase, the second phase of Indian studies in Germany (for
which we properly reserve the name Indology) was also marked by increasing tech-
nicization. Whereas the Romantics had been inspired by pedagogic and philosophi-
cal considerations, such considerations were regarded as increasingly redundant by
career Indologists. As we have seen, following Hegel’s review of von Humboldt’s Gītā,
German scholars increasingly came to see Indian texts as raw matter for their own
historical and critical researches. Hence Oldenberg could now declare, “it is the task
of the philological researcher to determine these fates [which the Indian texts have
undergone], so to speak, the life history [Lebensgeschichte] of the texts.” He also
compared Indian texts, “as they have been handed down to us,” with “the paintings
of old masters, across which destruction and attempts at restoration, both by legiti-
mate and illegitimate persons, have alternately been at work.” Our aim, Oldenberg
declared, was to “know, as far as can be recognized, what the painting originally was
like.”3 6 Here was where German scholarship came into its own. Oldenberg writes:
W e may state [with justifi cation] that the most ambitious eff orts [and] the most
important successes in this fi eld are associated with the names of German research-
ers. If we [now] add that it could not easily have been otherwise, then this is
not hubris; rather, we thereby merely give expression to a state of aff airs that is
grounded in the evolution of the science [Wissenschaft] itself. It was natural that
the earliest impulses for the nascent research on India, the fi rst attempts to grasp
the material that was imposing itself en masse on us and to fi nd preliminary forms
for it, are owed to Englishmen—men who had spent a good portion of their lives
in India and stood in constant contact with the local scholars of Sanskrit there. But
it is no less natural that the honors of further advances [and] deeper insights have
fallen to the lot of the Germans. Th e two areas of science [Wissenschaft], out of
which life and strength primarily fl owed to researches on India, were and remain
essentially German: comparative linguistics [Sprachwissenschaft], which, one can
say, was founded by Bopp, and that deepened, powerful science [Wissenschaft] or,
just as rightly, art of philology, as it had been practiced by Gottfried Hermann and,
alongside him, permeated by the proud spirit of Lessing, Karl Lachmann, full of
astute, goal-oriented skill, precise and true [genau und wahrhaftig] in small matters
just as much as in big ones. 37
Systematicity, rigor, intensifi cation of research, development of autonomous meth-
ods, historical reconstruction, and comparative and philological methods—these,
then, were the hallmarks of German scholarship on India according to Oldenberg.
Th ey were responsible for endowing the study of Sanskrit with its properly scien-
tifi c character. Th ese traits, however, were not unique to Indology. Th ey were the
defi ning characteristic of German scholarship tout court and in particular of clas-
sical philology, which remained t he science against which Indology measured itself.
As Oldenberg clarifi ed, “even if representatives of this philology [that is, of classi-
cal philology] . . . should encounter the youthful science [Wissenschaft] of India
36 . Oldenberg, “Ueber Sanskritforschung,” 395.
37 . Ibid., 400–1.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 365
with reserve or with more than reserve, this changes nothing about the fact that
work on Indian texts, investigation into the literary monuments of India, cannot
be learnt from any better teacher than those masters, who knew how to improve
and to explain the classical texts with an accuracy of method as this world has
never seen before.”3 8 Yet Oldenberg was not simply being ingenious. By the nine-
teenth century, it was the “new” philology that, above all, had established the repu-
tation of German scholarship. Howard notes that classical philology and its sister
discipline, A ltertumswissenschaft , became “the German sciences par excellence, and
[the] ones with far-reaching ramifi cations for scholarship and the university system
as a whole.” 39 Under the stewardship of Johann Matthias Gesner (1691–1761) and
Christian Gottlob Heyne (1729–1812), philological studies came to take pride of
pace within the neohumanist canon of the university. It thus comes as no surprise
that Oldenberg sought to construe the wissenschaftliche character of Indology along
the lines of classical philology. By underscoring the connection between Indology
and philology, he hoped to establish the scientifi c character of Indology. He argued
a direct ancestry for Indology in classical philology in that he traced its genealogy
via Friedrich Max Müller (1823–1900) to Moriz Haupt (1808–74) and Gottfried
Hermann (1772–1848), the latter two classical philologists at Leipzig. Indology was
scientifi c, w issenschaftlich , because it had imbibed ideas of methodological rigor and
technical precision from philology, from “that . . . great teacher” as Oldenberg called
it in his 1909 article.4 0 Paralleling the development of the study of ancient languages
at German universities, which had gone from being ancillary to theological concerns
to becoming independent disciplines in their own right, 41 Indian studies in the nine-
teenth century also underwent a similar process of Verselbständigung , rendering
themselves independent or autonomous of philosophical, literary, or theological con-
cerns. Well might Oldenberg underscore the wissenschaftliche character of Indology,
if all that was thereby implied was that it had traced the evolution of philology. And
yet that is only half the story, for we must still ask wherein the scientifi c character
of Indology as philology lies. Th e answer will take us in the direction of a general
critique of positivist methodology.
STEPS TOWARD A POSITIVIST PHILOLOGY
Oldenberg further deepened the comparison between Indology and classical philol-
ogy in later writings. As he expressed it in a 1909 address to a congress of German
philologists, it was not just the “existence of material relationships” between the
cultures of Greek, Roman, or Christian antiquity on the one hand, and Indian antiq-
uity on the other, that legitimated the comparison between the two. Rather, it was
the fact that “from a purely formal perspective, methodologically, the tasks that the
38 . Ibid., 401.
39 . Howard, P rotestant Th eology , 117.
40 . Oldenberg, “Indische und klassische Philologie,” 4.
41 . Howard, P rotestant Th eology , 117–20.
366 Chapter 05
Indologist has to solve are in every way comparable to those of the classical philolo-
gists, albeit, in other respects, not identical at all.” 42 Here he distinguished between
two aspects: (1) the object and aims of the science; and (2) the method of treating
the fi eld. As regards the fi rst, he argued that “for both sciences the task is to sum-
mon up the existence of past civilizations [Volkstums] from their grave, to reinvigo-
rate their manifestation, to understand the causal processes at work in them. Th e
doorway here, as there [in classical philology], is language, grammar, and the lexi-
con. . . . Th en the same holds for the Indologist as for the classical philologist, to hew a
trail through monstrous masses of literature, to cleanse the texts, to put the old and
the new, as much as possible, in their place.” Indology specifi cally was faced with the
task of a “reconstruction” of “the history of India.” 43 Oldenberg, however, conceded
that expectations had to be set “especially low” concerning the possibility of a com-
prehensive and coherent account of the history of India. 44 In its place, he advocated
specialized investigations focusing on “the religious essence of India in its evolution,
law, [and] the plastic arts.” Political, economic, or social history remained beyond
the ambit of Indology. Instead, Oldenberg argued a narrower claim. Indology was to
research “all areas of spiritual activity out of the texts and monuments, just as the
classical study of antiquity [klassische Altertumswissenschaft] does it in its own fi eld
with such great success.” 45
Th is narrowing of focus to what might be called the spiritual history of India (as
compared to its material history) was conditioned partly by what Oldenberg called
the “existential conditions” under which German scholars operated. 46 As he noted,
“On the one side stood those who work in India locally and on site [an Ort und
Stelle], obviously mostly Englishmen, alongside them anglicized Indians: there are
administrators, jurists, military offi cers, practical school-teachers, as a whole not
Indologists according to the German mould [nach deutschem Zuschnitt].” 47 Th ese
workers came in for high praise: Oldenberg noted that they had collected manu-
scripts, inscriptions, works of art, and ethnological and folkloric material. Yet, this
work was only preparatory to truly critical scholarship and the latter was done (or
was to be done) by German academics. Oldenberg comments: “Th ere are fruits in
Indology that only the purposeful [zielbewußt] philological and historical method is
capable of picking. To these fruits the hands of the workers, of whom I have spoken,
do not always reach.” He continues: “Now the others: we philologists, in particular,
the German philologists. Many of us have not seen India at all; for obvious reasons
we cannot come so easily to Benares as one comes to Rome or Athens. Th us, we are
all too exposed to the danger that something of the ultimate vitality of life is missing
from the pictures that appear to us, that what we take to be the cloud trails of the
42 . Oldenberg,“Indische und klassische Philologie,” 1.
43 . Ibid., 2.
44 . Ibid.; his exact words are: “Und dann gilt es die Geschichte Indiens zu rekonstrui-
eren: eine Aufgabe, bei der wir freilich unsere Ansprüche besonders tief herabstimmen
müssen.”
45 . Ibid.
46 . Ibid., 3.
47 . Ibid., 3–4.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 367
Indian sky are ultimately only the vapors of our own study-rooms.” 48 Nonetheless,
Oldenberg argued that there was “rich compensation” for these shortcomings:
If we may not feel ourselves immediately certain of [possessing] a feeling for the
Indian present, we nonetheless see with greater acuity in the distance of Indian
antiquity, that is, in the period that is important, above all, to us. . . . We know the
Hindu less well than our [British] colleagues, who live in his land and breathe his air.
But to us, I declare, the opportunity has been given to know the Aryan of ancient
India better than these [our colleagues]. 49
It is with respect to this task that Oldenberg considered classical philology to be the
science par excellence upon which Indology had to model itself. He concluded:
Here I have reached the point at which I was aiming. My task is to speak of the
relationship of our science [Wissenschaft] to classical philology. Now if we trust
ourselves to be able to look back into those ancient horizons, without constantly
going astray in their murky depths, then we owe this above all to t hat philology, the
great teacher, from whom we learn to work as philologists!5 0
What made classical philology the paradigmatic science for Oldenberg? Although
German successes in classical philology might have partly fuelled these—admittedly
somewhat hyperbolic—claims, there is good reason to look more closely at his rea-
sons. Partly hyperbolic as they were, his claims nonetheless expose deep shared com-
mitments (with philology) to certain principles of scholarship.
First and foremost, there were the technical aspects of the discipline. Here
Oldenberg argued that there can be “absolutely nothing humiliating for us [i.e., for
the Indologists] [to learn from philology] for this is simply a self-evident state of
aff airs.”5 1 As he clarifi ed,
Our science [Wissenschaft] is still too young, still too little established for us to
be able to learn and to teach the techniques of the philological art in our own fi eld
of work in their complete conformity to law [Gesetzmäßigkeit] and detail. All the
experiences, through whose conscious mastery tentative refl ection is transformed
into a skilled technique of research—we could not possibly have had them ourselves
in the necessary richness and determinacy; hence, we must take them over from
those who have had these experiences before us. We must observe the possessors
of such experiences at work: where can this occur better than in the workshops of
Lachmann or Mommsen?5 2
48 . Ibid., 4.
49 . Ibid.
50 . Ibid. (emphasis in original).
51 . Ibid., 4–5.
52 . Ibid., 5.
368 Chapter 05
Second, there were the concrete methodological steps to be learned from the philolo-
gists. Oldenberg argued that
the art of inquiry that also applies to the Indologist is practiced here [that is, in the
workshops of Lachmann and Mommsen]; it is here that he [the Indologist] learns
to recognize the seams in the form of what has evolved historically [Gestalt des
Gewordenen], through which research penetrates to the processes of becoming
[Vorgängen des Werdens] lying behind it [i.e., behind the outward form]; he learns
with a confi dent hand to collect all the fi rm points and to forget none of them for
each and every problem, setting out from which [points] the state of the unknown
points, which we are in search of, can be determined. Are there Indologists in train-
ing among those whom I address? I do not know of any more suitable advice to give
them than to take classes with the teachers of classical philology. Th ey should not
slavishly imitate them, but they should learn to apply in other fi elds and to other
conditions what manifests in terms of universal norms in the works of these [teach-
ers] in the most vivid form. 53
Th ird, there were the aims of scholarship, which once again were explicitly borrowed
from philology. As Oldenberg exemplifi ed vis-à-vis the Ṛgveda, Indologists had
adapted and further developed the tools of philology for their own needs. Th e kinds
of questions they had raised concerning the text, too, echoed the specifi c origin of
their concepts and methods in philology.
Th e textual transmission of the Ṛgveda, already quite fi rmly established in very
ancient times; seemingly in many of the most minute details of an admirable faith-
fulness: does it nonetheless permit, and if so to what extent, free reign to the conjec-
ture that strives beyond the old state back to the original state [of the text]? [And,
further,] the explanation of the Ṛgvedic text that is laid down in imposing works
handed down by the old Indian scholars; does our exegesis have to demonstrate
respect before this Indian knowledge [Inderwissen] or must it on its own responsi-
bility hew open its own paths? 54
Oldenberg also emphasized the critical potential of philology, in both correcting the
transmission and in off ering an alternative access to the text than the commentarial
tradition:
Whoever stands closer to my subject knows how diametrically opposed the views
are. What I consider to be correct, I will indicate. . . . It can only appear correct to me
to examine the text without all the literal faith in words [Buchstabenglauben] in the
traditional text with the methods of classical philology, as precisely as we are able to
examine this: then we learn, I declare, to recognize that the exemplary transmission
is nonetheless not infallible and in some places we learn to improve it. And similarly,
53 . Ibid.
54 . Ibid., 5–6.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 369
I can only consider it correct to once again examine the traditional explanation of
the R ̣gveda with the methods of classical philology: we then learn to see through
it as completely untenable and in many, I hope in the most places, we learn to fi nd
better [explanations]. 55
Although the parallels between Oldenberg’s views and Roth’s views (discussed earlier
in c hapter 4) of tradition are striking, we ought not overlook the fact that the new
philology, especially as it developed in the hands of scholars such as Heyne and Wolf,
was equally skeptical of tradition. 56 Oldenberg could therefore claim to be well in
the mainstream of philological ideas. Th e new philology, with its critical methods,
emphasis on a return to the sources of tradition, disdain for commentarial glosses or
interpolations, and preference for literal and historical readings, held out the prom-
ise of revolutionizing the understanding of the Veda. It not only off ered to build
incrementally on existing readings; it was a completely new approach, rooted in com-
pletely diff erent expectations and in a completely diff erent understanding of texts.
Further, its aims were antithetical to those of the tradition: whereas tradition con-
sidered the Veda to be a revelation and a source of infallible knowledge concerning
supersensible reality, philology would regard it as a human and historical testament.
As Barbara Holdredge notes in her comparison of the Veda and the Torah, the very
purpose of studying scripture underwent a sea change. 57 If the Indologist could not
see the antimetaphysical biases of his approach, it was because the new philology
implicitly underwrote his antitraditional, antiauthoritarian refl ex. Indeed, Oldenberg
did not think there was a signifi cant diff erence between the critical stance espoused
by philology and the criticisms of tradition advanced by Indology. As he expressed it,
“the technique of interpretation” was “in both fi elds [i.e., Indology and philology]”
55 . Ibid., 6.
56 . How far apart the two are to be kept is, of course, a matter of debate, since there
are scholars who see the critical refl ex of philology as itself partly arising from and partly
contributing to theological developments in Germany. According to Howard, the applica-
tion of “innovative philological techniques to biblical texts” by philologists such as J. D.
Michaelis and J. G. Eichhorn laid the foundations for the development of “ ‘myth criticism’,
the exegetical eff ort to separate the historical from the mythical in the Bible.” Howard
therefore argues that one is “tempted” to “generalize that the shape of nineteenth-century
German historical criticism of the Bible—and the concomittant critical theology that pri-
oritized historical exegesis over dogma—bears witness to a revolution in philology. . . .”
Howard, P rotestant Th eology , 120.
57 . “Th e study of scripture since the nineteenth century has been almost exclusively the
domain of biblical and orientalist scholars, who have used the tools of critical analysis in
order to determine the cultural, historical, and literary infl uences that have given rise to
individual texts. Th ese historical and literary studies have primarily focused on the con-
tent of particular religious texts and on questions of Entstehungsgeschichte , or the ‘his-
tory of origins’—the history of causes and conditions that have produced specifi c texts.”
Barbara A. Holdrege, V eda and Torah: Transcending the Textuality of Scripture( Albany: State
University of New York, Press 1996), 3–4. But as Holdredge notes, the “very category of
scripture” as it has been conceptualized by Western scholars may be insuffi cient to these
texts. Rather, “the very notion of textuality implicit in the concept needs to be reexamined”
since scripture, for the tradition, is “not simply a textual phenomenon, but . . . [represents]
a cosmological principle . . . inherent in the very structure of reality.” Ibid., 4–5.
370 Chapter 05
“partly identical and partly closely related.” “For the scholar of the Veda, who is
tempted to translate faithfully according to the Indian commentators, the contact
with classical philology is like contact with fresh air. Th e future of Veda interpreta-
tion, this is my conviction, depends not insignifi cantly upon whether we succeed in
dispelling the airs of the commentators’ knowledge by such a fresh breath of air.”5 8
In a nutshell, then, the positivist philology advocated by Oldenberg as the founda-
tion for Indology had the following features:
1. It drew on established methodological canons, made available to it by classical
philology.
2. Under the infl uence of what Sheehan has termed the “documentary impulse” it
studied Indian texts as physical, historical, and cultural artifacts, but not, at any
event, as literary works.
3. It focused on texts not as they functioned within the life of the community, but as
reconstituted by the scholar.
4. It replaced commentary by criticism, where the salient feature of this criticism
would be, as Schleiermacher has it, its suspicion. 59
5. It privileged historical investigations, though, conditioned by the fact that
German scholars lacked fi rsthand access to India, these investigations would not
take the form of positive historical research, but of identifying the historical pro-
cesses at work in the evolution of Indian texts.
6 . Finally, there was the claim to being Wissenschaft , legitimated not only in terms
of specifi c methodological precepts, but also in terms of a powerful rhetoric of
scientifi city.
Although presented as making contributions to a positivist, historicist philology,
there were signifi cant problems with Oldenberg’s conception of Indology. Oldenberg
might recall the names of Gottfried Hermann and Karl Lachmann, but the German
Indologists’ knowledge of philology remained tenuous at best. Th ey neither had
the secure grasp of language demanded by Hermann nor the secure grasp of criti-
cal edition demanded by Lachmann. Th eir reconstructions of various Ur - texts of the
Mahābhārata and Bhagavadgītā (studied in the preceding chapters) were evidence
that they had not grasped the basic principles of textual criticism. For the most part,
their philology could be summed up as what Heyne once described as “the vanity
of wanting to seem brilliant through emendations.” 60 Further, their penchant for
studying the Veda from a documentary perspective needs to be seen in its histori-
cal context. Although Indologists did introduce new modes of contemplation, those
modes in the fi nal analysis are also not free from suspicion. It is perhaps true that the
58 . Oldenberg, “Indische und klassische Philologie,” 6.
59 . Friedrich Schleiermacher, H ermeneutik und Kritik. Mit einem Anhang sprachphiloso-
phischer Texte Schleiermachers , ed. Manfred Frank (Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp, 1977),
255–56.
60 . As reported by Hermann Sauppe in “Johann Matthias Gesner und Christian Gottlob
Heyne,” in G öttinger Professoren. Ein Beitrag zur deutschen Cultur und Literaturgeschichte in
acht Vorträgen (Gotha: Friedrich Andreas Porthes, 1872), 89.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 371
tradition did not develop historical modes of contemplation (or, at least, not to the
same extent and in the same way as modern scholarship). As Oldenberg exclaimed,
“historical development tends to be more weakly, more nebulously formed in India
than in the West. And it lies in a transmission before us that does everything [pos-
sible] in order to obscure its image completely: this transmission without fi rm dates,
which often confuses old and new to a seemingly hopeless extent, which continuously
presents us with illusions with the pretentious [anspruchsvoll] wisdom of its masses
of commentaries that only owe their existence to the sophistry of the scholastics in
place of genuine thoughts and institutions.”6 1 Oldenberg also wrote that, “the more
we . . . know of the history of India,” the more it appeared “as an incoherent rise and
fall of accidental events.” “Th ese events lack a secure hold and the meaningful sense
such as that the power of a national spirit [Volksgeistes] that wills and transforms
its will into deeds lends history [Geschehen].” “Only in the history of ideas, above all
of religious thought,” do we fi nd “fi rm ground.” “One may hardly speak of history in
another sense here . . . [and] a people that has no history, naturally has even less of
historiography.”6 2
Th ese claims of a defi cient historical consciousness among Indians were, doubt-
less, at least partly rhetorical. By highlighting the historicist dimensions of their
research, Western Orientalists could make a powerful case for their own profession.
Yet, what emerged at the end of this process of divestment of the text of its tradi-
tional social contexts and meanings was not a text emptied of all religious authority,
but one whose authority had, to use Sheehan’s terms, been reconstructed and recu-
perated elsewhere: in the academies of Western scholars.
Sheehan demonstrates in painstaking detail how changes in attitudes to the Bible
in the eighteenth century led to the development of “nonliterary techniques . . . for
evaluating documents.”6 3 Once the Bible lost its source of legitimation in a single,
unifi ed church, scholars began to undertake the “recuperation of a text whose
authenticity and authority could no longer be guaranteed by . . . theology.” 64 In this
project, scholars turned to various domains and disciplines, especially philology. Th e
Bible came to be seen as a document rather than as a carrier of theological truths.
As Sheehan describes the process, the “idea of the textual unconscious was key to
the documentary impulse. By divorcing the physical features of the manuscript from
its literary content, and by using these physical features to historicize the manu-
script, both Maubillon and Montfaucon successfully removed the question of literary
content from the domain of serious scholarship.” 65 Yet, while these methodological
innovations were essential to the discovery of the academic Bible, they were also con-
ditioned by this discovery, indeed, made possible and necessary by it. Th e cultural Bible
became the legitimation for a positivist philology that was, in turn, tasked with the
investigation of this very text qua cultural artifact. “As a tool for teaching, a subject of
61 . Oldenberg, “Indische und klassische Philologie,” 6.
62 . Oldenberg, “Ueber Sanskritforschung,” 406.
63 . Jonathan Sheehan, Th e Enlightenment Bible: Translation, Scholarship, Culture
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005), 102.
64 . Ibid., 213.
65 . Ibid., 103.
372 Chapter 05
scholarly research, and a disseminated document, the authority and authenticity of
the Bible were guaranteed—in these domains—by the exercise of philological schol-
arship.”6 6 Hence, for Sheehan, the central problem for a study of the Enlightenment
Bible (and its attendant methods) cannot, following a popular narrative, be that of
an overcoming and an emancipation of religious authority, but its “reconstruction and
recuperation.”6 7
Western scholarship on Indian scriptural literature would trace a similar trajec-
tory, fi rst projecting and then deconstructing the category of scripture. Th e radically
reconstituted texts that emerged at the end of this process were mere simulacra of
their originals. Legaspi has elegantly defi ned “scripture” as a text that “functions in an
authoritative and obligatory way within the context of a community shaped by a coher-
ent economy of meaning.”6 8 If we accept his defi nition, we can see why the Orientalists’
attempt at projecting an autonomous study of Indian texts was destined to fail. On the
one hand, the Orientalists claimed justifi cation for their work in the fact that they were
off ering a nonconfessional take on Indian texts. On the other, the texts studied by them
had lost all reference to their originating communities. Th ey were no longer the texts
they had originally been. Th e “knowledge” the Orientalists attained in this process was
thus pertinent only for them, premised on objects that existed only for them. Yet, before
we set aside the work of the Indologists, it is useful and illuminating to consider exactly
what kind of knowledge it was that was attained in Indology and what the epistemic
foundations of this knowledge were. Th ese questions will lead us ineluctably into a wider
question concerning the understanding of scientifi c method in the nineteenth century.
CONSTRUING THE NATURAL SCIENTIFIC CHARACTER
OF PHILOLOGY
Oldenberg in his essay pursued two aims. Th e fi rst was to legitimate the claims
of his discipline to being a form of knowledge, Wissenschaft , alongside and on par
with classical philology. Th e second was to ground the claim to being scientifi c,
wissenschaftlich , in an ideal of method. We shall distinguish between these two as
the claim to science (or Wissenschaftsanspruch ) and the claim to scientifi city (or
Wissenschaftlich keits anspruch ). Th e former refers to the social and pragmatic aspects of
the acceptance and integration of Indology into the university canon; the latter refers
to the epistemic aspects of how the university canon in general was understood such
that Indology could claim to belong to it. Th e former aspect has been studied in great
detail elsewhere, among others by McGetchin, Sengupta, and Rabault-Feuerhahn,
and we shall therefore not pursue it further here. Rather, we shall focus on the sec-
ond aspect, attempting what might be called a Wissenschaftlichkeitsgeschichte rather
66 . Ibid., 117.
67 . Ibid., xii.
68 . Michael C. Legaspi, Th e Death of Scripture and the Rise of Biblical Studies (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2010), 14.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 373
than a Wissenschaftsgeschichte of Indology here. Th e question we shall pursue is: on
what understanding of science can Indology claim to be Wissenschaft ?
Th e search for an answer to this question takes us back to the problem of method
in what have been called the human sciences, the so-called Geisteswissenchaften .6 9
Although Oldenberg did not explicitly clarify wherein the scientifi c character of phi-
lology lay, it is not hard to trace the roots of his understanding of science. Th e sup-
posedly scientifi c character of his philology was, in essence, undewritten by three
implicit claims: (1) its positivism; (2) its historicism; and (3) its empiricism. Th e insis-
tence on the positive character of philology was not surprising, given the history of
eff ect of the positivism of Auguste Comte, which largely shaped nineteenth-century
attitudes and ideas of science. Positivism was the reigning intellectual current of the
nineteenth century. Emerging originally as a theory of experience, Comtean positiv-
ism infl uenced the fi elds of economics, politics, and even engendered the fi eld of
scientifi c sociology. Besides J. S. Mill, many leading intellectuals at the time made
common cause with positivism. “Alexander Bain, John Morley, George Henry Lewes,
George Eliot and Harriet Martineau were partial adherents of Comte’s positivist sys-
tem; others (e.g. Matthew Arnold, Henry Sidgwick and Leslie Stephan) read Comte—
often surprisingly sympathetically—because, given their particular moral concerns,
he was a force to be reckoned with. From the mid-1850s there was an offi cial positiv-
ist movement, led by Richard Congreve, and including E. S. Beesly, J. H. Bridges and
the prolifi c Frederic Harrison.” 70 Beyond this list of luminaries, positivism was to
have wideranging eff ects in the three major European powers of the nineteenth cen-
tury: England, France, and Germany. Even though the form of positivism that fi nally
established itself in these countries was diff erent in each case, nineteenth-century
Europe can rightly be regarded as the greatest fl owering of positivism at any time
in human history. 71 Owen Chadwick nicely sums up the lasting infl uence of Comte,
69 . Th e term Geisteswissenschaften was popularized by the translator of J. S. Mill’s Logic ,
who used the term to render Mill’s “moral sciences.” More recently, it has been stan-
dard practice to translate G eisteswissenschaften (back) into English as “human sciences.”
Schürmann follows Gadamer (and in this both diverge from contemporary academic prac-
tice ) in that he translates G eisteswissenschaften as “social sciences.” For reasons of fi delity,
we retain his “social sciences” wherever we quote from him, although, in our own text,
we prefer “human sciences” (the one exception to this rule is the expression “social sci-
entist”; the alternative “human scientist” sounds awkward and contrived, refl ecting our
deep-seated unease with calling the student of the human sciences a “scientist”).
70 . Cheryl B. Welch, “Social science from the French Revolution to positivism,” in Th e
Cambridge History of Nineteenth Century Political Th ought , ed. Gareth Stedman Jones and
Gregory Claeys (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 189.
71 . As Rom Harré writes, citing an unnamed commentator, “the impressive ‘rise of sci-
ence’ in the public regard in this period (one commentator remarked that the locomotive
was all that was needed to convince the general public of the authority of physical science)
ensured that the infl uence of [positivist] authors like Comte, Darwin, Huxley, Mach, and
Spencer was very widespread, fi ltering through to moral, political, and economic attitudes
to life itself.” Rom Harré, “Positivist thought in the nineteenth century,” in Th e Cambridge
History of Philosophy 1870–1945 , ed. Th omas Baldwin (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2003), 26.
374 Chapter 05
when he writes: “In the mind of every one of us, even the most devout of us, is tucked
away some little secret piece of Comte.” 72
Oldenberg’s (re)framing of the scientifi c character of philology in terms of posi-
tivism can thus be understood in terms of a general but paradigmatic intellectual
constellation of the time. Let us see what led him to this understanding of philology.
Th e story of philology more or less follows the vicissitudes of the human sci-
ences in their complex and problematic distinction from the natural sciences. Th us,
in order to understand the identifi cation of positivism with science tout court at
this moment in European history, we should fi rst look at how the human sciences,
headed by philosophy, split off from the natural sciences, and then at how the human
sciences attempted to ground their methods in a torturous relationship with natu-
ral sciences: the human sciences were both distinct from the natural sciences and
like them. To anticipate, the three ways in which the human sciences attempted
to distinguish themselves are: (1) positivism, (2) historical and/or dialectical, and
(3) phenomenological-hermeneutic.
In antiquity, there existed no separation between philosophy and science. 73 Take,
for example, the earliest Greek philosophers, the so-called Presocratics. Th eir works,
which the later doxographers uniformly titled Peri Phuseōs or “On Nature,” contained
both cosmologies and ethical discussions. Plato’s Timaeus likewise contained seri-
ous discussions about mathematics, the universe, space, and physiology, alongside
a theology that the entire Christian tradition of the Middle Ages found meaningful.
Aristotle is even more explicitly an illustration of the unifi ed intellectual enterprise
whereby philosophy works hand in hand with scientifi c enquiry. Not only does he
lecture on physics, politics, biology, the soul, God, and friendship but he also clarifi es
the common metaphysical grounding of all these subjects, which he articulates in his
study of the fi rst principles or the a rchai .
In sharp contrast to this approach, modernity defi nes itself by rapidly setting
apart philosophy (and its branches, anachronistically called the “human sciences”)
and the natural sciences. Indeed, we could even make an argument for seeing the pre-
liminary gesture for this division in the philosophy of St. Th omas Aquinas, who dis-
tinguished between lumen naturale and l umen revelans or “the light of natural reason”
and “the light of revelation.” Th e four-faculty structure of the medieval university,
encompassing, besides law and medicine, the theological faculty and the philosophi-
cal faculty (or what we today might call “arts and sciences”) can at least partly be
72 . Chadwick, Th e Secularization of the European Mind in the Nineteenth Century , 233.
73 . Th e following sections draw heavily on the unpublished lecture notes of Reiner
Schürmann, professor of philosophy at the Graduate Faculty of the New School for Social
Research and the leading European intellectual to theorize the origins of totalitarianism
after Arendt. Schürmann belonged to a tradition of European humanism that is the abso-
lute opposite of the tradition of European exceptionalism, of which German Indology is a
part, and his work provides the best vantage from which to interrogate Indology’s claims
to being a European tradition of knowledge. We therefore draw extensively on the unpub-
lished text of Schürmann’s “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” a lecture course off ered
in 1982 at the New School for Social Research.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 375
traced back to the infl uence of this division. Th e philosophical faculty (which taught
subjects such as arithmetic, geometry, logic, grammar, and rhetoric) was explicitly
considered a lower (i.e., preparatory) faculty. One could further speculate, with
much convincing evidence, that this distinction itself is theological in its innermost
nature: Christian belief begins by separating belief and reason, assigning theology
to the former. Th is precarious relationship between the sciences and philosophy is
clear in the case of Descartes in the seventeenth century. Descartes is both a sci-
entist and philosopher; he is quite at home in theorizing about optics, geometry,
and the circulatory system of blood. And yet, in his Meditations , God is introduced
to guarantee the reality of the perceived world. Th is is also the case in Leibniz; his
Monadology does double duty as both a sort of atomic theory and a theology. But this
tenuous relationship between philosophy and science, already distinct, does not last.
Schürmann notes:
Th en progressively a shift occurs which is more than a distribution of labor: the sci-
entist doing research and the philosopher attempting to ground scientifi c discourse
in the structure of the knowing subject (Kant takes Newtonian physics for granted
and places it on a critical basis).
In the 19th century, the estrangement between science and philosophy is
blatant: for the scientist, ‘true’ is what is empirically verifi able; and Hegel’s
and Schelling’s philosophical systems now appear as frightfully unscientifi c.
Philosophers build their concepts around such terms as ‘spirit’, ‘absolute’ etc.—
before which the scientist can only shrug. Th e divorce is complete. It still marks
the cultural situation today. It is responsible for the sometimes desperate attempts
at ‘bridging the gap’. In fact, there exist two cultures: the scientifi c one and the
‘meta’–culture.7 4
To complicate the picture, there is a further distinction between philosophy and the
human sciences. Whereas the rift between philosophy and natural sciences has been
a continuous process, beginning already at the end of antiquity, the social sciences
have a much more complicated relationship to the natural sciences. It is very impor-
tant to understand this distinction, because we now see philologists, with no train-
ing in philosophy, who feel quite competent to assess diffi cult philosophical texts of
antiquity. Wherefrom their conviction of competence? In a certain sense, the subjec-
tivity of the social scientist, founded in his method, provides an “all-encompassing
method” that becomes the bedrock of human sciences. But matters are not so simple,
because in the human sciences “the researcher himself is always implied in what he
studies.” 75 According to Schürmann, the “divorce between science and philosophy”
7 4. R einer Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” typewritten lecture notes,
Reiner Schürmann Papers, Th e New School Archives and Special Collections, Fogelman
Social Sciences & Humanities Library, 1–2. (Hereafter cited as Schürmann, “Methodology
of the Social Sciences”; page numbers refer to the pagination of the original typescript in
the collection of the New School Archives.)
75 . Ibid., 2.
376 Chapter 05
that occurs in the nineteenth century can be traced back to this fact.7 6 Th e scien-
tist now “turns away” from what is “immediately given” and “constitutes a ‘world’ of
research.” 77 Th is world, obviously, does not replicate the world the scientist inhabits,
even though it comprises the tools (for example, hypotheses and models) he uses
to understand and interpret his world. Th is solution, of course, is not available to
philosophy or the human sciences, for they cannot claim to constitute a “pure” world
of research, as the natural sciences can. Th eir models must have a relation to reality;
that is, they must themselves contain some element of the real.
We can now understand the naïveté and futility implicit in Oldenberg’s (and
other Indologists’) claim that their hypothetical and reconstituted texts are the real
ones. Having attempted to construe the scientifi c character of their discipline on the
model of the natural sciences, they were caught on the horns of a dilemma: they can
neither acknowledge the texts of the tradition as the authentic ones (in which case
the Indologists’ task is reduced to exegesis, that is, carrying forward the commen-
tarial tradition) nor can they acknowledge the constructed character of their own
texts (in which case they are talking about literally nothing). As much as they would
like to think of themselves as (natural) scientists, the notion of purely theoretical
(i.e., unapplied) research available in the natural sciences was unavailable to them.
Hence, they had only one way out: to maintain the model-character of their recon-
structions but insist that their models contain more of reality than the originals.7 8
Ontologically, the tradition now appears defi cient in comparison to its image, while
ethically-epistemologically the popular reception appears naïve (“uncritical”) in com-
parison with the critics’ understanding.
Th e point is worth underscoring. Whereas the natural sciences speak of a world
that is epistemologically and theoretically separated from the world the scientist
inhabits, the social scientist is “both embedded in a social context” and has to “recon-
stitute it [i.e., his society] theoretically.” “More than the natural sciences, the human
sciences aim at practice—at practical ‘application.’ ”7 9 Th is practical part is essential
to their constitution, but it provokes a question: in what sense can the human sci-
ences be considered s ciences when this term primarily refers to the disinterested the-
oretical contemplation characteristic of the natural sciences? As Schürmann notes,
“Th ere is no problem with a seminar of ‘methodology in natural sciences’: that would
be the inquiry into ways of producing that world of models. But there is a problem
with regard to ‘social’ sciences because the ‘ways’ are directed less towards abstract
knowledge than back towards social reality, towards intervention . . . ‘critique,’ fi rst
of all. Eventually, a transformation of the society in which we live.” 80 Here arises the
76 . Ibid.; Schürmann is using the term “philosophy” in a wide sense that includes the
social sciences.
77 . Ibid.
78 . Th is is not an empty statement. As we saw, this claim was explicitly made by Adolf
Holtzmann Sr., at the very inception of German Mahābhārata studies. As he put it, “Th e
Kuruinge are thus not a translation [of the Indian characters]; I may say: they are my work.
But nonetheless they are Indian through and through and do not contain anything, even
in the slightest detail, for which I could not demonstrate [the existence of] an Indian pro-
totype.” Holtzmann Sr. Indische Sagen , x.
79 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 2.
80 . Ibid.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 377
defi nitive aspect of the social scientist’s work. It is now critical not only in the weak
sense that compared with the tradition the scientist appears to undertake a refl ection
(mediated via his theoretical model) on his object but also in the stronger sense that
it has an ethical-social dimension. Th e scientist must not only create the models that
refl ect reality but also clarify reality back to the layperson. Practically, this took the
form of Indologists trying to teach Indians how to read their own texts “critically.”
Hence the twin protestations of the Indologists: “we are scientifi c” and “we are
useful.” A true scientist need assert neither. One does not read a journal of physics
where one reads, “We are scientifi c!” Th is obsessive cry of the Indologists we have
so far seen is symptomatic of the intense anxiety of the social scientist. Th e anxiety
stems from the unavailability of the hypothetical-deductive, experimentally verifi -
able method in the human sciences. Th us, having adopted natural scientifi c method
as the prototype of true knowledge, the human sciences are caught in the bind of
having to continuously justify themselves vis-à-vis (natural) science. By claiming
that philology is a rigorous science, philology ultimately places itself on a dangerous
and doomed ground, for it will be unable to live up to the criterion of scientifi city
implicit in the natural sciences. To trace the history of attempts to legitimate the
scientifi c character of philology is simultaneously to trace the history of the travails
of the idea of “method” in the human sciences. Let us see how the human sciences
have attempted to create their own alternative method.
What is it that makes the transference of the (natural) scientifi c ideal into the
domain of human sciences questionable? Th e natural scientist, when speaking of
theoretical objects, makes use of concepts or terms (e.g., mass, energy) derived from
the world he inhabits. However, he is able to draw a strict line between the natural
scientifi c usage of such terms (e.g., in formulae or experiments) from their every-
day meanings. In the human sciences, no such division is available. As Schürmann
notes, the admixture of what is scientifi c and not scientifi c is “essentially constitu-
tive of the domain of any discourse about society.”8 1 In spite of attempts by social
scientists to produce formal systems analogous to those of the scientists (e.g., the
search for metalanguages in analytic philosophy, Russell’s theory of types), these
attempts remain illusory. Th ese systems cannot be used to predict or evaluate
the outcome of experiments as in the natural sciences (e.g., the formula E = mc 2 ,
which, provided one of the two variables is known, will always yield the second).
Further, the discovery of the idea of universal history in Kant (more specifi cally,
the discovery of the historicity of all existence that occurs in Droysen and is raised
to a methodological principle in Dilthey) makes it impossible henceforth for the
social sciences to construe their objects naïvely on the model of the natural sci-
ences. Schürmann attributes the break between the “two cultures . . . the scientifi c
and the ‘meta’-culture” 82 directly to this discovery. Whereas the “scientifi c modern
mind” renounces the claim that “theory corresponds to invariable objective struc-
tures in the world [and] constitutes . . . a discursive world, [one] made of models,” the
81 . Ibid.
82 . Ibid.
378 Chapter 05
“critical mind” cannot renounce “the relatedness to a given world altogether.” “Th ere
is no ‘pure’ object of social sciences, but only an ‘historical’ one.” 83
Th us we now turn to “historical grounding” of method. To understand the cri-
sis brought about by the discovery of history for the human sciences, we need to
take a closer look at Comte. Th e tension between the natural and human sciences is
already present in Comte’s early work, his famous C ours de philosophie positive (six
volumes, 1834–42). Volumes one through three of this work analyze the natural sci-
ences: mathematics, astronomy, physics, chemistry, and biology. In his fi nal three vol-
umes, Comte then deals with the social sciences, self-consciously laying the grounds
for a new science. Th is work presupposes the “Law of the Th ree Stages of Humanity,”
which can be summarized as follows: humanity develops via three successive stages,
namely, the theological, the metaphysical, and the positive. In the fi rst, the human
mind seeks to understand phenomena in terms of supernatural causes or reasons;
in the second, it moves on to seeking abstract causes or reasons. Comte emphasizes
that the metaphysical stage is but a transition in the development of science from a
theological to a positivist inquiry. Th us, only in the third, properly scientifi c phase
does the mind turn away from seeking fi rst causes or origins and toward identifying
the law underlying phenomena. Paralleling this theory of the genesis of the natural
sciences, Comte also off ers an account of the material development of society: fi rst
militaristic, then legalistic, and fi nally culminating in industrialism.
Th is law, as can be plainly seen when stated bluntly, is hardly a law in the scientifi c
sense. It gains its validity not by being either logically true or through empirical veri-
fi cation, but through its application. Th e social scientists, especially the philologists,
rest their claims regarding the scientifi city of their method on the ambiguity of this
law. A reading of Mahābhārata studies, as the German Indologists have undertaken
them, reveals that Comte has been thoroughly absorbed into this discipline, to the
point where most Indologists do not even realize that they are Comteans! Note the
correspondence of Comte’s Law and the textual history off ered by Indology for the
Mahābhārata: the epic’s textual history is divided up into three phases: an initial
militaristic phase; followed by a second phase in which scheming, power-hungry
Brahmans (Comte’s lawyers and jurists?) interpolated “abstract” ideas into the text,
corrupting it; and fi nally, a positive phase, marked by a critical approach, which
German philology must fulfi ll. Th e critical approach “stops looking for causes of phe-
nomena, and limits itself strictly to laws governing them; likewise, absolute notions
are replaced by relative ones.”8 4 Comte’s hypothetical law has become the absolute
law that grants scientifi city to Indology. It proceeds through an analysis of layers
and identifi cation of interpolations and a tireless capacity for detheologization and
excision of metaphysics.
Let us now return to the third, positive stage. Comte’s sole legacy here appears
to be skepticism. If this were scientifi c skepticism, Indologists would be open to
83 . Ibid., 3.
84 . Michel Bourdeau, “Auguste Comte,” in Th e Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (S ummer
2011 Edition) , ed. Edward N. Zalta; http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2011/entries/
comte/ .
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 379
questioning the validity of their method; they would be able to adopt new approaches
and engage in dialogue with other forms of inquiry. But this is not so. Comte’s inheri-
tance is complex. Th e law brooks no suspicions; Comte endows the fi nal positive stage
with its own form of dogmatism. Th e only diff erence between an earlier theological
dogmatism and the new dogmatism is the law of human development. Indologists
are no skeptics, for they believe in the scientifi c status of Comte’s hypothesis, which
allows them to continue in their positivistic praxis. Comte clarifi es the necessary dog-
matism in his second major work. As Bourdeau writes:
Th e Considerations on Spiritual Power that followed some months later presents dog-
matism as the normal state of the human mind. It is not diffi cult to fi nd behind that
statement, which may seem outrageous to us, the anti-Cartesianism that Comte shares
with Peirce and that brings their philosophies closer to one another. As the mind spon-
taneously stays with what seems true to it, the irritation of doubt ceases when belief is
fi xed;8 5 what is in need of justifi cation, one might say, is not the belief but the doubt.
Th us the concept of positive faith is brought out, that is to say, the necessity of a social
theory of belief and its correlate, the logical theory of authority. 86
If Comte’s silencing of the critical impulse in the third, positive stage does not sur-
prise us, it is because we have so thoroughly internalized the narrative of the apo-
theosis of criticism in the Enlightenment that we no longer consider it necessary
to query whence comes the authority of the modern scholar. At the same time as
German scholars railed against the machinations of a corrupt elite (the Brahmans),
they entrenched themselves as benefi ciaries of an arcane method. As offi cial pur-
veyors of Indian culture to the European public, they managed to insert themselves
between the text and the reader. Th e university off ered them a powerful bully pulpit
from which to harangue theologians and philosophers, the previous occupants of the
power echelon the philologists in the third and positive stage of human development
wished to occupy. And yet, there is more to the story of positivism. For, as Bourdeau
notes, Comte himself underwent a kind of turn after 1846:
After Clotilde’s death in 1846, positivism was transformed into “complete posi-
tivism,” which is “continuous dominance of the heart” ( la prépondérance continue
du coeur ). “We tire of thinking and even of acting; we never tire of loving,” as the
dedication to the S ystem put it. Positivism transformed science into philosophy;
complete positivism now transforms philosophy into religion. . . . Th e transforma-
tion of philosophy into religion does not yield a religion of science because, having
85 . Th is “fi xed belief” dogmatism of positivism coincides with Luther’s distinction between
the s ozomenoia nd apollumenoi , or the saved and the damned. For details on the link between
textual deconstruction and Lutheranism, see Vishwa Adluri, “A Th eological Deconstruction
of Metaphysics: Heidegger, Luther, and Aristotle,” E poché 18, no. 1 (2013): 129–60. Th at a
criticism of the previous stages, that is, metaphysics and theology, also works hand in glove
with Luther’s project hardly needs to be proved.
86 . Bourdeau, “Auguste Comte.”
380 Chapter 05
overcome modern prejudices, Comte now unhesitatingly ranks art above science. . ..
the break-up with the academic world was complete . . . . !8 7
German Indology did not follow Comte down this path. It accepted a popular (and
clichéd) view of positivism (even making it the basis of its “scientifi c” praxis8 8 ), but
it did not think through positivism to its end, as Comte had. As was remarked earlier
in the introduction, the positivism it subscribed to was an incomplete positivism: it
took the turn neither to a positivism dominated by social, emancipatory, and aes-
thetic concerns, as in Comte, nor to a critical positivism dominated by the rejection
of a reality independent of the model-character of science, as in Mach, nor to logical
positivism dominated by the verifi cation principle, as in Carnap. Yet, the attempt at
holding out in the third, positive stage was no solution, for Indology thereby ren-
dered itself irrelevant to and out-of-step with wider currents in European philosophy.
87 . Ibid.
88 . Positivism remains the basis of the Indologists’ scientifi c praxis, even when—as is
the case in Bronkhorst’s recent article—they argue against it. Indeed, the explicit target
of Bronkhorst’s criticism is not so much “methodological positivism,” but rather the reli-
ance upon positive data in the form of texts. In his assessment, this reliance skews the
results of the Indologists, because they are now—allegedly—forced to accept the dominant
perspective of the Brahmans (in his opinion, the “winners” who were able to ensure that
only their version of events or their ideas survived). Th e following passage is typical of his
concerns: “Th e winner takes all. Th e texts that have survived are the ones that belong, or
were acceptable, to the currents of thought that have been victorious in the long run, for
whatever reason. If, as philologists, we decide to limit our attention to the texts that have
survived, we take the side of the victors, perhaps unwittingly. Worse, by doing so we run the
risk of taking the side of the victorious tradition, which includes projecting back its vision
of the past.” Johannes Bronkhorst, “Against Methodological Positivism in Textual Studies,”
Asiatische Studien LXIV, no. 2 (2010): 267 (italics in original). Bronkhorst further argues
that Indologists ought to, in the name of “a more critical spirit,” move beyond the sur-
viving texts and seek the outlines of those traditions whose texts have not survived (spe-
cifi cally of the Buddhists, the Ājīvikas, and the Cārvākas, the “losers” in his idiom). Ibid.,
269. Th us, even though the article is titled “Against Methodological Positivism in Textual
Studies,” what Bronkhorst is really opposed to is not methodological positivism as such
but scholars’ practice of deferring to the extant texts instead of positing their own texts.
Th us, his approach is still methodological positivism, albeit a positivism where the positum,
the text, must fi rst be posited rather than being accepted in the form in which it is given.
(A more appropriate title for the article would thus have been: “Against Textual Studies in
Methodological Positivism.”) Bronkhorst’s argument fails because he does not grasp the
distinction between positivism as an approach and as a reliance on positive data. Indeed,
his prescription is no more than the formalization of something Indologists had been doing
any way for over a century: they had progressively been freeing themselves from the text
since at least Roth’s time (and for similar sorts of reasons, namely to recover an alternative
history of India in which Brahmanic ideas do not become normative for Indian tradition).
Once again, the root anxiety behind this explicit call to Indologists to distance themselves
from the texts (and to seek the hidden texts of other sects) is the fear that, if they rely upon
the texts that have become normative for the Indian tradition, they will “fall in [sic] the trap
to become, in Indian studies, second rate imitation pandits. . . .” Hence Bronkhorst’s conclu-
sion that Indologists “have to think twice before [they] decide to limit [their] attention to
texts that have survived.” Ibid., 268. Exactly how the Buddhists, Ājīvikas, or Cārvākas are
helped by conjuring up texts Bronkhorst does not explain.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 381
Indeed, it led to an irreparable crack in the very foundation of the human sciences
in particular and the Enlightenment in general. On the one hand, we have a critical
science coeval with “outrageous” dogmatism; a purportedly universal humanism sur-
rendering to the narrow hegemonic claim that European self-understanding repre-
sents the fulfi llment of planetary human development; and a science that brooks no
criticism. On the other hand, we have the universality of the natural sciences and its
powerful integration of all humans across the world through technology. It is easy to
see which element of this contradiction—German Indology as a human science or
natural science as the feature of all humanity—won out in the end.
Th e attempt to construe the scientifi c character of philology on analogy with that
of the natural sciences thus fails. Positivism is no guarantee of the scientifi city of
Indology. But what of the second of Oldenberg’s three candidates, historicism? Can
it ground the scientifi c character of Indology?
HISTORICISM AND THE SEDUCTIONS
OF POSITIVE SOCIOLOGY
Indology appears to be on more stable ground with the second of the three aspects we
noted earlier as underwriting the scientifi c character of philology: historicism. Here
it seems we can at last point to real contributions made by Indologists to the study of
Indian texts. Even though the absence of historical consciousness was never as pro-
nounced a feature of ancient cultures as is sometimes made out to be by proponents
of the theory, it is undeniable that a proliferation of historical knowledge took place
after the nineteenth century. To cite but the best known examples of this expan-
sion, there was Lassen’s four-volume I ndische Alterthumskunde completed between
1843 and 1862 and Weber’s three-volume I ndische Streifen (a collection of smaller
articles that had appeared elsewhere and were, as he wrote in his preface to the fi rst
volume, “wanderings over the wide, almost unsurveyable fi elds of Indian cultural
history [Cultur-Geschichte]”) published between 1868 and 1879. 89 Some of the most
signifi cant contributions to this proliferation took the form of canonical histories
of Indian literature and philosophy. Besides Winternitz’ three-volume Geschichte der
indischen Literatur , other representatives of this genre include Windisch’s G eschichte
der Sanskrit-Philologie und Indischen Altertumskunde (both cited in the introduc-
tion), Glasenapp’s Die Literaturen Indiens. Von ihren Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart , and
Frauwallner’s G eschichte der indischen Philosophie .9 0 Doubtless some of this added
to our knowledge of Indian history, although, equally doubtless, most of it, such as
Lassen’s pseudo-ethnographic researches or Frauwallner’s periodization of Indian
history into an “Āryan” and an “Indian” intellectual phase, made no contribution
outside the respective author’s head.
89 . Albrecht Weber, Indische Streifen , vols. 1–3 (Berlin: Nicolaische Verlagsbuchhandlung,
1868–79).
90 . Helmuth von Glasenapp, D ie Literaturen Indiens. Von ihren Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart
(Wildpark-Potsdam: Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft Athenaion, 1929). For the
Frauwallner citation, see chapter 1.
382 Chapter 05
Yet at stake here is not history as such, but the historicism of the Indologists, spe-
cifi cally, vis-à-vis its claim to embodying greater scientifi city. And this means, once
again, that we need to trace this phenomenon back to its historical origins. Although
many candidates have been proposed for the title of “father of historicism” (among
them Vico, Leopold von Ranke, J. G. Droysen, and Wilhelm Dilthey), historicism as a
philosophical theory, like positivism, originates in the work of Comte. In contrast to
Ranke and Droysen, who emphasized the historically unique character of events and
therefore rejected grand philosophical narratives of history in favor of an objective
and descriptive science of history ( Geschichtswissenschaft ), Comte specifi cally sought
a law of historical development that would explain all of human history. (Ranke and
Droysen, for this reason, are more properly considered the founders of the historio-
graphical movement known as “historism”; the tendency among English speakers to
use “historicism” and “historism” interchangeably is responsible for much of the con-
fusion.9 1 ) Comte therefore is the true father of historicism, understood as “the belief
that objective laws can either be derived from history or imposed upon history.” 92
Comte’s infl uence on Dilthey is well attested.9 3 But although Dilthey developed
his project of grounding the human sciences in dialogue with Comte’s thought, he
explicitly rejected the latter’s metaphysics. In a letter from 1882, he stated that his
project was undertaken via a rejection of Comte’s positivism: “Th e fi rst book of the
fi rst volume seeks, in contrast to the presently popular approach of the Comte and
Mill school, to grasp the truly inner structure of the human sciences as they have
developed historically. From this I hope to show the necessity of a general grounding
[of the human sciences].” 94 Bambach comments: “Dilthey shared with the positiv-
ists a desire to restructure the system of sciences according to a new methodological
ideal: the commitment to empirical research in place of abstract systematizing. In the
end, however, he wholly repudiated any attachment to Comte’s positive sociology or
91 . In his excellent overview of the term (“Historicism: Th e History and Meaning of the
Term,” Journal of the History of Ideas 56, no. 1 [1995]: 129–52), George G. Iggers traces
the term H istorismus back to Schlegel, who used it to characterize Windelband’s aware-
ness of the “immeasurable distinctness” and “the totally unique nature of Antiquity.”
But Iggers argues that the distinction between Historismus and H istorizismus , the latter
referring to “the attempts by Hegel and Marx to formulate laws of historical development
which were used by the Marxists to legitimize their authoritarian control for eschatologi-
cal ends” (ibid., 136 and i nfra ), is fi rst attested to in Popper’s Th e Poverty of Historicism
(New York: Routledge, 1957).
92 . Graeme Donald Snooks, Th e Laws of History: Exploding the Myth of Social Evolution
(New York: Routledge, 1998), 90.
93 . Hodges considers the “empirical philosophy of the British school and the positiv-
ism of Comte” to be one of the three “determinative infl uences in Dilthey’s thinking” (the
other two being Kant and Romanticism). H. A. Hodges, Th e Philosophy of Wilhelm Dilthey
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1952), 2. Also see Bambach, Heidegger, Dilthey, and
the Crisis of Historicism , 137, n. 29 for a list of treatments of the topic, though Bambach
does not cite Hodges’ work.
94 . Cited and translated in Bambach, H eidegger, Dilthey, and the Crisis of Historicism , 135;
Bambach notes that the citation is from Dilthey’s unpublished letter, the so-called Schoene
Brief of 1882; Bambach cites Ulrich Lessing, Die Idee der Kritik der historischen Vernunft
(Freiburg: Alber, 1984), 111 as his source.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 383
Mill’s logic of the moral sciences.” 95 For that reason, Dilthey’s grounding, although
it was to have a long and signifi cant history of eff ects, falls out of consideration as a
source of infl uence upon the Indologists. Indeed, there is much the Indologists could
have learned from his antimetaphysical, empirical but not empiricist approach, had
they chosen to do so. Written in the shadows of what he called the “orgies of empiri-
cism,” 9 6 Dilthey’s philosophy was well aware of the ideological potential of even the
seemingly innocuous commitment to empirical research.
How does historicism manifest itself in the work of Indologists? To answer this
question, we must fi rst understand the salient features of historicism as opposed
to historism. Inseparable from positivism, historicism makes its crucial appear-
ance in Comte. Schürmann writes that “in Comte, historicization appears in one
of its radical—and also simplest—forms. He declares: ‘In order to know yourself,
know your history’ (T raité de l’esprit du positivisme ).”9 7 As with positivism, so also
in historicism, Comte’s thesis of the development of the human mind is essential.
Comte proposes three stages of development: fetishism, polytheism, and mono-
theism. Each of these stages is characterized by a search for fi rst and fi nal causes
(and hence all are part of the theological stage, broadly speaking). However, the
degree of sophistication with which they do so is diff erent in each case. Fetishism
represents a primitive stage, where man clarifi es natural phenomena by attributing
supernatural agents to objects. However, as he matures and observes that phenom-
ena follow certain patterns, fetishism gives way to polytheism. Th e supernatural
agents inherent in objects give way to a limited number of supersensuous, super-
natural, and divine agents, who control all phenomena according to laws. Th e fi nal
stage is monotheism, characterized by its faith in one God. Th ese three stages are
all subsumed within the theological stage of Comte’s Law, but their development
parallels the development from the theological to the metaphysical and, fi nally,
positivist stage. In fetishism, animism or anthropomorphism reigns. Polytheism,
in contrast, is more critical, as it operates with abstract powers. In this respect, it
recalls the metaphysical stage. However, only in the third stage, monotheism, does
reason come into its own. Even though man ultimately attributes everything to a
supreme Being, the fi eld of operation of his metaphysical imagination is restricted
to this one, ultimate instance. Instead of identifying supernatural agents or
abstract powers, as in the fi rst two stages, man now confi nes himself to the objects
of sense experience, both inner and outer. As Schürmann notes, “Only that is called
reality [now], as opposed to fantasy.”9 8
Before we proceed, let us note the irony here: the move beyond metaphysics, now
seen as fantasy, into history, now seen as real, is itself metaphysical. Comte is making
an ontological claim here: the empirical is the real. Schürmann says: “Th ere is some-
thing very metaphysical about his positivism, since it is meant to present a total view
95 . Bambach, H eidegger, Dilthey, and the Crisis of Historicism , 137.
96 . Cited in Bambach, H eidegger, Dilthey, and the Crisis of Historicism , 138; Bambach cites
Dilthey’s Gesammelte Schriften , vol. 1, p. 135 and vol. 4, p. 434 as the source of the phrase.
97 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 4.
98 . Ibid.
384 Chapter 05
of history. Th ere is even an ontological thesis underlying it—despite Comte him-
self—namely that being = appearance.” 99
From Comte’s clarifi cation of the historical development of man toward positiv-
ism, we can now say what is supposed to be scientifi c about this new science. Th e task
of science as understood by Comte is twofold: on the one hand, the scientifi c mind
tries to grasp what remains the same throughout appearances. On the other, if the
mind can understand this selfsame (i.e., identify the law that pertains to its appear-
ance), it can also intervene in these appearances. Primitive man is surrendered to
the natural phenomena in which he worships supernatural agents. Modern man is
the master of the natural phenomena whose laws he speculatively discloses. Th is has
monumental consequences for the human sciences conceived on analogy with the
natural sciences. Schürmann writes: “If the rules of history can be shown, then it is
possible to intervene in it. Th us theory and practice are closely intertwined at this
third stage. As he [Comte] puts it: both the scholar and the industrialist work with
the premise: ‘Savoir pour prévoir, prévoir pour prévenir.’ ” 100
Th e pragmatic aspect of human sciences is very important as Comte establishes
them. According to Schürmann, it is “this idea of mastery that makes Comte’s
three-stage theory understandable.” Th e theory may not be read “as if history were
something unfolding by itself.” Rather, history now becomes “the arena where man
progressively makes himself master of his own destiny and of nature.” Th rough the
three stages, man progressively emerges as the “subject of history,” not only in the
sense of that which history studies but also in the sense that he is now properly
the s ubject . According to Comte’s historicist view, earlier ages lacked such a notion
of man’s refl exive subjectivity, but it is precisely this view that instates the subject
(modern, self-conscious, self-refl exive) as the goal of history. In Schürmann’s words,
“Th rough the three stages, he [man] progressively constitutes his freedom.” 101 Th is
freedom expresses itself in man’s capacity for science, more precisely in the tendency
to replace absolute notions with relative, which Comte considers the hallmark of sci-
ence. As Comte puts it in the second volume of his Cours :
If we contemplate the positive spirit in its relation to scientifi c conception, rather
than the mode of procedure, we shall fi nd that this philosophy is distinguished from
the theologico-metaphysical by its tendency to render relative the ideas that were
at fi rst absolute. Th is inevitable passage from the absolute to the relative is one of
the most important philosophical results of each of the intellectual revolutions that
has carried on every kind of speculation from the theological or metaphysical to the
scientifi c stage.1 02
99 . Ibid.
100 . Ibid.
101 . Ibid., 5.
102 . Auguste Comte, A uguste Comte and Positivism: Th e Essential Writings , edited and with
an Introduction by Gertrude Lenzer (New York: Harper & Row, 1975), 220. (All citations
hereafter refer to this edition, but see the next but one note.)
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 385
Th is is very diff erent from science as understood thus far in European intellectual
history. Th is is not knowledge for knowledge’s sake, as in Aristotle, this is not seeing
temporal things in the lumen naturale of Aquinas, and it is not Newton’s “morsels of
wisdom into the workings of God.” It is most defi nitely not the “objectivity” one fi nds
in the natural sciences. Th e social scientist is an activist, an interventionist, a history
transformer, as Schürmann notes.
To obtain so-called objective knowledge is not what matters. Rather the world is—
as I said—no longer understood as an objectivity out there, to which our proposi-
tions have to conform themselves; the world is to be made. Comte calls the unity of
theory and practice “the most enjoyable privilege of the spirit of positivism.” Th is is
so, because with the triumph of sciences we have unlearned to ask, What are things?
And learned to ask instead, What can we make of them? Th e connection between
science and technology in its modern form is thus a direct result of the discovery of
history. “Technique will no longer be exclusively geometrical, mechanical, chemical,
etc., but also and primarily political and moral”. . . even religious: Comte was the
founder of a short-lived religion, worshipping ‘Humanity’.1 03
Finally, the social scientist also provides his own form of modest, relative, and suit-
ably positivistic kind of salvation in the guise of self-refl exivity. Since the question of
method in the human sciences is indissolubly linked to their capacity to transform
society, the human sciences do not just refl ect society as it is. Rather, the refl ection
they undertake is a self-refl ection of a peculiar kind: it is a self-refl exive self-refl ection,
that is, one that recoils on the subject, transforming it. Th e social scientist off ers
not just transformation of history or society (these are his interventionist aspects)
but also holds out the promise of a transformation of the self (the soteriological-
eschatological aspect).
Th ere is thus an essential connection between positivism and historicism. Comte
himself called the “historical method” the “indispensable complement of the positive
logic.”1 04 In contrast to historical inquiry, which treats phenomena in their specifi c-
ity and tries, as far as this is possible, to understand their evolution out of a set of
determinate historical circumstances, historicism may be understood as the attempt
to construe the being of historical phenomena as analogous to the being of natural
phenomena. Th e salient point for both is that phenomena must be subject to universal
laws and the scientist’s task is to identify these universal laws . Th e idea of law, further-
more, plays a foundational role in the constitution of the discipline.
It was necessary for us to outline the essential features of historicism in contra-
distinction to historism and to trace its intrinsic connection to positivism, because
we now see that the approach of the Indologists was not just historical, but h istoricist .
103 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 5.
104 . Th e complete sentence reads: “Cet indispensable complément de la logique posi-
tive consiste dans le mode historique proprement dit, constituant l’investigation, non par
simple comparaison, mais par fi liation graduelle.” Auguste Comte, Cours de philosophie posi-
tive , vol. 6 (Paris: J. Ballière, 1869), 671 (the passage is not included in the Lenzer edition).
386 Chapter 05
Although they claimed merely to be applying historical methods to the study of India,
the “historical method” they applied was not the descriptive approach of Ranke, but
the inductive approach of Comte. Comte had called his approach “historical method”
because its domain was historical phenomena, just as the domain of experimental
method was natural scientifi c phenomena. But his historical method did not aim at
a description of historical events in their specifi city and its locus was not (the disci-
pline of) history, but what he called “sociology.” 105 Comte’s historical method was,
properly speaking, a method for making observations in keeping with an a priori
conception of human nature. As he wrote, “every law of social succession disclosed by
the historical method must be unquestionably connected, directly or indirectly, with
the positive theory of human nature, and all inductions that cannot stand this test
will prove to be illusory, through some sort of insuffi ciency in the observations on
which they are grounded. . . . And thus we fi nd, look where we will, a confi rmation of
that chief intellectual character of the new science, the philosophical preponderance
of the spirit of the whole over the spirit of detail.” 106
Like Comte, Indologists set out in search of such universal laws capable of explain-
ing all of Indian history. In Comte’s case, this had been an a priori law of “the develop-
ment of human intelligence,” which Comte called “a great fundamental law.”1 07 In the
case of the Indologists, it would be an a priori law of the decline of Indian civilization
from heroic Āryan beginnings to a state of corruption and lassitude, partly under
the infl uence of priests and partly under the infl uence of the climate. 108 And again,
like Comte, they would fi nd observation of historical phenomena to be meaningful
105 . Scholars have since labeled it “positive sociology,” because to call Comte’s project
“sociology” is no less misleading than to call his method “historical method.”
106 . Comte, A uguste Comte and Positivism , 251.
107 . Ibid., 71.
108 . Although we have seen references to this earlier, it is worth collecting all the refer-
ences as attempts have recently been made to deny the continuity of this thesis in German
Indology. Th e earliest scholar to hypothesize the existence of a pure northern Āryan race
was Christian Lassen, who in his Indische Alterthumskunde of 1847, claimed that the Āryans
“came from the Northwest.” Christian Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1, 513; and
also see his “Beiträge zur Kunde des Indischen Altertum aus dem Mahâbhârata I,” 75 and
Indische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1, 2nd ed., 791 for references pertaining to the Mahābhārata;
both passages are quoted in chapter 1. Lassen also presented a comprehensive epidemiol-
ogy of how the Āryans declined owing to a mixture of racial contamination and the eff ects
of climate (Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1, 410–12), besides explicitly contrast-
ing the Indo-German race to the Semitic (ibid., 414–17). Th ereafter, Holtzmann Jr., also
made use of this interpretive scheme (see his Zur Geschichte und Kritik , 45–46 and 33,
both passages are quoted in c hapter 1). Hermann Oldenberg also attributed northern ori-
gins to the Āryan race (see especially his Buddha: sein Leben, seine Lehre, seine Gemeinde
[Berlin: Wilhelm Hertz, 1881], 9 and 11–12, reprising many of Lassen’s comments about
the spiritual and physical decline of the Āryans under the infl uence of the Indian climate).
Still later, the leading Indologist of the day, Richard Garbe, invoked the thesis of racial
degeneracy to explain ancient India’s cultural achievements (which he attributed entirely
to the Āryan race), whereas the customs of the mixed Hindu race were presumed to have
originated not from the Āryans but from “the darker side [von der schwarzen Seite].”
According to him, “in the present day, the blood of the Hindus is without a doubt only Aryan
to the smallest degree, and even the Brahman families have been starkly contaminated
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 387
only insofar as these phenomena conformed to, that is to say, could be integrated
into a general law of the evolution of history. What counted as genuinely “scientifi c”
about the new discipline was not the discovery of events per se (indeed, Oldenberg
conceded that colonial adminstrators “working locally and on site” were better placed
to carry out historical inquiries of an empirical and material nature), but the real-
ization of their conformity to law . Here was where German scholars excelled. As
Oldenberg noted, Englishmen, French, Russian, and Japanese had played a more sig-
nifi cant role in bringing historical phenomena—be it events, social circumstances,
or documents—to light. But when it came to bringing order to those discoveries by
integrating them into an a priori conception of history, German scholars took the
lead. In an article published in I nternationale Wochenschrift für Wissenschaft, Kunst
und Technik (Th e International Weekly for Science, Art, and Technology ), Oldenberg
clarifi ed the roles of the diff erent nations as follows: “Englishmen bring the mate-
rial to light. Th ey collect the manuscripts, inscriptions, coins. Th ey organize the
excavations. . . . Th e activity of the French, too, has, in recent years, approximated
a similar character.” 109 Russian and Japanese scholars, too, were assigned merely a
preparatory role: “Multiple relationships to the central Asian and Tibetan regions
endow the activity of the Russian Indologists with [its specifi c] character. Th e ori-
gin of one of their main religions out of India [endows] the eff orts of the Japanese,
which have in recent years begun promisingly, [with its specifi c character].”1 10 In con-
trast, Oldenberg argued of the “German Indologists” that they could not “profi t from
relationships of this tangible kind. Many of them have never been to the country
their work concerns. Out of this and, in certain respects, from the unique nature of
German philological-historical research in general we can understand why for at least
a section of German Indologists the focus on making new material accessible had to
take a backseat to that of the critical analysis [Durcharbeitung] of texts, to that of
the solution of historical problems; [while] the striving for immediate, lively concrete
contemplation of the Indian essence [had to take a backseat to] the eff ort to arrange
the Indian formations [Gebilde] i n further contexts [and] v ia a comparative observation
make them serviceable to the solution of broader problems .”1 11
Th e idea of reciprocity between what the discipline studied (and brought to light
as the law of historical progression) and the discipline itself plays a major role in
Comte’s conception of a science of positive history. Comte had argued of the new
with barbarian blood.” Richard Garbe, Indische Reiseskizzen (Berlin: Gebrüder Paetel,
1889), 86. In this new “scientifi cally” legitimated form, the thesis would later be a corner-
stone of Erich Frauwallner’s racial construal of the history of Indian philosophy (see his
“Der arische Anteil an der indischen Philosophie” and G eschichte der indischen Philosophie ,
vols. 1–2, but the relevant passages, along with other source materials are superbly pre-
sented in Jakob Stuchlik, D er arische Ansatz: Erich Frauwallner und der Nationalsozialismus
[Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2009]), as well as of
Hauer’s stern warning to the German nation to learn its lesson from the weakening of
the Āryan race in India (see his Eine indo-arische Metaphysik , 63, the passage is cited in
chapter 3 earlier).
109 . Oldenberg, “Indologie,” 641.
110 . Ibid.
111 . Ibid., 641–42 (italics added).
388 Chapter 05
sociology that, “it asks from history something more than counsel and instruc-
tion to perfect conceptions that are derived from another source: it seeks its own
general direction, through the whole system of historical conclusions.” 112 We fi nd
a similar reciprocity in the case of Indology: there was a consonance between the
laws whose discovery was necessary to explain Indian history and the laws that
guaranteed scientifi city to Indology. Indeed, they were one and the same. Just as
“positive sociology” revealed itself to be “both the fulfi lment and the science of his-
tory,”1 13 Indology turned out to be “both the fulfi lment and the science of (Indian)
history.” Even though Oldenberg had cited Mommsen approvingly, most Indologists
were not interested in a descriptive general history. Rather, as works with titles such as
Deutsch-indische Geistesbeziehungen (Ludwig Alsdorf), India and the Germans: 500 Years
of Indo-German Contacts (Walter Leifer), and Impact of Indian Th ought on German Poets
and Philosophers (Wilfried Nölle) attest,1 14 they saw themselves as participants in the nar-
rative of Indian history itself . Th e Indologist is, as we noted earlier of the social scientist
in general, an activist, an interventionist, a history transformer. Th is aspect of their
science was important for German Indologists as they understood their work. Indology
devoid of its interventionist, aufklärerische , and simultaneously restorative and refor-
matory concerns would be dissolved into the discipline of history. Hence, they insisted
that there was a unique domain of objects that called for the development of autono-
mous (Indological) methods. It was important for them to dismiss not only the claims
of their British and Continental colleagues to participation in the narrative of Indian
history but also the claims of their colleagues in history departments at German uni-
versities, who were their rivals and challengers in off ering an account of Indian history.
Th us began the project of discovering a diff erent set of laws alongside the principles
invoked by the historian: laws that specifi cally governed the Indian context and hence
could also be used to explain it. Th ese laws would constitute an annex or supplement to
the laws of history; without them, Indian history could not be suffi ciently explained.
Here was where the theory of the absence of history among Indian peoples came into its
own. First, there was the thesis that “historical development tends to be more weakly,
more nebulously formed in India than in the west.” 115 Lest the historian nonetheless
attempt to study Indian history, there was the need for the further addendum that this
history could not be relied upon without further ado. Th us Oldenberg now argued, “it
[i.e., historical development] lies in a transmission before us that does everything [pos-
sible] in order to obscure its image completely: this transmission without fi rm dates,
which often confuses old and new to a seemingly hopeless extent. . . .” 116 Th ere was thus
need for extreme suspicion when approaching Indian history, which suspicion could not
get a purchase until one knew, fi rst of all, how to decipher Indian history to identify
the guilty party. One had to know of the material in front of one that it “continuously
presents us with illusions with the pretentious [anspruchsvoll] wisdom of its masses of
commentaries that only owe their existence to the sophistry of the scholastics in place
112 . Comte, A uguste Comte and Positivism , 252.
113 . Snooks, Th e Laws of History , 93.
114 . See bibliography for complete citations.
115 . Oldenberg, “Indische und klassische Philologie,” 6.
116 . Ibid.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 389
of genuine thoughts and institutions.”1 17 Th e Indologist, as opposed to the historian,
possessed the necessary suspicion (indeed, hostility) toward the tradition. But there was
also a further quality he brought along with him: an a priori scheme for reconstructing
Indian history. As Oldenberg put it, “the more we . . . know of the history of India,” the
more it appeared “as an incoherent rise and fall of accidental events.” 118 “Th ese events
lack a secure hold and the meaningful sense such as that the power of a national spirit
[Volksgeistes] that wills and transforms its will into deeds lends history [Geschehen].” 119
Th us, one could not simply reconstruct Indian history without fi rst having some idea of
the laws that governed it. Whence were these laws to be obtained? Here Oldenberg is
quite unambiguous: it is “only in the history of ideas, above all of religious thought,” that
we fi nd “fi rm ground.” “We can hardly speak of a history in any other sense here [i.e., as
pertains to India].” 120 And so, the Indologists, who since the time of Rudolf von Roth had
been deeply concerned (we might even say, o bsessed ) with Indian religions, were natu-
rally positioned to take over the task of studying Indian antiquity from the historian.
Finally, there were the narrowly historicist aspects of the German Indologists’
praxis, understood as the belief that the past has nothing to teach us and hence can
only be studied from a historical perspective. Although this appears at fi rst to be
the most prominent feature of historicism, it is in many ways but a consequence of
Comte’s understanding of science. As F. A. Hayek insightfully grasped, “Th e idea of
recognisable laws, not only of the growth of individual minds, but of the develop-
ment of the knowledge of the human race as a whole, pre-supposes that the human
mind could, so to speak, look down on itself from a higher plane and be able not
merely to understand its operations from the inside, but also to observe it, as it
were, from the outside. . . . What this belief really amounts to is that the products of
the process of mind can be comprehended as a whole by a simpler process than the
laborious one of understanding them, and that the individual mind, looking at these
results from the outside, can then directly connect these wholes by laws applying to
them as entities, and fi nally, by extrapolating the observed development, achieve
a kind of shortcut to future development.”1 21 Calling this “empirical theory of the
development of the collective mind” “the most naive and [at the same time] the most
infl uential result of the application of the procedure of the natural sciences to social
phenomena,” Hayek argues that it is here that the belief in our ability to “recognize
the ‘mutability’ of our mind and of its laws” and the belief in our ability to “control
[our] future development” arises.1 22 But a corollary of this view of science, more pre-
cisely, of self-refl exive understanding as the hallmark of science, is that the past,
which has not been able to grasp itself in this way (ex hypothesi, the past is never
able to grasp itself in this way; it is only the individual mind at present that can, as
117 . Ibid.
118 . Oldenberg, “Ueber Sanskritforschung,” 406.
119 . Ibid.
120 . Ibid.
121 . F. A. Hayek, S tudies on the Abuse and Decline of Reason: Text and Documents , ed. Bruce
Caldwell (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010), 269–70.
122 . Ibid., 270.
390 Chapter 05
Hayek says, “lift itself up by its own bootstraps” 123 ), no longer appears relevant to us.
Its function is reduced to that of serving as a mere iteration of the human mind in
its progression toward the self-refl exive contemplation of the individual mind at this
present moment. Th e past, on this view, has no intrinsic value; its value is entirely
a function of the position it is assigned in a continuum and only in this way does it
become, for the fi rst time, truly past .
By integrating the Indian past into a teleological narrative of history, Indologists
historicized Indian culture. Th ey were not just proposing that one could study Indian
history, which historians had in any case done to varying extents for centuries.
Rather, they were proposing that Indian texts could only be studied as dead letters,
within a metanarrative of history that accounted for their being dead in terms of
the movement of historical reason. (Th e same metanarrative did double duty, since
it also justifi ed why the Western Indologist had to be taken seriously: he was the
embodiment of that selfsame reason in its latest, and perhaps fi nal, incarnation.)
Th e specifi cs of the narrative discovered or projected were less important in each case
than the fact that such a narrative was n eeded in order for the Indologists to be able
to make sense of Indian texts at all. Indeed, the narrative could even have been true
in one or the other respects (although we found that it was not). But the discovery
of “laws” governing Indian history was crucial, because it fi rst allowed Indologists
to identify events as conforming to such-and-such a type, to integrate them into
their histories, to make sense of them as making sense of their own position as the
inheritors of Indian antiquity. Th us, although they claimed to be merely proceeding
empirically, in actual practice their work was weighed down by a heavy burden of
metaphysical, historicist, empiricist and scientistic presuppositions.
Th e faith in the mind’s ability to hover above itself and its history and thus to
achieve a kind of “shortcut to future developments” (to use Hayek’s expression) also
explains the Indologists’ confi dence in being able to advise Indians on what was to be
done by them. Th e Indologist, as we have seen earlier, understands his role not just
as that of providing a commentary on Indian history but also as that of, t hrough cri-
tique , transforming it. Th is aspect of their praxis remained, for the most part, latent
(although it could occasionally also come to the fore in the writings of more reli-
giously or politically motivated Indologists such as Hacker and Stietencron).1 24 To
be sure, this understanding of the social scientists’ role has its explicit role-model in
Comte, who remarked, “Savoir pour prévoir, prévoir pour prévenir.” But Indologists,
by tying the Comtean program of positive sociology to the encounter with a
123 . Ibid.
124 . A few of the more important of Hacker’s writings on Hinduism are listed in the
bibliography. Th e best summary of Hacker’s works is in Joydeep Bagchee, “Th e Invention
of Diff erence and the Assault on Ecumenism: Paul Hacker Becomes a Catholic,” paper
presented at the 3rd R ethinking Religion in India conference, Pardubice, Czech Republic,
11–14 October, 2011. Th e paper includes a comprehensive bibliography of Hacker’s writ-
ings, including polemical pieces Hacker wished suppressed from his collected essays
( Kleine Schriften ). Bagchee demonstrates how, behind the facade of a scholar and univer-
sity professor, hid a religious fundamentalist, who in Christian pamphlets and newslet-
ters denounced Hinduism as an unethical religion and argued for an aggressive program
of religious conversion. Although motivated by political rather than religious concerns,
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 391
non-European culture, gave it a new, racially-tinged edge. German Indology perpetu-
ally affi rmed Comte’s axiom. As a discipline, it heartily agrees with Comte that, as
Schürmann puts it, “the ‘method,’ in positivism, clearly is not merely a method for
the formation of concepts. It is at the same time a method of intervention. Th is is
an entirely new notion of science.” 125 Th is intervention meant diff erent things to
diff erent generations of Indologists. To some, it meant displacing Semitism from
the center of European history with a nobler, purer Āryan origin, and this entailed
mastery of Sanskrit and sustained dedication to linguistics. To others, it meant sup-
plying Germany with an identity, particularly that of the modern, enlightened scien-
tist. A more banal intervention of a personal sort also played a big role: positions of
power within the ranks of academic institutions. German Indology thus sees itself
not merely as learning and collecting objective knowledge as in the case of natural
sciences. It is more : the German Indologist directly intervenes in history and changes
it. On the one hand, Indians are to be shown to be at the mercy of the tyranny of
their misshapen, lecherous, and fantastical gods.1 26 Even more urgently, they are
to be shown as being subject to the tyranny of priestly authority. Texts need to be
purifi ed of Brahmanical interpolations and metaphysical speculations. Freedom on a
political and cultural level, in this idiom, can only be secured when the task of secur-
ing texts coincides with p urifying them. Th us, we have seen in the third chapter the
profuse enthusiasm with which German Indologists vied with each other to fi nd
excuses to dissect the Gītā. If only Brahmanical and bhakti aspects were removed,
Indians, as brethren in the world humanitarian project, could stand up as good, free
K ṣatriyas, interpreted here to mean as good Prussian soldiers. Or very nearly so.
More importantly, the Indologist must keep the Enlightenment torch burning at
home in Germany, as Slaje, Hanneder, and Bronkhorst argue. Th us the Indologists
allied themselves with whoever was in power to do their best to be philologist-kings
or at least philologist-advisors.
It is important to keep this aspect in mind when considering German Mahābhārata
studies. What could be more invigorating than a Blut und Eisen model of the great
Stietencron’s writings share Hacker’s concern with infl uencing contemporary Hinduism
through deconstructing (the concept of) Hindu identity; a good place to begin is Heinrich
von Stietencron, “Hinduism,” in Secularization and the World’s Religions , ed. Hans Joas and
Klaus Wiegandt (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2009), 122–40. His secularist zeal-
otry is also in evidence in: “Religious Confi gurations in Pre-Muslim India and the Modern
Concept of Hinduism,” 51–81 and in “Hinduism: On the Proper Use of a Deceptive Term,”
in H induism Reconsidered , ed. G. D. Sontheimer and Hermann Kulke (Delhi: Manohar,
1989), 11–27.
125 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 4.
126 . See Oldenberg, “Indologie,” 641, commenting that “its gods [i.e., the gods of
Hinduism] are the misshapen, wild, cruel, [and] lascivious Hindu gods, at their head Shiva
and Vishnu” and see also Garbe, Indische Reiseskizzen , 85: “there is no bridge from the
radiant forms [Lichtgestalten] of the Veda to the forms of the modern gods [modernen
Göttergestalten] [of Hinduism], whose monstrous representations with their tastelessly
multiplied animal limbs and so on, should be familiar to all, at least as a type. . . . In spite of
their A ryan names, I consider the modern Hindu gods—Shiva, Vishnu, Durga, Hanuman,
and whatever else they may be called—not to be Aryan conceptions, but to be conceptions
of the aborigines. . . .” (Garbe’s emphasis).
392 Chapter 05
epic of India?1 27 Th us begins the complex seduction of the experiment of forging a
K ṣatriya Urepos from the Mahābhārata. But the transformation was not just directed
outward at Indian history or society, but inward at the researcher’s historical situation
itself . Th e former two were to be r e made in the mold of the German scholar’s interpre-
tation, even if the most dubious evidence had to be brought forth to convince Indians
that they had once been blood brothers in the Āryan rationalist project. Th e history
recounted was always an eschatological history embodying a concrete vision of what
India could be if it but followed the German scholar’s missives. But at the same time
as the Germans intervened in the subject of their researches, they were placing them-
selves at the head of this narrative of history: if the scholar-scientist can put in place a
historical narrative that culminates in Western, enlightened self-consciousness, then
the scholar-priest who is the epitome of that consciousness becomes the very mean-
ing of history itself. Th us behind the German scientists’ mournful glances backward
at Indian history was also a rather self-serving look forward at their own historical
present. Who would pay them to tell tales of ancient Indian history unless those tales
simultaneously refl ected Germany (and German scholarship) in a good light?
Lest we think that this transformative, ideological aspect was secondary to the
conduct of a pure science, we should recall that the relation of knowledge to its results
diff ers in the case of the human sciences as compared to the natural sciences. Natural
sciences, for the most part, exist for the sake of knowing, although technology arises
out of them as a welcome but not essential consequence. Not so with the human
sciences, where the “link between theory and practice is true of all schools that have
arisen from Auguste Comte’s project, viz. Empirico-criticism (Richard Avenarius),
Logical Positivism (Ernst Mach, Rudolf Carnap, Alfred Ayer), and today so-called
Analytic and Linguistic Philosophy (except Ludwig Wittgenstein).”1 28 In the natural
sciences, the step from the realm of fact to that of pure logic and mathematics must
be undone in a step back to the realm of fact if the science is to turn into technology.
Since the human sciences never leave the realm of fact in spite of the Indologists’
protestations that they are operating with pure models of the epic or the Gītā, that
step back has always already become redundant. Finally, there is the ethical aspect.
As Schürmann notes, “A society gets the philosophy that it deserves. It should not
come as a surprise that a technological society recognizes itself best in positivist
thinking. But this only illustrates the practical orientation of this entire school of
thinking.” 129 Schürmann, speaking after the horrifi c genocides of the twentieth cen-
tury, teaches us a valuable lesson: a society gets the philosophy it deserves. If the social
scientists who interpreted the Bhagavadgītā and the epic had, instead, interpreted it
as a call for understanding the l imits of history and martial glorifi cation, one wonders
127 . Th e words are a reference to a famous speech made by Bismarck (the “Iron
Chancellor”) before the Budget Committee of the Prussian Assembly on September 30,
1862, in a plea for supporting his proposed reforms of the Prussian army. Th e full sentence
runs: “Th e great questions of the day will not be settled by means of speeches and majority
decisions . . . but by iron and blood.”
128 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 6.
129 . Ibid.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 393
if they could they have made a diff erence. Gandhi’s Indian experiment with the Gītā
(see the conclusion of this book) seems to suggest that perhaps they could have.
But by taking the turn toward historicism, Indology closed off the avenue to a social
philosophy informed by emancipatory concerns no less than to a historical science
informed by humanistic concerns.
Th e point bears repeating. Whereas Indologists would like to see themselves as
either in the tradition of Ranke and Droysen (when it comes to G eschichtsschreibung )
or in the tradition of Dilthey (when it comes to the G eisteswissenschaften ), their true
intellectual pedigree is neither of these. Indeed, there fl ourished a strong German
tradition of historiography on India in history departments—quite independent of
Indology and its fundamentalist, interventionist concerns. Dilthey’s emphasis upon
Verstehen (understanding) as the specifi c characteristic of the human sciences (as
opposed to Erklären in the natural sciences, which e xplain things) was to infl uence
Heidegger and to become a model for the philosophical hermeneutics of Gadamer.
Dilthey would have been much more sympathetic to the ideal of Indian studies we
have been (implicitly) proposing than to Indology. He would recognize in the for-
mer an attempt to understand what is unique and special about the human sciences,
whereas he would see the latter as embodying precisely the tendency he sought to
combat: to construe the scientifi c character of the human sciences as identical with
that of the natural sciences.
If the fi rst of the three aspects we identifi ed as underwriting the scientifi c charac-
ter of Indology—positivism—led to a dead end, and the second—historicism—led
to a wrong turn, what of the third? Does empiricism constitute a more viable alterna-
tive for grounding the scientifi c character of Indology?
EMPIRICISM AND THE SEARCH FOR GENERAL
PROPOSITIONS
A good place to begin our inquiry into the empiricism of Indology is to ask how pre-
cisely empiricism was understood in the writings of nineteenth-century Orientalists.
Specifi cally, we should ask whether they understood empiricism merely in the sense
of a moment in research practice or as a philosophical doctrine and epistemological
position. 130 Th e latter is more correctly described as an empiricist stance and, like
historicism (which was not itself historical but referred to an a priori metaphysical
understanding of history), is not itself empirical but describes a metaphysical theory
of concept formation in the social (and natural) sciences.
Oldenberg, in his statements on the scientifi c character of Indology, had opposed
its positivist and historicist aspects to the tradition, which he explicitly accused of
engaging in metaphysical speculation, that is, speculation exceeding the sphere of
empirical reality. “Instead of history,” he charged, “religion, poetry, refl ection and
130 . Th is is how the distinction is encapsulated in the Collins Dictionary of
Sociology, for example; see D. Jary and J. Jary, eds., Collins Dictionary: Sociology , 3rd ed.
(Glasgow: HarperCollins, 2009).
394 Chapter 05
dreaming [Sinnen und Träumen] of world forgetful [weltvergessender] philosophers
plays the dominant role in the literary products of India.” 131 “During the period
when, in a healthy nation, the interest in its own past and its relationship to the wars
and suff erings of the present awoke, where Herodotus and Fabius, the narrators of
what had occurred would normally appear, the literary activity of India was sunk
in theological and philosophical speculation.” 132 Oldenberg specifi cally critiqued the
tendency to “pantheism” he found to be widespread in later (that is, post-Vedic)
Indian thought. Th us, whereas the earlier phases of Indian history more or less rep-
licated the evolution of Western culture (that is, as Oldenberg understood it), mov-
ing from primitive nature speculation (Comte’s fetishism) to identifying abstract
powers as gods (Comte’s polytheism), this process was interrupted at a certain stage
in Indian thought. “It has been fatal,” he says, “for all thought and poetry in India
that, early on, a second world, fi lled with strangely fantastic shapes, was established
there alongside the real world. Th is was the place of sacrifi ce with its three sacred
fi res and the schools in which the virtuosos of the sacrifi cial art were educated—
a sphere of strangest activity and the playground of a subtle, empty esotericism
[Geheimniskrämerei], whose enervating power over the spirit of an entire nation
we can scarcely comprehend in its full extent.” 133 In place of the monotheism leading
fi nally to positivism, which should have been the successor to fetishism and polythe-
ism, Indian thought goes astray down the path of speculation. Oldenberg sees one
brief shining moment when Indian tradition might have taken the turn to an empiri-
cism motivated by positivistic concerns: “Earlier and stronger than among any other
people of antiquity, interest and joy in analyzing language scientifi cally [die Sprache
wissenschaftlich zu zergliedern] developed in India. One developed with dazzling
perspicuity and precision the observation of the individual consonants and of the
changes to which they are subject to a system, from which, as it became known in
Europe, the science [Wissenschaft] of our century found reason to learn with [due]
admiration.”1 34 But it was not to be. “Naturally, the brilliance and profundity of these
Vedic linguists was shadowed, as though by a curse, by a genuinely Indian tendency
toward sophism; the joy, out of which at times something like a bizarre schaden-
freude seems to emerge, of cloaking the things [Dinge] in an artifi cial robe and forc-
ing it upon them, of building labyrinths of subtleties, in whose twisting passageways
the well-versed and cunning expert knew how to pretentiously fi nd his way.”1 35
In contrast to this penchant for developing metaphysical systems of thought
rather than turning to the things, D inge , themselves, Oldenberg understands his task
as being one of rigorously introducing empiricism into the pantheism of the Indians,
subverting its speculative, anti-empirical character. He does so, of course, less by
exposing the problems with speculative thought than assuming speculative thought
to be a priori inadmissible. We do not fi nd an explicit engagement with (much less an
analysis of) Indian philosophy. Rather, Oldenberg seeks to explain phenomena such
131 . Oldenberg, “Indologie,” 638.
132 . Oldenberg, “Ueber Sanskritforschung,” 406.
133 . Ibid., 396.
134 . Ibid., 399.
135 . Ibid.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 395
as myths, magical incantations, sacrifi cial rituals, and philosophical doctrines (espe-
cially concerning the identity of the cosmos with Being) in positivist, historicist, and
empiricist terms. From a positivist perspective, he seeks to convert the beliefs of
ancient authors (concerning the immortality of soul, the connection between the
personal and the suprapersonal spheres, etc.) into expressions of the universal mind,
albeit one that is still at a primitive stage in its development. Th us, theories are
explained psychologistically in terms of the desire of the ancient man to control his
environment, to address his fears of death, and to fi nd comfort in the thought of a
cosmic justice. From a historicist perspective, the thesis of the progressive develop-
ment of Indian thought from primitive beginnings in nature worship to its mature,
pantheistic stage comes to his aid. Th us, magic and ritual are explained as developing
from the core of the nature worship of Āryan tribes. In his book on the philosophy
of the Upani ṣads,1 36 Oldenberg describes how Vedic gods such as Indra gradually lost
ground to the interest in sacrifi ce, leading, fi nally, to the emergence of a specialized
class of ritual technicians, the Brahmans. 137 Th ey, being more interested in “magic
than in the worship of Gods,” “now took up the next task, of explaining all this [i.e.,
the sacrifi cial ritual, gods, being and existence] in their own way so as to secure all
power in the hands of the knower.”1 38 “Here we have reached the point where we
encounter the Brahmanic science of sacrifi ce, which requires our attention as the
foundation and breeding ground of the great pantheistic speculation.” 139 Likewise,
the belief in the effi cacy of magic is explained in terms of primitive man’s belief that
if there exists an identity or resemblance between two things, then the one can be
used to control the other.
So much is easy to understand, that one eats the heart of a bear or of a bird of prey
in order to become courageous, that one smears the brains of a wise man onto one’s
forehead in order to gain wisdom: in that very heart or brain dwells the essence of
courage, of wisdom; in this way, one takes it up into oneself. Other equivalences can
also be understood such as the mystic identity that is imagined [to exist] between
the shadow of a being or even its footsteps or its name and, on the other hand,
he himself such that the one who takes hold of the one also has the other [in his
control]. Or eff ects such as that, when produced by a magician in the right way, the
illusion of rain brings about rain. Th e one signifi es the other, it is the other. 140
From an empirical perspective as well, Oldenberg believes he has found the key to
the metaphysical speculation of the Indians. It is rooted, he argues, in a distrust and
distate for empirical reality, which was to be subordinated to a higher, eternal prin-
ciple. “In all occurrences, one saw only this, that it was transient: and one recog-
nized everything transient, we may not even say, as a simulacrum [Gleichnis], but
136 . Hermann Oldenberg, Die Lehre der Upanishaden und die Anfänge des Buddhismus
(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1915).
137 . Ibid., 12–14.
138 . Ibid., 15.
139 . Ibid.
140 . Ibid., 11 (Oldenberg’s emphasis).
396 Chapter 05
as absolutely worthless, an unhappy nothing [ein unglückliches Nichts] from which
the knowing one had to free his thoughts.” 141 What Oldenberg specifi cally criticizes
about Indian thought is not that it did not accept perception as a source of knowl-
edge. Indeed, he would likely have known (although he does not mention it) that
Indian tradition, too, under the heading of p ratyak ṣa , considered the senses one
source of knowledge, albeit one that operates under specifi c limitations. 142 Rather,
his criticism of tradition takes the form of an a priori claim that empirical experience
is the sole means of knowledge such that all statements must be reducible to their
empirical content. According to Oldenberg, there is no statement of Indian thought
that cannot, through some combination of positivistic, historicist, or empiricist
explanation, be reduced to a positive datum, that is, to a positum. Th is holds all the
more so for the conception of knowledge of the time .
At that time, the relation of man to knowledge appeared in a diff erent light; the
acquisition of knowledge, therefore, took place in a very diff erent form than in our
time, which is glutted with knowledge and operates with it in objective and busi-
nesslike fashion. Ancient concepts step in here. Just as the name of a being, its
image or shadow stands in the closest mystical connection to it, so also knowledge
of it. Th e saying ‘knowledge is power’ is true here in another sense than that famil-
iar to us: not, as we understand it, in the sense that it enables us to act rightly, but
directly, in the sense that it produces a mysterious connection between the knower
and the thing known; for example, the way it might contain an immediate magical
power over the object of knowledge within itself, whereas the same object might
take revenge upon the knower for his insuffi cient or false knowledge. 143
Th e basis for Oldenberg’s comparison of Indian and Western philosophy, then, was
a thoroughgoing empiricism. Oldenberg not only defended sense experience as the
main (and perhaps, sole ) source of human knowledge, but also rejected the claim to
knowledge implicit in other means of knowledge. When the Indian tradition spoke
of supersensuous reality, hidden connections, or nonmaterial forces, it was not just
invoking alternative sources of knowledge, ones that could exist alongside empiri-
cal knowledge and perhaps extend it; it was “subtle, empty esotericism,” 144 “a ten-
dency toward sophism,”1 45 and a “diff erent form” of knowledge altogether, which
could scarcely be compared to our own.1 46 Th e gulf between the two conceptions was
141 . Oldenberg, “Ueber Sanskritforschung,” 406.
142 . P ratyaks ̣a , for example, is incapable of giving us mediate or supersensuous knowl-
edge. At least in some schools, when we see smoke, we require an additional step beyond
perception to attain the knowledge “there is fi re.” Th is knowledge is gained through
anumāna or inference. Likewise, when it comes to supersensuous reality, Indian philoso-
phy holds that pratyak ṣa cannot be of aid. Rather, what is required is a diff erent p ramā ṇa ,
or valid means of knowledge, namely, ś abda or authoritative testimony, especially as con-
tained in the revealed texts, the Vedas.
143 . Oldenberg, Die Lehre der Upanishaden , 6–7.
144 . Oldenberg, “Ueber Sanskritforschung,” 396.
145 . Ibid., 399.
146 . Oldenberg, Die Lehre der Upanishaden , 6.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 397
absolute and yet not unbridgeable, for Oldenberg proposed that Western scholar-
ship could nonetheless make sense of traditional ideas of knowledge by explaining
them historically and empirically. He notes that the Brahmans’ “representations of
things and events was fundamentally diff erent from what appears real to modern
man, indeed, as representable.” Th e diffi culty, for him, is resolved through the cat-
egory of “ ‘prelogical’ intellectual constitutions.” “Naturally, that is not to say that
the theology or metaphysics of the Brahmans has remained at this prelogical level.
But it is as yet on the path of separating out from it and has not, as yet, covered
great distances in all respects on this path.” 147 “Only later—for the period of which
we shall speak, this lies for the most part in the future—one learns, instead of the
imaginary occurrences, to see the real.”1 48 When looking back at a past that had not
as yet learned to see “the real,” the challenge was to fi nd categories to translate and
explain these experiences into ideas and categories familiar to nineteenth-century
audiences. Herein lay the justifi cation for Indology as a public and publicly funded
discipline.
When it comes to grounding the scientifi c character of Indology, however, empiri-
cism too proves to be no solution. First, there is the problem, already alluded to above,
that empiricism itself is not empirical, but rather, a metaphysical theory of experi-
ence. Th ere is the further problem that, as understood by Oldenberg, the empiricism
of Indology did not simply refer to the use of sense data as a moment in research,
but the much more problematic claim that a ll knowledge claims could be reduced to
their empirical conditions. Th e latter clearly breaches the domain of possible sense
experience; it makes a totalizing claim about how all experience (even that of others )
is to be understood. Finally, rigorous empiricism runs into problems when it comes
to identifying the kind of general propositions Indologists were seeking. Here, a look
at Mill’s radical empiricism is instructive.
Empiricism, understood as the view that sense experience is a source of knowl-
edge (of reality), was not new. Before Comte and Mill, the British empiricists (Locke,
Berkely, Hume) knew of the view and had defended it. But what is new about the
empiricism of Comte and Mill is the emphasis on induction as the method of empiri-
cal science. In his System of Logic (1843), which appeared the year following the pub-
lication of Comte’s sixth and last volume of the C ours de philosophie positive , J. S. Mill
proposed two theses: fi rst, all knowledge is based on the data of sense experience;
second, there is nothing beyond the realm of experience (i.e., no rational intuitable
nature of things in itself). Th e latter was especially contentious. Following Hume’s
skeptical attacks on empiricism, leading to the extreme skeptical conclusion that no
knowledge of causality was possible setting out from an empiricist framework, phi-
losophers had struggled in a number of ways to resuscitate knowledge of external
reality. Kant famously remarked that Hume “awoke him from his dogmatic slum-
bers.” Hume had argued that we may associate two events with each other based on
the observation that they always occur in succession, but we cannot assert a causal
147 . Ibid., 10.
148 . Ibid., 12.
398 Chapter 05
connection on this basis. Kant’s solution had been to propose that we do not infer or
intuit causality from the manifold of sense experience, but that it constitutes one of
the a priori categories of the understanding through which we institute order in the
manifold (in this case, introducing the idea of cause and eff ect). For Mill, however,
the task was to reconcile a radical empiricism with mathematics and logic. His solu-
tion was to propose induction as the method of science. Whereas Hume had stopped
with association, Mill proposed that the mind moved from observations to inductive
generalizations. Although these could not have the apodictic certainty of deduction,
by combining the notion of inductive logic with that of psychologically necessary
connections in the mind, Mill off ered a robust defense of science.
Indologists wishing to ground the scientifi c character of Indology in empiricism
might have taken a closer look at Mill, especially at his fi ve laws of induction, through
which he sought to defend empirical observation as leading to more than particular
knowledge:
1. Method of agreement. If two cases or more, in which one fact occurs, share only
one feature, this is the cause or the eff ect of both cases.
2 . Method of diff erence. If two occurrences both contain a phenomenon W in a given
circumstance A—but not, when A is absent—then W depends on A.
3 . Joined method of agreement and diff erence. If certain cases contain a phenome-
non W when A is given, and if other cases, when A is not given, also do not contain
W, then A is the condition of W.
4. Method rests. When W depends on A = A1, A2, A3, then to discover the depen-
dence of A1 and A2 is to establish that A3 depends on W.
5. Method of parallel transformation. If an appearance W changes as soon as
another, U, changes, whereby an increase or decrease of W occurs with an increase
or decrease of U, then U depends on W. 149
Mill’s work, which presents an epistemological defense of empiricism, would have
permitted the Indologists to go beyond mere association to actually asserting scien-
tifi c claims about the text (more precisely, to actually asserting the scientifi city of
their claims about the text). Th us, it seems as though, if these laws hold, the project
of converting philosophical, literary, mythic claims in the Indian texts into rigorously
empirical facts could, in fact, get underway. We could then really undertake the task
posed by Oldenberg of presenting a scientifi c (and this means, exclusively empirical)
account of the texts. Rather than being an ad hoc method of interpretation, Mill’s
laws would be the principle that grants scientifi city to Indology.
Yet, when we look more closely at the way German scholars tackled the Gītā, we
fi nd no such consistency. Even though the scholars studied here all valorized their
approach as scientifi c and empirical, they did not adhere to basic principles for devel-
oping general propositions from empirical data. To be sure, they cannot be faulted
for not having an education in Mill’s System of Logic . But when one borrows general
ideas of science from the intellectual climate of the time and, moreover, makes those
149 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 7.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 399
ideas into a rhetorical weapon, one should also know something of the intellectual
history of those ideas. In the case of Indology, empiricism was a basic tenet of schol-
arship, yet most Indologists did not even understand the problems with empiri-
cism. Th ey were using some combination of Mill’s laws (although, of course, without
being explicitly aware of them as such) in the most random fashion. A few examples
may suffi ce here. First, the method comes in too late: from the beginning, German
Gītā scholars were hamstrung by the war narrative hypothesis. All of these scholars
shared the opinion formalized by Jacobi but imagined by others before him, that
the entire epic, like Homer’s Iliad, is essentially a historical record, restricted to a
depiction of war. Th is prejudice prevented an objective evaluation of the text in ques-
tion: it presents itself, among other things, as a Veda for all members of society. 150 We
have shown that various subjective prejudices necessarily relating to German iden-
tity are at work here. Th ese scholars neither questioned their premises nor subjected
their criteria to scrutiny. Whatever the methodological rigor of inductive argumenta-
tion, it arrives too late and presents itself dogmatically. Second, the text in question
is a philosophical work, necessarily populated by various perspectives. Th e a dding
of a layer for each perspective creates multiple texts, as demonstrated. Th e induc-
tive method in this context shatters rather than explains the basic text. Th ird, the
text in question is a poetic, literary work. Th is necessarily means that the text uses
the same terms with several meanings, and several termswith the same meaning, in
order to achieve proper rhetorical eff ect. Th e application of inductive laws must be
fi ne-tuned to accommodate for such variance. In all of the scholars studied here, we
fi nd no such adjustment. Fourth, in addition to its poetic, literary qualities, the text
in question is also a pedagogical work. Th is means that arguments occur in a specifi c
order. Th us, although the discussion of the Gītā does begin with Arjuna’s dilemma
concerning his proximate duty, this is by no means the ultimate concern of either
being human or of the text, which purports to teach Arjuna the courage to be, not
merely the courage to fi ght. Rules of induction must therefore also be fi ne-tuned to
allow for this pedagogical crescendo of meaning; otherwise, the application of rules
has the unintended consequence of creating data for a text that does not exist: a
monotone. Th en there is the problem of circularity in the K ṣatriya hypothesis and
the method of fi nding “interpolations” that challenge that hypothesis. Last but not
least, the scholar must be trained not only in method but also in grammar, logic, phi-
losophy, and poetics, as well as being skilled in the delicate task of hermeneutics. 151
Since such scholars are rare, we ought to depend, to some extent, on a plurality of
150 . See Mahābhārata 12.314.45 and Bhagavadgītā 9.32. Th e appellation s trī-śūdra-veda
or a “Veda for women and ś ūdras ” for the Mahābhārata, in contrast, is late.
151 . In all these cases, notice that it is the text that demands a better method rather than
an intrinsic fl aw in this method. Positivistic research may or may not be a satisfactorily sci-
entifi c method in itself, but a naïve trust in the universal applicability of this method to all
texts, whatever their genre, self-presentation, form, and philosophical signifi cation, turns
out to be misplaced. Still, it is one thing to supplement positivistic methods with oth-
ers such as hermeneutics and traditional commentaries. To label this inadequately refi ned
and shabbily applied positivism to texts with the dogmatic, authoritative, and uncritically
normative claim that this is the most rigorous, scientifi c, and objective of all approaches
betrays the very spirit of the Enlightenment.
400 Chapter 05
perspectives, interpretations, and approaches. Obsessed by nationalism, however,
German Indologists rejected pluralism. Th e German Gītā project was most concerned
always to exclude all of these options. In search of securing a method that could rival
the natural sciences in objectivity, this subbranch of philology arrived not at cer-
tain knowledge, but at a discipline in which scientifi c knowledge basically meant any
interpretation authored by a German. To these criticisms, we may add one more, set-
ting out from Schürmann’s observation: “Th e basic goal in these laws is the transition
from the particular datum to general propositions. Th at is, in a word, induction.”1 52
Th e existence of a plurality of German Gītās shows that no such general propositions
concerning the poem were discovered, and the particular data remain idiosyncratic,
depending upon the views of the respective scholar. Mill, who argued with Comte
against the inclusion of phrenology among the sciences, would be astonished at the
claim that the philology practiced by the Indologists could lay claim to a ny science,
much less an objective, rigorous one.
If Mill’s views on induction proved too restrictive to ground the work of the major-
ity of Indologists, they might have considered the work of the nineteenth-century
British empiricist Herbert Spencer. Philologists fascinated by the history and fate
of texts could have found some theoretical grounding in Spencer’s work, since he
subscribed to positivism but combined it with a theory of social evolution. Although
infl uenced by Comte and therefore in agreement with positivism about the empirical
character of scientifi c knowledge, Spencer rejected Comte’s metanarrative of history.
Because the subject of the social sciences (human life) is itself in a process of change,
knowledge regarding it must also change. In his A System of Synthetic Philosophy
(1862–92), Spencer rejected the dichotomy between religion and science. Th ere must
be between them a “fundamental harmony,” for “it is impossible that there should be
two orders of truth in absolute and everlasting opposition.” 153 Even though he was a
critic of religious doctrine, Spencer advocated a methodological agnosticism. While
there is progress and change in both religion (the domain of society’s values) and
science (the domain of society’s knowledge of itself and inventions that serve it), the
idea of a universal end is speculative. In Spencer’s organicist conception of society,
there is growth and development, as well as decline and decay. Th us there is no narra-
tive of the movement from theology-religion to positivism, as in Comte, and religion
survives alongside science.1 54
In contrast to Spencer, it was very important to the German task of isolating an
Āryan identity to d eny any theory of progress and evolution. In fact, the political and
152 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 7 (Schürmann is speaking of
Mill’s laws).
153 . Herbert Spencer, First Principles (London: Williams and Norgate, 1862), 21.
154 . “Assuming, then, that since these two great realities are constituents of the same
mind, and respond to diff erent aspects of the same Universe, there must be a fundamen-
tal harmony between them, we see good reason to conclude that the most abstract truth
contained in Religion and the most abstract truth contained in Science must be the one in
which the two coalesce. Th e largest fact to be found within our mental range must be the
one of which we are in search. Uniting these positive and negative poles of human thought,
it must be the ultimate fact in our intelligence.” Ibid., 24.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 401
intellectual climate suggested ends (Catholicism, theology, religious authority, etc.)
and bold new beginnings (Protestantism, study of religions, the cult of the expert,
etc.). But these beginnings required a dignifi ed past: Āryan heroes here and also
Greek heroes. Th us texts were understood as corrupted rather than enriched , and
the philologist here is like a plastic surgeon who carefully performs rhinoplasties on
these texts. We have shown how these re-created texts resonate with the political and
cultural aspirations of the scholars themselves. In any event, Spencer’s evolutionary
theme is not only inconvenient but also too metaphysical for the philologist’s taste.
Th is leaves the Indologists increasingly little room for maneuver. Indologists
looking to ground the scientifi c character of their discipline in empiricism might
have considered one more option: the scientifi c empiricism of Ernst Mach. Mach
combined elements of French (Comtean) and British (Humean and Millean) positiv-
ism. From Comte, he inherited the former’s pragmatic and antimetaphysical stance,
but he rejected his absolutism. Further, he diff ered from Comte in assigning psy-
chological facts as much value as physical ones. Th ese two explain Mach’s reluctance to
view science independent of human reality. Science provides us models to understand
reality but can view its picture neither as fi nal nor as corresponding to a reality that is
“out there.” Th e former is at the core of Mach’s view of science as a Weltanschauung or
“worldview,” the latter at the core of his debate with Max Planck about the reality of
atoms. Mach claimed that contemporary science “does not claim to be a fi nished view
of the world; rather, it is aware of working towards a future view of the world (a future
Weltanschauung ). Th e highest philosophy of the scientist consists, in fact, in tolerat-
ing an incomplete view of the world and to prefer it to a seemingly complete but actu-
ally insuffi cient theory.” 155 Th us, Mach struggled to retain his agnostic view of science,
where science was characterized by its radically open, revisable, and syntactic character.
Against Planck, who insisted that the atoms the physicist worked with were real, Mach
argued that they were but a “convenient fi ction.” Scientifi c theories are not true or false;
rather, they are workable or unworkable. Grounded in empirical experience, they help us
organize data, but while the data remain, theories come and go. Regarding this view of
science as a means of rendering reality comprehensible, Schürmann remarks: “Th is is a
‘h odos’ of sense data; a hodos to which the ‘m eta -’ discourse has become rather modest.1 56
Th at is, ‘methodology,’ the discourse about the proper triad to follow, no longer claims
to say anything about reality.”1 57
But in contrast to Mach’s modest, agnostic, and self-negating notion of method
as a h odos or “path,” Indologists viewed method as the meaning of scholarship
itself. As the writings of Oldenberg demonstrated, German Indologists did not just
see themselves as collecting empirical data nor was their goal to simply provide
155 . Cited in Richard von Mises, “Ernst Mach and the Empiricist Conception of Science,”
in Ernst Mach: Physicist and Philosopher , ed. Robert S. Cohen and Raymond J. Seeger
(Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 2010), 267. Mises does not give the source.
156 . Schürmann is playing with the etymology of the word method . Th e Greek hodos
means “road” or “path”; m ethod implies a certain path. Th is etymology is not merely for
eff ect; Heidegger places great emphasis on thinking as being “on the way” and prefaces his
collected works with a Spartan utterance: “Wege nicht Werke.”
157 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 8.
402 Chapter 05
hypothetical models (which were to be tested against the data and discarded if
found to be unworkable). Indeed, in contrast to Mach’s emphasis on the role of
data in any scientifi c theory, Oldenberg had explicitly assigned the task of data
gathering (which he regarded as inferior) to English and French scholars. German
Indologists, meanwhile, were assigned the task of making sense of this informa-
tion. Unfortunately, Indologists chose not to take a page out of their compatriot
Ernst Mach’s book: instead of the theory being revised to fi t with the available data,
it was always the data that was shaped to fi t the theory. Instead of reading texts
in a spirit of humility and hermeneutic openness, they went to work with chisels
and axes.1 58 “With crude powerful tools, with the axe, we hew our way through the
forests of as yet untouched problems and, ever and ever again, we are rewarded by
the opening up of new horizons,” exulted Oldenberg. 159 Th e German Indologist is
not only committed to Realpolitik but also vociferously insistent on the superiority
and sovereignty of his method. He has many facts to expose and some myths to
present as facts (see Holtzmann’s “Buddhist hypothesis” in the second chapter for
a good example). Th us while Mach’s “militant anti-dogmatism” found acceptance in
the United States with Dewey, who “at the same time, wished to obtain ‘scientifi c
knowing of society’ and dismissed all defi nite formulae about society,” 160 within
his homeland, his modest proposals found no takers among the Indologists. Even
though they equated scientifi city, W issenschaftlichkeit , with the bracketing of sub-
jectivity and the reliance upon empirical observation, in practice they were never
able to live up these ideals. “I have thereby already touched upon a peculiarity of
these investigations concerning which I may not keep silent,” wrote Oldenberg.
“Th at precisely in them the subjectivity of the observer, his scientifi c temperament,
tends to play an especially dangerous role. We see, on the one side, researchers
who with hasty confi dence throw themselves upon every similarity between dis-
tant manifestations and constantly scent the track of historical relationships. Th e
phlegmatic types, who stand opposed to these sanguine ones, are also not lacking.
Th ey let a timid mistrust rule everywhere where they are asked to take a gamble, to
make a leap or even just to take a step from the one cultural sphere in the direction
of the other.”1 61
Th e fi rst of the three aspects we identifi ed as underwriting the scientifi c charac-
ter of Indology—positivism—led to a dead end. Th e second—historicism—led to a
wrong turn. Th e third has now led us to a missed opportunity. Empiricism is only
viable as a fundament for Indology if it turns to milder forms of empiricism such as
Spencer’s or Mach’s empiricism.
158 . For the reference to the Indologist, who with his “chisel’ gives “form” to the
“block . . . of uncut stone,” see Oldenberg, “Ueber Sanskritforschung,” 386.
159 . Oldenberg, “Indische und klassische Philologie,” 3.
160 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 8.
161 . Oldenberg, “Die Erforschung der altindischen Religionen,” 18.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 403
CRITICISMS OF THE POSITIVISTIC NOTION OF TRUTH
We have already seen that the notion of science implicit in the three great scien-
tifi c movements of the nineteenth century—positivism, historicism, and empiri-
cism—is insuffi cient to ground the scientifi c character of Indology. Th is makes the
Indologists’ claims to being scientifi c, w issenschaftlich , increasingly problematic.
In spite of their attempts to claim a place within a “world of the human sciences
[Geisteswissenschaften] [i.e., a world] that is . . . a p urposeless [ zweckfreie ] world of
human sciences,” 162 they were not able to convincingly demonstrate wherein their
scientifi city lay. Crucially, while upholding a positivist conception of science, they
seemed unaware of the criticisms the positivist notion of truth had been subject to
in twentieth-century Continental philosophy. We shall now look specifi cally at three
criticisms of positivism raised by Schürmann. Th ese three criticisms may be summa-
rized as: (1) verifi cation, (2) prediction, and (3) a hidden metaphysics. Th e problems
with verifi cation are stated succinctly by Schürmann as follows:
It is not so simple to say what verifi cation is. Traditionally, the answer is: “sense
experience.” Th at does not solve much. Indeed, w hose experience are we talking
about? Scientifi c language would be reduced ultimately to observational statements
(see Carnap’s article). But neither the “who” nor the “fact” are clear: what is the
fact that an observation statement reports? Is it a subjective experience about a
physical object? Is it a pure picture of that object? Subjectivity, it appears, cannot
be entirely disentangled from verifi cation. Th is is already the case in the natural sci-
ences but even more so in the social and human sciences. Th ere it is quite clear that
the observer contributes a lot to what he observes.1 63
Schürmann’s point is glaringly obvious in the case of the text-historical approach
to Indian texts, especially the Mahābhārata and, even more so, the Gītā. Th ere is
absolutely no conclusive evidence that there was such a war, and there are no texts
outside the epic to corroborate that there was such a war. Even if there was such a
war, there is no agreement about who the participants of the war actually were: they
range from the text’s own suggestion (a titanomachy) to the German Indologist’s
fantasy (a religious war, involving Buddha himself!). External verifi cation being
impossible, the interpreters we have been discussing resort to internal verifi cation.
But thesis and evidence appear in a vicious circle: the proof of Brahmanic mischief is
precisely what the Indologist asserts, based on this text, as an alleged Brahmanic redac-
tion! Th e text becomes both the thesis and evidence. Th ese very basic logical errors
go unnoticed because, like fi sh to water, these scholars have fully taken for granted
their thesis of corrupt, mendacious Brahmans as a self-evident truism. Surely there is
mischief on the part of any faction of society claiming to have the absolutely correct
interpretations of texts and claiming power in the name of truth. But this accusation
is as true of German Indology as of any other elite group. Further, the enormous
162 . Slaje, “Was ist und welchem Zwecke dient die Indologie,” 311 (italics in original).
163 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 15.
404 Chapter 05
generalization of “Brahmans” is a shoddy one: it does not make room for the fi erce
debates that must necessarily occur in any intellectual milieu. Let us imagine that a
faction of Brahmans attempts tampering with a canonical text: would the Indologist
have us imagine that the Brahmans, already characterized by him as greedy and hun-
gry for power at any cost, allowed it? Were there councils of Brahmans agreeing on
synoptic views to interpolate? Were those who disagreed murdered? Such questions
do not bother the Indologist, in whose view all Brahmans are alike.
Th ere is the further point of the distinction between the natural and the human
sciences:
Namely, that in the latter we are somehow involved. It is to say that as o bservers in
the human sciences we introduce what one may call our own “horizon” of under-
standing. Th e hermeneuticians speak therefore of a “fusion of horizons” between
observer and observed. Th is certainly makes the quest for elementary statements
that are like the facts, impossible.1 64
Schürmann, of course, is referring here to the Horizontsverschmelzung elaborated by
Gadamer in his seminal work T ruth and Method . Gadamer’s interpretation necessar-
ily leads to a dialogical situation, where the exclusionary gestures and self-important
postures of German Indologists become no longer tenable. But failing such a devel-
opment, German Indology remains trapped by its positivist inheritance. Once again,
Schürmann is instructive as to what happens once one rejects opening oneself up in
the direction of a philosophical hermeneutics:
In the language of the positivists themselves: is it ever possible to translate a per-
son’s internal experience into a statement about physical objects, or vice versa? Does
the subject not “contribute” something that makes the fact forever elusive? Th is is
more than merely the problem of solipsism, of private language, of the necessarily
non-public character of experience. It has to do with the very process of obtaining
knowledge: whether private or public, statements always involve the speaker, hence
interpretation.1 65
Th e German scholars whose work we examined in the preceding chapter, however,
could not agree even on a basic text of the Gītā. Each proposed his own text based
on his reaction to the Gītā. What is this but the most extreme and utter solipsism?
To be sure, they were prepared to open themselves up a little to each other, as one
can see from the Garbe-Jacobi debate. But this debate ended without leading to any
conclusion because the two participants in it were not capable of a genuine dialogue.
As Garbe curtly noted in his fi nal response: “It is naturally not possible to continue
the discussion in DLZ in the current manner; furthermore, a continuation of it would
also not have the success that one of us would convince the other of the incorrectness
164 . Ibid. (Schürmann’s emphasis).
165 . Ibid.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 405
of his stand-point.” 166 Schürmann’s comments regarding how extreme verifi cation-
ism leads to the problem of solipsism, of private language, and of the necessarily
nonpublic character of experience are thus pertinent here. Far from the scientists
they so wish to emulate, German Indologists begin to look like the fabled blind men
of India, each touching a diff erent part of the Gītā elephant. What is the solution?
Schürmann off ers the following answer:
Each person’s experience, each age’s presuppositions are interpretation. Each per-
son’s experience, each age’s presuppositions are diff erent from the allegedly objec-
tively real world. But to say that verifi cation statements mean one thing to one
person and another to others, amounts to eliminating the very possibility of the ver-
ifi cation principle. Hence my fi rst thesis: no verifi cation without interpretation.1 67
Either dilute the verifi cation principle by acknowledging its interpretive dimension
(and then attempt to reinstate the intersubjective dimension of truth via a theory of
communication) or watch the verifi cation principle erode away anyway. But since the
former meant opening oneself up in the direction of a truly dialogical, international
situation, where the truth of a statement is open to question and is not simply accepted
because it is made by a German, German Indology was unable accept this solution.
German Indology fails verifi cation as a test of its scientifi c character, but it is no more
successful when it comes to the second test of a positivist methodology: prediction.
Previewing or prediction is the area where positivism is supposed to have the
greatest impact. As Mary Pickering notes in her biography, one of Comte’s cherished
aphorisms was “ from science comes prediction; from prediction comes action .” 168 “Th e
aim of each science was therefore prediction. Prediction to Comte meant going not
only from the present to the future but also from the known to the unknown.” 169
In fact, in the second volume of his C ours , Comte goes so far as to say: “All sciences
aim at prevision [toute science a pour but la prévoyance].” 170 German Indologists
wishing to defend the scientifi c value of their work might have argued that their
work nonetheless has value in terms of being able to foresee (and perhaps forestall)
future developments in India. But what is it exactly that the positivist methodology
in Indology is supposed to predict? Future Āryan incursions? Th e gradual darkening
of the Northern races under the infl uence of India’s clime? Or are they supposed to
predict the loss and degradation Indian texts would allegedly suff er if no German
Indologists were around to preserve and safeguard them?
Even if the Indologists were to accept a weak form of the prediction hypothesis,
where the law is useful and retained as long as it produces predictions accepted by
166 . Garbe, “Mein Schlusswort zum Bhagavadgītā-Problem,” 604.
167 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 15–16.
168 . Cited and translated in Mary Pickering, C omte: An Intellectual Biography , vol. 1
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 566 (Pickering’s italics); the Lenzer
edition has it as: “From science comes prevision; from prevision comes action.” Comte,
Auguste Comte and Positivism , 88.
169 . Pickering, C omte, 566.
170 . Comte, A uguste Comte and Positivism , 56.
406 Chapter 05
German Indologists alone rather than by general consensus (as the strict defi ni-
tion of “successful prediction” requires), there is still a problem. We might imagine
a situation in which German Indologists sat around in circles and narrated stories
of Brahmanic corruption and mendacity; these could even take the form of predic-
tions to which everyone assembled gave their assent, hence ensuring the “predicative
success” criterion was met. But even then, they would at best be verifying empirical
statements but p recisely not the law from which their discipline draws its character of
a science. Schürmann writes:
Prediction is based on laws. How is a statement like the following to be veri-
fi ed: “When a moving body is not acted upon by external forces, its direction will
remain constant”? It is one thing to verify a statement like: “Th ere is a parade
on 5th Avenue.” It is another thing to verify these laws on which prediction is
based. Scientifi c statements imply an indefi nite number of cases. If the positiv-
ist is consistent, then any single case in the future can falsify such a statement.
What would be needed is a fact that can verify n ow the future truth of that gen-
eral scientifi c statement—obviously an impossibility. Th us the problem that the
positivist faces is whether to consider any scientifi c statement meaningful. It
would be so—according to the verifi cation principle—if it could be verifi ed. But
can an experiment, or my experience, tell me anything about the future? By rigor-
ous application of the verifi cation principle, a statement of prediction has to be
meaningless. 171
What can be done? If the law is to govern an indefi nite and infi nite number of cases
in the future, then how can a statement such as “Brahmans always corrupt texts”
be verifi ed here and now? Clearly, when posed in this way, the statement loses its
appearance of a positivist, empirically verifi able claim and becomes the expression of
a religious point of view. But even religious points of view must be capable of being
subject to criteria for validity, if they are not to be dogmatic claims. Here is where the
notion of falsifi ability or defeasibility comes in.
In Schürmann’s view, the only person to draw the correct conclusion from the
impossibility of prediction as a criterion for a scientifi c theory was Popper:
More hardcore positivists stick to the axiom: if a statement is not conclusively veri-
fi able in principle, then it is not a proposition, i.e. meaningful. Positivists who did
not want to abandon the verifi cation principle have therefore proposed a compro-
mise: there are strong and weak forms of the verifi cation principle. Th e weak form
says that statements must be verifi able “in principle”; they must be ‘capable’ of veri-
fi cation. Th ey must be confi rmed in some degree by the observation of something
physical. With this concession, the most important point of the theory, the strict
adherence to data of experience, suff ers a defeat. It is Popper who has drawn the
appropriate consequence, namely the trial-character of statements. As far as the
171 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 16.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 407
instrumentation is concerned, it cannot rest on positive statements alone. It makes
the principle of verifi cation impossible.1 72
Following Popper’s move from a verifi cation principle to a falsifi cation principle, it
becomes a simple matter to test a theory for its scientifi city. Scientifi c statements,
according to Popper, are capable of falsifi cation: it suffi ces to demonstrate just one
instance of ~p, to set aside the theory that p. Likewise, it suffi ces to demonstrate one
instance where Brahmans have not corrupted a text to defeat the German view that
Brahmans always corrupt texts. But once one does this, two hundred years of German
Mahābhārata scholarship collapses like a house of cards, for it is based on the premise
that there was a militaristic Āryan epic that was later corrupted by Brahmans. What
can be done to salvage this legacy? Schürmann writes:
In predictions we are in fact always working with a defi nite picture of society, which
positivism must pretend to set aside. Th ere is always a pre-understanding of social
realities at work when predictions are attempted. But the back-and-forth between
an anticipated totality and a single present case is precisely one way of describing
dialectics. Here, then, it is only dialectics that can solve the problem. Dialectical
thinking cannot o ppose present and future. Th e future is a possibility, [and,] as
such[,] ‘real’ in the form of an anticipated totality. 173
Th us, there is always the option that the German Indologist will acknowledge his
historical conditioning, that he is working with a defi nite picture of society, as
Schürman puts it. Th e back-and-forth between the anticipated totality (his assump-
tions regarding Indian tradition) and the single present case proves to be such that it
is susceptible to correction and this precisely in the course of such a back-and-forth.
In this case, there can be no opposition between present and future, because the
present (the text currently being researched) and the future (the anticipated conclu-
sion) are both open to each other. But this would mean precisely abandoning the
artifi cial walls German Indologists erect between the Indian past and the present,
between the pure text and its reception in Indian history, and between themselves
and the Indian tradition. One can see the problems this positivistic demand for pre-
dictability places on the philologist, especially if he rejects the Wirkungsgeschichte of
ideas in the culture that produces the texts. Th e German Indologist does himself no
favor by claiming that he has neither expertise nor interest in the evolution of ideas
in the commentarial or textual traditions.
Challenged in this way, the Indologist may fall back on the old defense “but the
Indians are metaphysical!” Hanneder, for example, compares the pandit to a theolo-
gian for whom his subject “will always be more than ‘just’ a topic for research” and
points out that his profi ciency in a subject “is often coupled . . . with a certain way of
life.” 174 But against Hanneder, it is important to note that positivism itself entails a
172 . Ibid., 17.
173 . Ibid. (Schürmann’s emphasis).
174 . Hanneder, Review of Th e Pandit , 672.
408 Chapter 05
metaphysics. Th e criticism of positivism at this level is twofold. One is subtle and yet
essential, the other obvious and more empirical. First, the subtle criticism:
Something non-empirical has to be assumed in any form of positivism. Usually, this
is the formal realm of logic and math. Th is already falls outside the verifi cation prin-
ciple. But the equation “real = empirically verifi able” is itself metaphysical: a claim
about the nature of things. Th e verifi cation principle is itself unverifi able, it is a
metaphysical assumption. 175
Th e second criticism is especially relevant to the study of Indology:
Th e metaphysical option—since that is what is at stake—can perhaps best be
described in reference to language. In so-called observation statements, language
supposedly accurately refl ects the facts. Th is is . . . old hat for philosophers, called
the correspondence theory of truth. Except that no previous philosopher had been
so uncritical of this theory as the positivists: philosophers had always felt the neces-
sity to go into some pains to establish how such correspondence is at all possible.
Prior to modernity, it was made possible by the “divine bridge” between the mind
and the outside fact; after Descartes and Kant, by the simultaneous formal consti-
tution of subject and object. But in positivism these considerations are explicitly
rejected as non-scientifi c—depriving therefore positivism itself of one of its most
solemnly invoked bases. How can we at all circumscribe (demarcate) the realm in
which positive knowledge obtains? Only by an act other than such knowledge—
“thinking” or rational belief. 176
What are we to make of the claims of the German Sanskritist who places extreme
faith in lexica rather than in experiences that have defi ned and shaped the reception
of the text? Th e epic itself, through a series of literary tricks, overcomes this criticism
in its narrative and didactics. Th e most important motif is the erasure of boundar-
ies between reality and textuality: Vyāsa, the author, is also the progenitor of its
main characters. Th us reality is fi rst raised to a narrative level, and it is this n arrative
that is narrated by the epic. 177 In so doing, the entire metaphysics of the relationship
between spatiotemporal events and language is sublated: the world itself is now a
literary creation. Spatiotemporal reality is not the original of which the narrative
is a copy, a fact that German Indology misses in order to keep itself relevant. Th us,
one may extrapolate an external world from the narrative, but in doing so, a scholar
175 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 17.
176 . Ibid., 18 (Schürmann’s emphasis).
177 . One could object that the outer frames are a late invention. Th is ignores the con-
tribution of the Sukthankar edition, which demonstrates convincingly, on the basis of the
manuscript evidence, the basic contours of the oldest possible archetype. One need not
follow the Indologist into his dream world of a K ṣatriya Urepos; it suffi ces to point out
that even in the innermost narrative, the Vaiśampāyana narrative, a dialogic, retelling sub-
structure, endures throughout the epic. Hiltebeitel has profi tably read the epic by paying
attention to such literary tropes.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 409
ceases to be a scholar and becomes a dreamer. He, too, fi nds the boundaries between
reality and textuality fuzzy, but both reality and textuality are now lost in an extrapo-
lated, imaginary realm. Th e concrete text at hand is no longer the locus of operation
for such a scholar. Other literary tropes abound in a textual approach to the reality of
Becoming, and this is seen in the way certain set themes (sacrifi ce, genealogy, war,
and cosmology) are wrested from their straightforward functions as descriptions of
events and become leitmotifs for certain ideas. Th us the war is not just a war but a
sacrifi ce, a fi nal apocalyptic event in cosmology, and a crisis in genealogy. Th e epic,
through working out the possibilities of various genera of Becoming, thus re-creates
a textual universe, and it is this textually created universe that is then subjected to
analysis. When one reads the epic as a textbook of ancient history, one fi nds such
perplexities as Aśoka as Duryodhana or Buddha as Aśvatthāman (Holtzmann), a
monstrous chaos (Oldenberg), Brahmanical tampering (any one of the Indologists
cited), and so on. Th is is not to say that there is no historical information contained
in the text. Th ere are descriptions of landscapes, fl ora, and fauna, as well as refer-
ences to other texts, but these are present as simulacra, not as testimonies.
Philosophers in the twentieth century have become suspicious of the grand claims
of positivism to being an objective science. As Schürmann notes, “Th e extreme short-
coming of positivism can be summarized by the observation that general scientifi c
statements are impossible to verify; and mere falsifi cation does not produce knowl-
edge. Th e metaphysical option for the positivist can only be balanced by a theory
of how universals are always involved in any process of observation. Such a theory
is precisely transcendental criticism. Th us whereas the tenet of verifi cation made
hermeneutics necessary and that of prediction, dialectics, the option for the positive
makes something like transcendental philosophy necessary—Kant.” 178 Schürmann
thus lists three objections to positivism: it is subjectless, it is ahistorical, and it is
literally a thoughtless view of the world. 179
178 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 18.
179 . Ibid., 18. Th ese criticisms were already anticipated in the work of Kierkegaard, who,
against the philosophy of Hegel drew attention to the problems with Hegel’s notion of
objective truth. In his C oncluding Unscientifi c Postscript , Kierkegaard insisted upon the sub-
jective nature of truth against both Hegel and Kant, a criticism that was to be extremely
infl uential for existentialist and twentieth-century Continental philosophies. Against
the idea that truth is possessed in the form of propositions, Kierkegaard emphasizes the
notions of subjectivity, of interiority, of conscience, and of the situatedness of the exis-
tent individual. He argues that speculative thought (principally Hegel’s but Kierkegaard’s
critique is also applicable to historical speculation) forgets the existent individual from
whom all thought proceeds. Instead of taking this subjective situatedness into consider-
ation, in speculative thought the subject attempts to rise above his subjective condition
and set himself above all history. What holds for Christianity also holds for all theologies,
including the theology that has become successful under the name of “German Indology.”
In the history of thought, Kierkegaard’s critique of Hegelian speculative metaphysics was
enormously infl uential. It not only infl uenced philosophers such as Heidegger and Sartre
but also theologians such as Tillich. Kierkegaard’s criticism is relevant here because it illus-
trates the absurdity of a science that attempts to construct objective histories of Indian
literature, while leaving out the subjective relationship to this literature. As a fi rst step,
410 Chapter 05
It is partly in response to these criticisms of the positivistic notion of truth that
German philosophy in the early twentieth century began to turn away from the natu-
ral sciences as a model for the Geisteswissenschaften . Knowledge in the humanities
could not approximate the methodological ideal of the natural sciences. More impor-
tant, this ideal was shown to be a false ideal and a misunderstanding of the task
of the humanities. But before we study this turn in twentieth-century Continental
philosophy, it is important to return one last time to Kant, from whom the “critical
project” of Western philosophy—and, by extension, philology—took its inspiration.
KANT’S CRITICAL TURN AND THE SIGNIFICANCE
OF APRIORISM
Since we began this engagement with the scientifi c character of Indology in the intro-
duction with a discussion of its “critical” potential, it is only appropriate that, at the
end of this engagement, we return to that question. We had begun with the observa-
tion that most Indologists seek to justify their work in terms of its critical character.
We examined three notions of critique or criticism: critique in the sense of an inquiry
that takes a critical stance toward its objects, critique in the strict Kantian sense of a
self-refl exive turn to the a priori categories of the understanding through which we
organize the contents of experience, and critique in the sense of textual criticism. We
found that the last two of these did not apply to Indology and that when Indologists
used the terms “critical” or “critique” what they basically meant was any generalized
suspicion toward authority. In the meanwhile, it has become clear that this suspicion
was not scientifi cally grounded. Indeed, the texts of the Indologists we studied shows
Kierkegaard distinguishes “historical truth” from “philosophical truth” and “eternal truth.”
Since German Indologists explicitly and repeatedly pooh-pooh the notions of philosophi-
cal truth and eternal truth, only the fi rst enters consideration here. However, as we have
seen the fi rst is not available to the Indologists, who were not interested in historical inves-
tigations per se, but in a metanarrative of history. Indeed, even if we accept that Indology
was interested in the historical truth, according to Kierkegaard, the subjective individual’s
relationship to historical truth cannot be one of noting some datum; it must be one of
“inwardness” and “possession.” Further, as Kierkegaard points out, the “existing subjective
thinker” is “just as negative as positive, has just as much of the comic as he essentially has
of pathos, and is continually in a process of becoming, that is, striving.” In other words, he
is as much a part of the process of becoming he seeks to grasp. Finally, there is the problem
that of the three sources of knowledge possible from a positivistic perspective—sensa-
tion, historical record, and speculation—the fi rst two are ruled out. (Sensation requires
that the Indologist be cotemporal with the events he wishes to study, which is impossible
in the case of ancient events, and the criterion for historical record is also not met in the
case of German Indologists, who possessed no actual archaeological or historical records.
Th eir information was largely derived from texts and hence properly falls in the domain of
philosophical knowledge). Further, even where historical knowledge was available, it is, as
Kierkegaard notes, at best “approximation-knowledge.” Th at is to say, we can assume that
this inscription can be dated to this period or that such-and-such a king was responsible
for it, but our knowledge is at best only an approximation. Th is leaves us the category of
speculation, to which, properly speaking, all Indological knowledge belongs. Such knowl-
edge, of course, is a “phantom,” as Kierkegaard notes.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 411
that their work was justifi ed more often in terms of an ideology of critique rather than
anything concretely critical about it.
Since this ideology of critique ultimately, if implicitly, derives from Kant (more
precisely, from the enormous historical infl uence of his idea of critical philoso-
phy), 180 we should look at how the critical project of Indology relates to that of Kant.
Specifi cally, we should look to see whether the Indologists may fi nd some episte-
mological grounding in Kant’s idea of a science built up out of a priori propositions.
Even though positivism itself failed to account suffi ciently for the allegedly scientifi c
character of the discipline, Indologists may maintain that, unlike the commentarial
tradition, their science is presuppositionless . It begins neither from revealed truths
nor from precepts handed down by the tradition. Yet, if the Indologist gathers his
data neither from sense experience nor from an exegetical tradition, his science must
consist of a priori propositions. It would have to be a strictly logical, deductive enter-
prise. Indologists could then claim that what guarantees scientifi city to Indology is
the rational, self-evident character of its truths. Th ese truths can then be used as as
criteria to discriminate or critically distinguish between the propositions of the tra-
dition, thus fulfi lling Indology’s promise of off ering a critical canon.
But although apriorism initially appears to off er a solution to Indology’s prob-
lem of self-justifi cation, this solution also runs quickly into problems. To begin with,
the notion of the a priori has undergone a signifi cant change since Kant, who, as
Schürmann notes, “fi xes defi nitively on the notion of the a priori:”1 81
A posteriori knowledge is that which has its origin in experience, sense experi-
ence. “A priori modes of knowledge are entitled pure when there is no admixture
of anything empirical” (KrV Intro, B 3). Th us there are things that we do know a
priori, for Kant, i.e. that we know “independently from experience and with clarity
and certainty.” Th is is opposed to inductive knowledge in which one can only reach
“assumed and comparative universality” (ibid.). In a priori knowledge, on the con-
trary, we possess modes of knowledge that are universal and necessary. 182
Kant’s genius consists, on the one hand, of his rejection of metaphysics and all dog-
matic claims to authority of uncritical knowledge, while on the other hand r ationally
grounding philosophy . He is able to do this by undertaking a critical rather than an
empirical turn. In doing so, he turns to the s ubject , not the o bject , of all sense experi-
ence. According to Kant, the mind can only know itself, it can discover only what it
projects, and all knowledge outside the domain of the subject’s a priori logical consti-
tution is a mere H erumtappen.1 83
180 . For a good overview of the historical infl uence of Kant’s conception of K ritik , see
Historisches Wörterbuch der Philosophie , s.v. “Kritik”; see especially pp. 1267–82 (“Der
Begriff der K. von Kant bis zur Gegenwart”).
181 . Schürmann, “Methodology of the Social Sciences,” 12.
182 . Ibid.
183 . Th at is, a groping or blundering about (especially in the dark). Th e expression is
from the Preface to Kant’s Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View , where he writes
that if the local knowledge provided by the specialized sciences is not ordered and directed
412 Chapter 05
Th is is where German philology, especially Indology, and German philosophy
begin to part ways. For Kant, what is a priori is precisely not what is intuited through
sense experience about the external world. Rather, the critical turn, as understood
by Kant, implies a turn from the objects of experience to the subjective conditions
under which those objects are known. Kant’s famous “Copernican turn” marks pre-
cisely a turn away from the kind of naïve faith in appearances German Indologists
manifest when they argue, as Slaje does in a recent article, that Indology as “the
disciplinary eff ort at knowledge, description, and analysis of the autonomous Indian
Logos” must seek “with the help of” “textbook-ready factual knowledge” to “project
a general overview” that “views the great and continuous lines of the spiritual world
of this culture . . . as they manifest themselves to us .”1 84
Slaje would receive no sympathy from Kant: the reliance upon mere appearance
is precisely what Kant considers uncritical about ancient philosophy. 185 Kant would
argue that the method of separating “original” from “later” layers of texts is a criti-
cism in the phenomenon, and thus a H erumtappen. It is hardly a “critical enterprise,”
a term he reserves for the study of the a priori structure of the subject of experi-
ence. Further, if we bear in mind that the texts in question are characterized by the
fact that they relate to the experience of distant cultures, the philologist’s use of the
term c ritical loses the force of Kant’s scientifi c project. As for the myths of original
Germans in India, a Protestant Enlightenment in India called Buddhism, what would
Kant call these but the “Dreams of a Ghost Seer”? In any event, contemporary phi-
lologists such as Slaje and Bronkhorst are anxious to bring the textual project out
of India and closer to home, and their claims for Enlightenment are based on a con-
fused understanding of European “critical consciousness” on which they wish to base
Indology as a rigorous science of their own self, namely, Europe.1 86
Th e parting of ways between philosophy and philology becomes increasingly glar-
ing in Germany. Philosophers in Germany develop from Kant’s c ritical philosophy to
phenomenology . Th is coincides with German Idealism: Fichte, Hegel, and Schelling.
Indologists, on the other hand, still call their work “critical.” We raise this point to
underscore how German Indology became an isolated, outdated niche in the richer
and larger arena of German intellectual life. After Hegel’s lectures on history, phi-
lologists no longer developed newer intellectual perspectives and approaches. Th ey
aff ected embarrassment with Schopenhauer’s Romantic encounter with Indian
philosophy, and they ignored the criticisms leveled against philology by Nietzsche.
Twentieth-century philosophies, which take a rich textual turn (Arendt: narrative,
through philosophy, it can yield nothing more than “fragmentary groping around and no
science [fragmentarisches Herumtappen und keine Wissenschaft]” (7: 120).
184 . Walter Slaje, “Was ist und welchem Zwecke dient die Indologie?,” 324 (italics added).
185 . Whether correctly or incorrectly is a separate matter and is not to be debated here.
186 . Th ere is one place where Kant w ould provide room for an encounter with the other
in a scientifi c way, and that is contained in the C ritique of Judgment . Since no Indologist
seems to have availed himself of the aesthetic categories contained within it, we leave it out
of the discussion.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 413
Gadamer: hermeneutics), are completely ignored. German Indology appears stunted
not from an Indian perspective (indeed, it is our claim here that Indology had supris-
ingly little to do with India 187 ); rather, German Indology is woefully out of step
with intellectual currents within Germany and, by geographical extension, Europe.
Th at the Enlightenment itself, from which Indology feigns to draw its theoretical
ideals, has come under severe criticism either does not bother the Indologist, or he is
unaware of it. “We philologists are keepers of the torch of Enlightenment, and guard-
ians against dogmatism,” one hears.1 88 In any event, the p ractical aspect of teaching
Indians how to read their own texts takes on a tragic note when German Indologists
refuse to read contemporary German texts in philosophy and philosophy of science.
Th ese texts have, unbeknownst to them, completely eroded their theoretical founda-
tions. In the next section, we shall look at how Continental philosophers, especially
German philosophers, begin to turn away from the ideal of method as the guarantor
and embodiment of scientifi city in the humanities, and to turn toward truth . In this
turn, an engagement with Gadamer is unavoidable.1 89
RETHINKING THE SCIENTIFIC CHARACTER
OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES
Th roughout most of this book, we have inquired into the praxis of text-historical
research. Praxis, unlike theory, is circumscribed: thus in place of general claims,
we have focused on just one text, the Mahābhārata, and, even more specifi cally, on
the Bhagavadgītā. Th e temporal focus of research (Gītā interpretations between
the two world wars) provided further defi nition to this study, although the story
of this research required us to reach back into its own history to clarify important
issues. Th e central question guiding this study is this: in what sense is text-historical
research a science? Our research showed that none of the criteria germane to natural
187 . Th is claim has of course been made before, above all by Inden. See his lucid and
persuasive account in Ronald B. Inden, Imagining India (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 2000).
188 . Bronkhorst’s recent essay “Indology, What Is It Good For?” provides a paradigmatic
example of such wishful thinking. He writes: “However, not only do disciplines like Indology
need Enlightenment values, Enlightenment values also need disciplines like Indology. Th e
two need each other, their dependence is reciprocal. In other words, if we wish to maintain
and strengthen a society in which the values enumerated above have a place, we need to
maintain and strengthen disciplines like Indology.” Johannes Bronkhorst, “Indology, What
Is It Good For?” Z eitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 161, no. 1 (2011): 122.
189 . Th e signifi cance of Gadamer’s work for Indian studies has been evaluated earlier
by Richard King, though from another perspective (see his Orientalism and Religion cited
earlier, esp. c hapter 3). King is more interested in using Gadamer to show how every inter-
pretation remains embedded in its historical context; his work is thus a contribution to
(the formation of) an anti-essentialist, anti-Orientalist discourse on Indian texts or cul-
tural practices. However, we are more interested here in using Gadamer to critical illu-
mine Indology’s claim to being part of the human sciences, especially insofar as that claim
invokes an understanding of scientifi c method that the human sciences themselves found
problematic and turned away from. Th e problem for us is not of the colonial or noncolonial
nature of Indology, but of its nonscientifi c nature.
414 Chapter 05
sciences holds for text-historical scholarship: neither self-evident and indisputable
hypotheses, nor bracketing of subjective feelings, nor universal methods that can
be objectively formulated, nor consensus among experts, nor universal and binding
fi ndings, nor pragmatic application, nor even relevance to laypersons—none of these
informs this praxis.
For the sake of understanding the praxis, in the preceding sections we traced
the theoretical background and the issues surrounding text-historical methods. At
least in the case of the Bhagavadgītā, we found that some elements of positivism did
inform text-historical method, but incompletely so. Beyond positivism, European
thought made great advances in theoretical models for inquiry into research in the
humanities. Hegel’s phenomenology, Marx’s dialectics, and Freud’s psychoanalytic
method are the most dominant examples of useful models into research in social
sciences. German Indology remains uninformed of these avenues of intellectual
progress. We now propose to turn away from method, suggest that hermeneutics
constitutes the best candidate for research into Indological research, and with that
conclude this section on theoretical aspects in methodology. In our quest for a
reformed, contextually sensitive, and historically appropriate ( zeitgemäße ) Indology,
we bring nineteenth- and twentieth-century Indology into a dialogue with one of the
major fi gures of twentieth-century Continental philosophy: Hans-Georg Gadamer.
In the fi rst section of his T ruth and Method , “Th e Problem of Method,” Gadamer
turns his attention to the humanistic tradition in search of nonmethodological ave-
nues to truth. As Weinsheimer describes the situation: “If Gadamer does not begin
(or end) with a defi nition of method but rather proceeds to the history of humanistic
alternatives, that is in part because history is itself the alternative to method.” 190
Gadamer does not engage with method but fi nds an alternative to it, because just
as “methodical proof calls a halt to history and obviates any further need to con-
sult tradition as a source of knowledge, so also art, philosophy, history—tradition
generally—challenge the universality and exhaustiveness of method as the exclusive
means whereby knowledge worthy of being called true is disclosed.” 191 Gadamer is
dissatisfi ed with the sovereignty of method for several reasons.
Method is an inappropriate tool for understanding truth in humanistic tradi-
tion. Th is implies “fi rst, that method lies outside the humanistic tradition. Second,
it implies, albeit indirectly, that method, and specifi cally the method of the natu-
ral sciences, has no history: that it sprang full-blown from the heads of Bacon and
Descartes and has not altered signifi cantly since then.” 192 Rorty works out Gadamer’s
insight that the domination of method has epistemology as its goal, namely, secur-
ing stable foundations of knowledge. If this goal is translated into that subject in
the humanities we call philology, it manifests itself in an obsessive, method-driven
190 . Joel Weinsheimer, G adamer’s Hermeneutics: A Reading of Truth and Method (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), 1–2.
191 . Ibid., 2.
192 . Ibid.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 415
production of “critical” editions. 193 Th is has an unanticipated side eff ect: Fremdheit or
alienation. As Gadamer notes,
As the foreignness which the age of mechanics felt towards nature as the natural
world has its epistemological expression in the concept of self-consciousness and in
the methodologically developed rule of certainty, of “clear and distinct perception,”
so also the human sciences of the nineteenth century felt a comparable foreignness
to the historical world. Th e spiritual creations of the past, art and history, no longer
belong to the self-evident domain of the present but rather are objects relinquished
to research, data from which a past allows itself to be represented. 194
German Indology, to be sure, inverts this relationship and views India’s own unfold-
ing history as meaningless and favors instead an abstractly conceived fetish his-
tory: a history of untrustworthy historiography. From this fetish history, numerous
constructs were made, such as the decline of the hypermasculine Āryan warrior and
Brahmanical wrongdoing. Th ese two fantasies serve as more historically objective to
German Indology than the painful and brutal colonizations by Islamic and European
forces. Even on this fetish level, Gadamer is still correct: anxieties of Fremdheit
remain, and the Āryan brotherhood theme, although now defunct and glossed over
in silence, is present to assure the German scholar that he is indeed a participant
in India’s history, albeit in some unthematized way. Clearly, the German Indologist
will neither affi rm the Āryan hypothesis nor concede that he is no diff erent from
a scholar from France or the United States. But Gadamer is making a much bigger
case: “ Fremdheit consists in the schism between past and present, I and others, self
and world. Method derives from this sense of living among objects to which one no
longer belongs.” 195 With the rise of a historical method , one becomes “stranded in the
present.” 196 We may summarize the problems with positivism from a Gadamerian
perspective thus:
1. Method is engineered to avoid “stumbling.” Th is is not a banal point.
As Weinsheimer notes, “Mistakes are precluded by method because the
193 . A critical edition, when carried out correctly, can have considerable value. It can help
clarify the transmission of the text or help attain the oldest state of the text, the so-called
archetype. But as we have seen, in the case of German Mahābhārata and Bhagavadgītā
scholarship, the Indologists’ editions were not critical editions in the technical sense of the
term where it refers to an edition based on systematic recensio and genealogical analysis.
On the contrary, they elevated prejudices about the tradition to fi rst principles and pro-
ceeded to reconstruct the texts on the basis of these subjective impressions. In general, the
principles of critical editing are badly understood and the expression itself irresponsibly
applied by the majority of German Indological authors, as we discuss in our forthcoming
book, Philology and Criticism: A Guide to Mahābhārata Textual Criticism . For other examples
of infl ation in the use of the term, see the recent “critical” edition of the Mok ṣopāya, in
reality nothing of the kind.
194 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , 61.
195 . Weinsheimer, G adamer’s Hermeneutics , 4.
196 . Peter Fritsche, Stranded in the Present: Modern Time and the Melancholy of History
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004), 79.
416 Chapter 05
methodologically controlled mind is aware of its position at all times, knows its
origin and the rules that govern its progress; and therefore the end of method is
clear and distinct, because the steps of derivation can be retraced, reconstructed
and rechecked at will. Truths accidentally known, as irregular and unrepeatable,
are therefore essentially unfounded; and what is not founded by method, what
is not repeatable, is suspect. Th us, as method becomes the criterion of truth,
history (itself essentially unrepeatable) becomes increasingly unnecessary (W M
329, TM 311)”.1 97
2. Th e relationship of the method to its practitioners becomes one of Master
Method/Slave Scholar. By claiming universality, method gathers under its domin-
ion all that can truly be said to be. “In methodological universalism, there is a
distinct exaggeration of sovereignty—of its claim to control what occurs to us
and in our world, to control history, and especially to control truth. Th e ambi-
tion of method, in Bacon’s words, is to ‘extend the empire of man over things,’ to
‘exercise over the nature of things the authority which properly belongs’ to the
mind. Th e peculiar sycophancy of method as Bacon conceives it is that precisely
by submitting the mind to the show of things, which Bacon calls the ‘humilia-
tion of the human spirit,’ the mind achieves dominion.”1 98 Note that this collusion
between knowledge and power goes beyond merely method and applies more gen-
erally to epistemology as well. Th is was worked out in great detail by Foucault 199
and applied specifi cally to humanistic discourses of the other by Said. 200 Pollock
exposes these dynamics in the context of German Indology. 201 Although there are
protests against Pollock, a brief glance at the attunement of German Indologists
toward Indian scholarly history is suffi cient to prove Pollock’s point.
3. Scientifi city begs the question. Gadamer writes that “even modern historical,
and scientifi c consciousness—is governed by eff ective-historical determinations,
and that beyond any possible knowledge of being so governed. Th e historically
eff ected consciousness is fi nite in so radical [a] sense that our being, eff ected by
the whole of our history, essentially far surpasses the knowledge of itself.” 202 Th e
197 . Weinsheimer, G adamer’s Hermeneutics , 7. For a counter to the irreversible univer-
salist pretensions of method in ancient Greek philology, see Vishwa Adluri, Parmenides,
Plato and Mortal Philosophy: Return from Transcendence (London: Continuum, 2011). In this
book, the author has argued that every human life is singular and unsubsumable under
linguistic categories. Likewise, in the Gītā, Arjuna raises the question of singulars , those
mortals he can name, whom he loves, and whom he must kill (Bhagavadgītā 2.4). Th us
this work is aware of the limitations of history and is concerned not with “secure facts”
but with ultimate concerns. By exploring phenomena such as erōs, salvation, initiation, and
pedagogy, this work articulates an alternative approach in philology, one that truly takes
history in terms of singulars. Th e alternative, as Gadamer shows, is not to have a history
at all but simply generalizations and phantasms such as the “cunning Brahman” or the
“shrewd Jew.”
198 . Weinsheimer, G adamer’s Hermeneutics , 8.
199 . Michel Foucault, P ower/Knowledge (New York: Vintage, 1980).
200 . Edward Said, Orientalism (New York: Vintage, 1979).
201 . Pollock, “Deep Orientalism?”
202 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , xxx–xxxi.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 417
mind thus does not account for itself; our scientifi c objectivity is far from indubi-
table. Overarching historical determinations manifest as self-evident truths, and
this has been proven beyond doubt in the prejudices that handicapped the schol-
ars whose philological work we discussed in the preceding chapters of this work.
Th ese are some of the reasons for Gadamer’s dissatisfaction with method-based
approaches to humanities. Let us now turn our attention to key sections within Truth
and Method , where he retrieves an alternative approach to humanities—p hilosophical
hermeneutics —by undertaking a critique of Enlightenment.
German Indology closely follows the Enlightenment in forging an irrational sus-
picion of authority and an exaggerated optimism concerning method into a science.
Already in Romanticism, according to Gadamer, there was an implicit and nuanced
criticism of Enlightenment. In contrast to the latter’s emphasis on rationalism and
science, Romanticism valorized the world of myth. Th is world was supposedly lost
to the Enlightenment’s desire for scientifi c progress. However, as Gadamer sees it,
Romanticism, even though critical of the Enlightenment, ends up implicitly adopt-
ing the very scheme it criticizes, namely, the conquest of myth by logos . Romanticism
shares “the presupposition of the Enlightenment and only reverses its values, seek-
ing to establish the validity of what is old simply on the fact that it is old: the ‘gothic’
Middle Ages, the Christian European community of states, the permanent structure
of society, but also the simplicity of peasant life and closeness to nature.” To this list,
Gadamer could have added, had he been aware of German Indology, the “heroic” Āryan
past, the knightly deeds of the Ks ̣atriya warriors, the noble simplicity of their ethical
and philosophical outlook, and so on. As a discipline, German Indology is so much a
child of its time that Gadamer’s philosophical analysis of European Geistesgeschichte
can be applied one-to-one to understand Indology’s historical evolution.
German Indologists, of course, are embarrassed by their Romantic inheritance, and
some such as Garbe and Oldenberg made serious eff orts to deny it. 203 Even today, most
historical accounts by Indologists invoke the scheme of Romantic enthusiasm for India
being replaced by a critical, distanced, and self-refl exive science. However, the critical
aspects of this science are directed more against what it sees as rival sources of author-
ity (e.g., Brahmans, or native traditions of interpretation) and less against a fundamen-
tal premise of Romanticism: this is the tendency toward restoration. Th is restorative
tendency takes the forms of a “tendency to reconstruct the old because it is old, the
conscious return to the unconscious, culminating in the recognition of the superior
wisdom of the primeval age of myth.” 204 Th us, the German Indologists surveyed are
203 . Garbe, without specifying his precise targets, wrote: “Th e period, in which the Bhag.,
because of its sublimity of its thoughts and its language, stimulated nothing but enthusi-
asm and delight in Europe, are long past. We have—apart from [a few] fantastic theoso-
phists like Franz Hartmann and other such enthusiasts [Schwärmer]—become more sober
and critical and do not close our eyes to the obvious failings and weaknesses of the poem.”
Garbe, D ie Bhagavadgîtâ , 11–12. For Oldenberg’s criticisms of Schlegel, see Oldenberg,
“Ueber Sanskritforschung,” 391 (quoted earlier).
204 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , 275.
418 Chapter 05
not satisfi ed with reading the epic as it exists or as it is available in any of its manu-
scripts, irrespective of whether these are nineteenth-century, eighteenth-century, or
even fourteenth- or fi fteenth-century manuscripts. In the case of the Gītā, the text
is attested to at least since Śam ̇kara’s eighth-century commentary, but even this does
not satisfy the Indologist. In a refl ection of the Romantic longing for the origin, he
seeks the Ur-Gītā. Meanwhile, the wisdom of later commentators is discarded as
interpolation, while one seeks the superior wisdom of a heroic Āryan past, which the
Indologist fails to realize is but a projection of his own longings. 205 Th e Romantic rever-
sal of the Enlightenment’s criteria, as Gadamer notes, ends up actually “perpetuat[ing]
the abstract contrast between myth and reason.”2 06 But this is no objection to the
Indologist, who, of course, needs this contrast to sustain his self-image. Th us, whereas
the Romanticists felt close to the pristine cultures and religions they sought and found
in the texts of antiquity, the Indologist paradoxically both longs for the old a nd feels
compelled to distance himself from it. Two examples: Holtzmann wanted to both
reconstruct the ancient heroic epic with all its bloodlusts and raw passion and to fuse
this with the enlightened Protestant outlook he found in Buddhism. Hauer likewise
sought to fi nd the contours of the old Indo-Āryan race and their metaphysics of battle
and action but cautioned that importing Indian ideas to Europe would be a problem.
Th e solution, a wesensgerechte Erforschung , was supposed to mediate between these
contradictory requirements of a past that is valorized both as near to the present and
yet utterly unlike it. Th e German Indologist wanted to exist in two cultures at once: the
ancient India of his fantasy and his modern present, where he could feel secure of him-
self as enlightened, progressive, secular, and scientifi c.
Romanticism critiques historicism by valorizing myth. Th e Indologist valorizes
historicism by discovering myth, paradigmatically present to him in the writings
of non-European cultures who were allegedly not critical enough to distinguish
between history and myth. In Romanticism, there is a presupposition “of a mysteri-
ous darkness in which there was a mythical collective consciousness that preceded
all thought.” Gadamer fi nds this presupposition to be “as dogmatic and abstract as
that of a state of perfect enlightenment or of absolute knowledge. Primeval wisdom
is only the counterimage of ‘primeval stupidity.’ ” 207
205 . Th e Indologists w ere able, after a fashion, to fi nd the more original or more ancient
texts posited by them. Th is was only because—to cite Nietzsche’s famous metaphor—they
had already hidden them behind the proverbial bush. Th eir scholarship thus had all the
apodictic value of Nietzsche’s “ ‘Behold, a mammal’.” See Friedrich Nietzsche, “On Truth
and Lying in a Non-Moral Sense,” trans. Ronald Speirs, in Th e Birth of Tragedy and Other
Writings , ed. Raymond Geuss and Ronald Speirs (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1999), 147; the full passage runs: “If someone hides something behind a bush, looks for it
in the same place and then fi nds it there, his seeking and fi nding is nothing much to boast
about; but this is exactly how things are as far as the seeking and fi nding of ‘truth’ within
the territory of reason is concerned. If I create the defi nition of a mammal and then, hav-
ing inspected a camel, declare, ‘Behold, a mammal’, then a truth has certainly been brought
to light, but it is of limited value, by which I mean that it is anthropomorphic through and
through and contains not a single point which could be said to be ‘true in itself’, really and
in a generally valid sense, regardless of mankind.”
206 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , 275.
207 . Ibid., 276.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 419
We have seen throughout this work how German Indologists opposed the “mys-
terious darkness” of Indian antiquity to the perfectly enlightened self-critical aware-
ness of the German scholars. Weber, in his letter to Raumer, in fact, uses these
precise words: “As soon as they [i.e., the Vedas] are unveiled from the mysterious
darkness surrounding them till now . . . and made accessible to all, all the untruths
shall be automatically revealed, and this shall, in time, put an end to the sorry plight
of religious decadence . . . of India.” 208 But what is remarkable is how this perceived
contrast between the primitivism of India and Enlightenment modernity itself
directly engenders the critical task, as voiced by Gadamer:
Th ese romantic revaluations give rise to historical science in the nineteenth cen-
tury. . . . Th e great achievements of romanticism—the revival of the past, the dis-
covery of the voices of the peoples in their songs, the collecting of fairy tales and
legends, the cultivation of ancient customs, the discovery of the worldviews implicit
in languages, the study of the “religious wisdom of India”—all contributed to the
rise of historical research, which was slowly, step by step, transformed from intui-
tive revival into detached historical knowledge. Th e fact that it was romanticism
that gave birth to the historical school confi rms that the romantic retrieval of ori-
gins is itself based on the Enlightenment. Nineteenth-century historiography is its
fi nest fruit and sees itself precisely as the fulfi llment of the Enlightenment, as the
last step in the liberation of the mind from the trammels of dogma, the step to
objective knowledge of the historical world, which stands on a par with the knowl-
edge of nature achieved by modern science.2 09
Here, then, is what Gadamer grants as scientifi c about the human sciences: liberation
of the mind from dogma. Rather than question whether this is a suffi cient criterion
for science, Gadamer rejects the methodology of human sciences and questions the
cognitive value of undoing tradition. Th e Romantic criticism of the Enlightenment is
rejected by philologists, but Gadamer is more sophisticated: he shows that this critique
itself is a continuation of the program Enlightenment sets up for itself. To overcome
Enlightenment and restore tradition, Gadamer rejects the view that all tradition can be
reduced to prejudice, and all prejudices ought to be overcome. As he notes, the “over-
coming of all prejudices, this global demand of the Enlightenment, will itself prove to
be a prejudice.” Th us, a philosophical hermeneutics, according to him, must begin with
“removing it [i.e., this prejudice]” as this “opens the way to an appropriate understand-
ing of the fi nitude which dominates not only our humanity but also our historical con-
sciousness.”2 10 Let us see how this distancing of oneself from the prejudice against all
prejudices simultaneously implies a reinstatement of traditional authority.
Gadamer rejects the notion that we can guard against error, especially by sim-
ply overworking our notion that traditional knowledge, inasmuch as it is unscien-
tifi c, is merely prejudice. He traces the Enlightenment’s prejudice against tradition
to the “mutually exclusive antithesis between authority and reason.” Enlightenment
208 . See his Letter to Karl Otto von Raumer, 12.10.1855 , cited earlier.
209 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , 276–77.
210 . Ibid., 277.
420 Chapter 05
consciousness, the “false prepossession in favor of what is old, in favor of authori-
ties, is what has to be fought.” Explicitly linking itself with to the Reformation, the
Enlightenment sees itself historically as a continuance of Luther’s task: the strug-
gle against authority. “Neither the doctrinal authority of the pope nor the appeal
to tradition can obviate the work of hermeneutics, which can safeguard the reason-
able meaning of a text against all imposition.” 211 But exactly what is entailed in the
hermeneutic task that is engendered by this break? And in what way does German
Indology correctly inherit and interpret this critical inheritance?
A hermeneutic approach to Indian texts such as Gadamer advocates crucially
requires the condition of being open for these texts. Th is is not a trivial point, for it
means not only that one must be open to the traditional self-understanding of these
texts as providing a hermeneutic entrée to them but also that one’s own interpreta-
tion must be informed by philosophical and critical refl ections on the Enlightenment
and its methodological shortcomings. In the case of the Indologists, we see that
neither of these conditions was met: not only were the German scholars we have
discussed not open to the Indian tradition but they also were not self-conscious of
their own tradition. Only in this way could a notion of science, whose origins lay
in nineteenth-century Comtean positivism, come to be identifi ed with science tout
court, while an entire discipline could come to be constituted on the pretext of off er-
ing a postconfessional, postmetaphysical and posttheological access to texts.
But as with any other endeavor constituted on the basis of a repression, this was
to exact a price from German Indology. Freud has shown how repression of a trauma
exacts a price in the form of a neurotic symptom. In the case of German Indology,
the repressed trauma (forgetfulness of its origins in the Neo-Protestantism of the
eighteenth century) returned in the form of an exaggerated and overwrought aff ec-
tation against all forms of religion. Th us scholars such as Hanneder would argue that
whereas Indian scholarship was “religious and confessionally bound,” German schol-
ars were the inheritors of the secular Enlightenment, charged with a “defense of the
achievements of the Enlightenment against religiously determined views that dis-
guise themselves as science.” 212 Th us emerged the picture of Indians as beatifi c yogis
on fl ying carpets, 213 whereas the German Indologist constituted himself as a scien-
tist, critic, rationalist, secularist, and defender of the Enlightenment. 214 What can
be done to help these repressed theologians? Once again, Gadamer off ers a way out:
Th is kind of hermeneutics need not lead to the radical critique of religion that we
found, for example, in Spinoza. Rather, the possibility of supernatural truth can
211 . Ibid., 279.
212 . Hanneder, Marburger Indologie im Umbruch , 87.
213 . For the metaphor and other stereotypes, see ibid., 86.
214 . Ibid., 87, and 81–82. Also see the position paper published by Islamwissenschaftler
(scholars of Islam) in Germany, defending their Islamwissenschaften as “scientifi c” vis-à-vis
plans for a program in Islamic Studies at the universities of Osnbrück and Münster. Th e sig-
natories allege that the latter is a form of “Islamic theology” and is “confessionally bound,”
whereas “Islamwissenschaften is a . . . confessionally neutral discipline.” Hanneder is one of
fi ve Indologists to sign the document (the others are Heidrun Brückner, Andreas Pohlus,
Axel Michaels, and Walter Slaje). “Stellungnahme von Fachvertreterinnen und -vertretern
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 421
remain entirely open. Th us especially in the fi eld of German popular philosophy,
the Enlightenment limited the claims of reason and acknowledged the authority
of Bible and church. We read in Walch, for example, that he distinguishes between
the two classes of prejudice—authority and overhastiness—but considers them two
extremes, between which it is necessary to fi nd the right middle path, namely a
mediation between reason and biblical authority. 215
Th us the hermeneutic approach as applied to the epic seeks to liberate itself from the
faith-reason dichotomy that is misapplied to Indian texts. 216 Th is is because, following
Gadamer, we can reject the applicability of this scheme—typical of the Enlightenment
but nevertheless deeply rooted in Luther2 17 —to the texts of those traditions where
rational soteriology was a real possibility, and where the texts explicitly claim to undertake
the necessary pedagogy through rational means . Lessing’s parable of God off ering a choice
between the whole truth in one hand and eternal striving in the other is unthinkable in
relation to any reasonable god, and the value of rejecting truth for strife sets up an unten-
able opposition between reason and faith—an opposition that is at the root of all fun-
damentalism. Yet, it is this choice that is enshrined in Kierkegaard’s rejection of Hegel’s
Phenomenology and, as we documented, in the case of Holtzmann. Unable to sustain
this either-or of faith and reason, where reason itself is driven by an irrational method-
ological strife, we fi nd in Gadamer’s overcoming of error and fear of prejudice a theoreti-
cally robust approach. Th us we reject the text-historical method in full agreement with
Gadamer’s rejection of Schleiermacher’s approach. In taking over the Enlightenment’s
prejudice against reason, the critic fails to see “that among the prejudices in favor of
authorities there might be some that are true—yet this was implied in the concept of
authority in the fi rst place.” “His [i.e., Schleiermacher’s] alteration of the traditional divi-
sion of prejudices documents the victory of the Enlightenment. Partiality now means
only an individual limitation of understanding: ‘Th e one-sided preference for what is
close to one’s own sphere of ideas.’ ” Th is, however, is not the proper meaning of partiality,
which can also mean a preference for something based on its merits or on a consideration
of it. It is this narrowing down of the concept of partiality that we see at work in German
scholars rejecting traditional commentators b ecause they are traditional . However, that
der Islamwissenschaft und benachbarter akademischer Disziplinen zur Einrichtung des
Faches ‘Islamische Studien’ an deutschen Universitäten,” October 25, 2010 http://www.
dmg-web.de/pdf/Stellungnahme_Islamstudien.pdf .
215 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , 279.
216 . See, for example, Vishwa Adluri, “Frame Narratives and Forked Beginnings: Or,
How to Read the Ādiparvan,” J ournal of Vaishnava Studies 19, no. 2 (2011): 143–210;
and Vishwa Adluri, “Hermeneutics and Narrative Architecture in the Mahābhārata,”
in Ways and Reasons for Th inking about the Mahābhārata as a Whole , ed. Vishwa Adluri
(Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Institute, 2013), 1–27.
217 . See Etienne Gilson, Reason and Revelation in the Middle Ages (New York: Charles
Scribner, 1963) for a superb and concise elaboration of how reason and faith coexisted
in a sophisticated and nuanced relationship to each other throughout the Middle Ages.
Anselm’s credo ut intelligam and fi des quaerens intellectum and St. Augustine’s c rede, ut intel-
ligas emblematically accuse the faith-reason dichotomy both of historical and religious
parochialism, even within Christianity.
422 Chapter 05
the prejudices determining what we think are due to our own partiality is a judgment
based on the standpoint of their having been “dissolved and enlightened, and it holds
only for unjustifi ed prejudices.” If, however, there are “justifi ed prejudices productive of
knowledge,” then the Enlightenment prejudice against prejudice is unjustifi ed and itself
antithetical to knowledge. 218 Th is is why Gadamer rejects the radical consequences of the
Enlightenment as expressed in Schleiermacher’s faith in method as “not tenable.” 219
In a sense, it is this blind faith in reason that ultimately undoes the Enlightenment
in that the Enlightenment succumbs to its own followers. Gadamer notes the pathos
of this situation: the Enlightenment means well,2 20 but it is misguided in its knee-jerk
and extremist iconoclasm. 221
Th e Gadamer reference is relevant because the same iconoclastic rejection of
authority guided early German Orientalists. Ever since Hegel, Orientalist scholars
had considered Indians to be incapable of history. To these writers, the reception
of the Mahābhārata as a theological text off ered confi rmation of Hegel’s suspicions.
India’s lack of historical consciousness, they reasoned, was a direct consequence of
spiritual excesses. Indeed, the absence of historical consciousness could be directly
attributed to the priestly caste’s need to control and to impose their religion on their
naïve followers. Th is suspicion was at the back of Indologists’ claim that “critical”
scholarship into antiquity was both a scientifi c and social desideratum. Th e primary
value of their discipline, as they understood it, was that it provided a check upon
authoritarian excesses, protecting Indians, for example, against the depredations
of a corrupt and power-hungry clergy. Historical-critical research into Indian texts
thus, from the very beginning, carried an ethical imperative along with it. It was
charged not only with the task of enabling a K lärung (clarifi cation) of Indian texts
218 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , 280.
219 . Ibid.
220 . “Th e Enlightenment’s distinction between faith in authority and using one’s own
reason is, in itself, legitimate. If the prestige of authority displaces one’s own judgment,
then authority is in fact a source of prejudices. But this does not preclude its being a source
of truth, and that is what the Enlightenment failed to see when it denigrated all author-
ity. . . . In fact the denigration of authority is not the only prejudice established by the
Enlightenment. It also distorted the very concept of authority. Based on the Enlightenment
conception of reason and freedom, the concept of authority could be viewed as diametri-
cally opposed to reason and freedom: to be, in fact, obedience.” Ibid.
221 . “But this is not the essence of authority. Admittedly, it is primarily persons that
have authority; but the authority of persons is ultimately based not on the subjection and
abdication of reason but on an act of acknowledgment and knowledge—the knowledge,
namely, that the other is superior to oneself in judgment and insight and that for this rea-
son his judgment takes precedence—i.e., it has priority over one’s own. Th is is connected
with the fact that authority cannot actually be bestowed but is earned, and must be earned
if someone is to lay claim to it. It rests on acknowledgment and hence on an act of reason
itself which, aware of its own limitations, trusts to the better insight of others. Authority
in this sense, properly understood, has nothing to do with blind obedience to commands.
Indeed, authority has to do not with obedience but rather with knowledge. It is true that
authority implies the capacity to command and be obeyed. But this proceeds only from the
authority that a person has.” Ibid., 281.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 423
but also that of an A ufklärung (Enlightenment) of the Indian mind. 222 But as laud-
able as the Orientalists’ attempts to induce a second Reformation in India were, they
overlooked a crucial point:
Even the anonymous and impersonal authority of a superior which derives from his
offi ce is not ultimately based on this hierarchy, but is what makes it possible. Here
also its true basis is an act of freedom and reason that grants the authority of a supe-
rior fundamentally because he has a wider view of things or is better informed—
i.e., once again, because he knows more. Th us, acknowledging authority is always
connected with the idea that what the authority says is not irrational and arbitrary
but can, in principle, be discovered to be true. Th is is the essence of the authority
claimed by the teacher, the superior, the expert. 223
In their overly hasty post-Luther, post-Reformation, and post-Enlightenment rejec-
tion of authority, the German Orientalists clearly forgot this legitimate aspect of
tradition. A resurrection of bloodthirsty Āryanism seemed preferable to them than
to countenance legitimate authority. Even if we accept the equation of all priestly
authority with mendacity, one would still have to ask: is Āryan primitivism prefer-
able to clerical authority? Is it therefore not worthwhile, illuminating, and intelligent
to look at the Indian tradition when interpreting Indian texts rather than launch a
campaign of general vilifi cation in the name of a global method and an indefensible
conception of science? Merely attacking Brahmans with the same intensity, for the
same reasons, in the same language, and for the same religious motivations as attack-
ing Catholics in Germany is not science; it is simply self-righteous self-enrichment at
the price of cultural genocide.
But what part of tradition ought we preserve? In the case of Indian epic, the peda-
gogical function stands out. Th ese texts are less a record of power than of philosophy,
and no matter how incestuous that may seem to our cynical ears, we must begin our
journey into a text on its own terms. Much would seem to us foreign, bizarre, or irra-
tional. Th e text is aware of the contingencies of time and worldview and endeavors to
use a sophisticated set of tools to overcome and compensate for “truth leakage” across
history. It does so by selecting its subject matter carefully, by alternating narrative
with didactics, through riddle and humor and enigmatic symbols, and by opposing
222 . See the statements by Goldstücker, already cited throughout this book. And see also
Oldenberg’s remark in his “Ueber Sanskritforschung” that “it was not easy [for European
scholars] to defeat the opposing Brahmanic prejudices [and gain a knowledge of Sanskrit
texts]; to master the hindrances that arose from the unnature [Unnatur] of the indescrib-
ably sophistic and twisted grammatical system of the Indians entailed great diffi culties,
which, however, could be overcome with some patience.” Oldenberg footnoted the words
“indescribably sophistic and twisted grammatical system” with the passage: “Th e origi-
nal lament of the missionary Paulinus S. Bartholomaeo is well known: the Devil, in his
wondrous cunning, has spurred on the Brahman philosophers to invent a language that is
simultaneously so rich and so convoluted that their secrets are hidden not only from the
people [at large], but also from their own students.” Ibid., 388, n. 3.
223 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , 281.
424 Chapter 05
various ideas, worldviews, and philosophies in a literary construction. Th is literary
construction itself has an architectonic that is both stylistic and thematic: composed
of circular and repetitive patterns, returning motifs always slightly modifi ed and
juxtaposed with each other in thoughtful ways, and interspersed with hermeneutic
clues ranging from key experiences (initiation, sacrifi ce) to large narrative constructs
(genealogy, cosmology, war). Th e most profound intellectual experiences are the
result of such “stumbling” through the epic, rather than of clinical methodology. To
appreciate these avenues, one can glance at the tradition that created and continues
to use these texts profi tably. 224
Traditionalism should not be misunderstood as a bond of naïveté. It is true, as
Gadamer remarks, that the concept of tradition has “become no less ambiguous
than that of authority, and for the same reason—namely that what determines the
romantic understanding of tradition is its abstract opposition to the principle of
enlightenment.” 225 But, as we have argued throughout this work, there is a way of
looking at tradition that does not play on this abstract opposition. Th at tradition is
some kind of monolithic, unchanging entity is a false idea, one that is engendered by
Romanticism. Gadamer notes: “Romanticism conceives of tradition as an antithesis
to the freedom of reason and regards it as something historically given, like nature.
And whether one wants to be revolutionary and oppose it or preserve it, tradition
is still viewed as the abstract opposite of free self-determination, since its validity
does not require any reasons but conditions us without our questioning it. . . . 2 26 Th e
majority of German Indologists, however, accepted this understanding of tradition.
Some, like Oldenberg, went so far as to criticize those (like the British Orientalists
Jones and Wilkins) who did not share this iconoclastic attitude toward tradition.
Instead of looking at what in tradition was valid and could be reused and made the
basis for further researches, German Indologists cast away all tradition. Not only tra-
dition, but also traditionally trained scholars were reviled as uncritical and untrust-
worthy.2 27 Nowhere does the German scholars’ rootedness in specifi c historical
circumstances become more evident than in this diff erence from their British and
Continental colleagues. German scholars, however, did not stop to ask themselves
why tradition appeared so inimical to them. In their headlong rush to take their place
224 . Gadamer thematizes these insights clearly: “Here we can fi nd support in the roman-
tic criticism of the Enlightenment; for there is one form of authority particularly defended
by romanticism, namely tradition. Th at which has been sanctioned by tradition and cus-
tom has an authority that is nameless, and our fi nite historical being is marked by the
fact that the authority of what has been handed down to us—and not just what is clearly
grounded—always has power over our attitudes and behavior. . . . And in fact it is to roman-
ticism that we owe this correction of the Enlightenment: that tradition has a justifi ca-
tion that lies beyond rational grounding and in large measure determines our institutions
and attitudes. What makes classical ethics superior to modern moral philosophy is that it
grounds the transition from ethics to ‘politics,’ the art of right legislation, on the indis-
pensability of tradition. By comparison, the modern Enlightenment is abstract and revo-
lutionary.” Ibid., 281–82.
225 . Ibid., 282.
226 . Ibid.
227 . For examples, see the articles and essays by Hanneder, already cited in this work.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 425
as scientists alongside their philologist colleagues, they simply accepted the abstract
opposition of tradition and reason as set up by Romanticism. Indeed, it became one
of the foundational gestures of the discipline. Th us, from Roth to Oldenberg and
from Slaje to Hanneder, when asked what Indology was, they responded with a clari-
fi cation of w hat it was not : it was not the tradition. But merely not being traditional is
no argument for a discipline; it is only an argument for the value of something where
tradition has been equated with the nonrational or the antirational.
Gadamer too rejects the idea of an “unconditional antithesis” between tradition
and reason. “However problematical the conscious restoration of old or the creation
of new traditions may be, the romantic faith in the ‘growth of tradition,’ before which
all reason must remain silent, is fundamentally like the Enlightenment, and just as
prejudiced.” Indeed, he points to an element of “freedom and history” within tradi-
tion itself: “Even the most genuine and pure tradition does not persist because of the
inertia of what once existed. It needs to be affi rmed, embraced, cultivated.” But lest
Indologists such as Hanneder and Slaje oppose that this is precisely to surrender to
the forces of irrationalism and conservatism against the scientifi c spirit of Europe,
Gadamer points out that “preservation . . . is active in all historical change.” Indeed,
he challenges the dichotomy between conservatism and reason: for him, “preserva-
tion is an act of reason, though an inconspicuous one.” Precisely because the rea-
son inherent in preservation is inconspicuous, well bred, and moderate and does
not engage in the kind of book burning Slaje and Hanneder advocate, “only innova-
tion and planning appear to be the result of reason.” But, as Gadamer notes, “this is
an illusion.”2 28 “Even where life changes violently, as in ages of revolution, far more
of the old is preserved in the supposed transformation of everything than anyone
knows, and it combines with the new to create a new value.” For this reason preserva-
tion represents “as much a freely chosen action as . . . revolution and renewal. . . . Both
the Enlightenment’s critique of tradition and the romantic rehabilitation of it lag
behind their true historical being.” 229
Gadamer wishes to apply these insights—the use of enabling prejudice, the peda-
gogical function of authority, and the intellectual horizon of tradition—to critique
method in humanities and to recommend the sophisticated art of hermeneutics.
He notes:
Th ese thoughts raise the question of whether in the hermeneutics of the human
sciences the element of tradition should not be given its full value. Research in the
human sciences cannot regard itself as in an absolute antithesis to the way in which
we, as historical beings, relate to the past. At any rate, our usual relationship to the
past is not characterized by distancing and freeing ourselves from tradition. Rather,
we are always situated within traditions, and this is no objectifying process—i.e.,
we do not conceive of what tradition says as something other, something alien. It is
always part of us, a model or exemplar, a kind of cognizance that our later historical
228 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , 282.
229 . Ibid., 282–83.
426 Chapter 05
judgment would hardly regard as a kind of knowledge but as the most ingenuous
affi nity with tradition. 230
Gadamer’s critique of the equation of historicism and historical method with objec-
tivity tout court is especially germane to our context. With him, we might ask: “has
the rise of historical consciousness really divorced our scholarship from this natural
relation to the past? Does understanding in the human sciences understand itself
correctly when it relegates the whole of its own historicality to the position of preju-
dices from which we must free ourselves? Or does ‘unprejudiced scholarship’ share
more than it realizes with that naïve openness and refl ection in which traditions live
and the past is present?” Obviously, these are questions Indology is not well placed
to ask or answer, since it constitutes itself via a repression of its history. But even if
we grant it diplomatic immunity from history, the question still remains: how can
Indology claim to carry out historical research when it evades the elementary con-
ditions of historical being? As Gadamer pertinently notes, “understanding in the
human sciences,” too, shares “one fundamental condition with the life of tradition,”
that is, “it lets itself be addressed by tradition.” 231 “Is it not true of the objects that
the human sciences investigate, just as for the contents of tradition, that what they
are really about can be experienced only when one is addressed by them?” Gadamer’s
pregnant formulation makes the crisis of German Indology especially acute and
places it before a fundamental decision: either it must acknowledge an inheritance,
a debt to German history, or it must accept some connection to the Indian tradition,
but there is no such thing as access to the past unmediated by history. From all we
have read, we know that the second option is anathema to Indology; to do so would
be to accept the validity and binding authority of the I nderwissen that Oldenberg
so decries. Given that Indology has only been able to think of Indians in terms of
stereotypes such as fl ying carpets and yogis, it is unthinkable that it would seriously
strive to fi nd some link or access to the Indian tradition. But the fi rst option is no less
problematic: since Indology’s claim to superiority over the classical Indian tradition
has rested on its claim that it alone is not indebted to history—that it alone has tran-
scended the elementary conditions of historical being to attain pure objectivity—it
cannot now acknowledge that its perspective, too, is historically conditioned, unless
it is willing to accept the problems with past scholarship. But as we know, Indology
is far from taking up such a critical relation to its own past. Indeed, even at the price
of sheltering Nazis, German Indologists are unwilling or unable to accept a critical
refl ection on the history of German Indology. 232
230 . Ibid., 283.
231 . Ibid., 283.
232 . In a recent review, Slaje attacks Jakob Stuchlik’s detailed and pertinent study of the
Austrian Indologist Erich Frauwallner’s involvement in Nazism; see Walter Slaje, Review of
Der arische Ansatz: Erich Frauwallner und der Nationalsozialismus , by Jakob Stuchlik, É tudes
Asiatique 64, no. 2 (2010): 447–62. Slaje’s criticisms are polemical, unfounded, and illogi-
cal, and provoked the only possible response from the author: in a response to the review
published in a subsequent issue of the same journal, Stuchlik accused Slaje of being “moti-
vated by an obvious desire to discredit a critical book about the relationship of a scholar to
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 427
Th us, the relevance of Gadamer to Indology is ultimately that he dispels the
Enlightenment illusion of an unmediated access to history and, in fact, establishes
this elementary historicity as the basic condition of all knowing, even of historical
knowledge. Once one grants this historicity, however, the “real fulfi llment of the his-
torical task” can no longer be to provide, as Slaje describes it, “manual-ready factual
knowledge . . . that brings into view the great and continuous lines of the intellec-
tual world of this culture, exactly as it articulated itself primarily” 233 but, rather, as
Gadamer describes it, “to determine anew the signifi cance of what is examined.” 234
But here, the basic reciprocity inherent in all human cognitive endeavors comes to
the fore.
But the signifi cance exists at the beginning of any such research as well as at the
end: in choosing the theme to be investigated, awakening the desire to investigate,
gaining a new problem. At the beginning of all historical hermeneutics, then, the
abstract antithesis between tradition and historical research, between history and the
knowledge of it must be discarded .2 35
Th is makes the dogmatic separation of “the eff ect ( Wirkung ) of a living tradition” and
the “eff ect of historical study” characteristic of historicism impossible. Indeed, in
Gadamer’s words, the two come together to constitute “a unity of eff ect,” the analy-
sis of which reveals “only a texture of reciprocal eff ects.” 236 Equally sobering are his
conclusions for historicism:
Hence we would do well not to regard historical consciousness as something radi-
cally new—as it seems at fi rst—but as a new element in what has always constituted
the human relation to the past. In other words, we have to recognize the element
of tradition in historical research and inquire into its hermeneutic productivity. 237
A recognition of the “hermeneutic productivity” of historical research, however,
applies not only to the books and ideas through which the West sought to deter-
mine itself but also to those through which Western authors sought to determine
National Socialism” and of attempting “over and above the attempt at discrediting the book
and its author, to wash the [accused] scholar clean [of Nazism].” Jakob Stuchlik, “Replik auf
Walter Slajes Rezension meines Buches,” É tudes Asiatique 65, no. 1 (2011): 287. See also
Stuchlik’s concluding remarks: “However, Slaje does no favors for the Frauwallner school
to which he belongs and which he believes he must defend in this manner: his engagement
places him in the tradition of the questionable and only apparently de-Nazifi ed [scheinent-
nazifi zierter] Frauwallner and thus confi rms the book’s conclusion which pointed out the
remarkable contemporary relevance of the problem.” Ibid., 307–8. We discuss yet another
member of the Frauwallner school in the next chapter: Frauwallner’s student and direct
successor, Ernst Steinkellner.
233 . Slaje, “Was ist Indologie?” 324.
234 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , 283.
235 . Ibid., 283–84 (italics in original).
236 . Ibid., 284.
237 . Ibid.
428 Chapter 05
Indian culture. A critical Indology, then, would recognize, as Gadamer says, “that an
element of tradition aff ects the human sciences despite the methodological purity
of their procedures,” and it would not consider this element of tradition a problem
that must be eliminated but its “real nature and distinguishing mark.” Th us, for
Gadamer, the “hermeneutic turn” in philosophy ultimately marks a renewed turn
to man’s fi nitude after the hubris of the Enlightenment and the easy technological
progress of early modernity, for which tradition, faith, and respect for authority—
in other words, everything that is, for Gadamer, summed up in the word p hrone-
sis —appeared to be unnecessary at best and an active hindrance at worst. Precisely
because “none of man’s fi nite historical endeavors can completely erase the traces
of this fi nitude,” it is hubristic to call for an Indology that neither owes anything to
humanity nor believes it owes allegiance to tradition.2 38 Indology “does not provide
therapy, it does not heal, and it does not prognosticate,” 239 but it wants to be well
paid nonetheless. But lest Slaje rejoin that Indology belongs to a “European tradition
of knowledge [Wissenstradition]” that, according to its “original claim [ursprüngli-
chem Anspruch],” aims at the creation of the “p urposeless [ zweckfreie ]world of the
human sciences,” 240 it is helpful to recall the fundamental distinction between the
Naturwissenschaften and the Geisteswissenschaften as this was developed by us in the
preceding sections. Gadamer, too, notes:
It is clear that the human sciences cannot be adequately described in terms of this
conception of research and progress. Of course it is possible to write a history of the
solution of a problem—e.g., the deciphering of barely legible inscriptions—in which
the only interest is in ultimately reaching the fi nal result. Were this not so, it would
have been impossible for the human sciences to have borrowed the methodology
of the natural ones, as happened in the last century. But what the human sciences
share with the natural is only a subordinate element of the work done in the human
sciences. . . . 241
Why is this so? As we demonstrated in the central sections of this chapter, the
attempt to construe the scientifi c character of the human sciences on the model of
the natural sciences (as was done in positivism, for example) is to misunderstand
their basic character. First and foremost, there is no pure object of research that can
be investigated for itself, independent of history and independent of human sub-
jectivity, as in the natural sciences. Further, the attempt to determine the being of
historical phenomena in this abstract a priori manner (as was done, for example, in
historicism) leads not only to the elision of what is historically specifi c about them,
but also to the veiling of the historical particularity of the researcher. But this histori-
cal particularity is merely veiled and not put out of commission. Even as he imagines
he has transcended his historical and social context, these continue to infl uence him
in the choice of research object he makes, in the particular questions he raises, and in
238 . Ibid.
239 . Slaje, “Was ist Indologie?” 321.
240 . Ibid., 311 ( italics in original ).
241 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , 284.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 429
the kinds of answers that seem germane to him. Finally, although empirical methods
have their place, empiricism, and its attendant phenomenon, psychologism, do not
get us very far when what is at stake is understanding why people in the past thought
as they did. Gadamer is not unaware of these issues, of course. He notes:
Obviously, in the human sciences we cannot speak of an object of research in the
same sense as in the natural sciences. . . . [Rather,] historical research is carried along
by the historical movement of life itself and cannot be understood teleologically in
terms of the object into which it is inquiring. . . . Whereas the object of the natural
sciences can be described idealitera s what would be known in the perfect knowledge
of nature, it is senseless to speak of a perfect knowledge of history, and for this
reason it is not possible to speak of an “object in itself” toward which its research
is directed. 242
Th us, with Gadamer, we come full circle. We began with the Wissenschaftsideologie
of the nineteenth century and its resonances in nineteenth- and twentieth-century
Indology, especially in the work of Hermann Oldenberg. Via an analysis of Comte’s
positivism and historicism and of the empiricism of Mill, Spencer, and Mach, we
developed an understanding of the problems with the methodological self-under-
standing of Indology. We demonstrated how, although German Indologists con-
tinue to valorize the w issenschaftliche character of their work, they are unable to give
an account of wherein this scientifi city should lie. And fi nally, we showed how the
abstract contrast between tradition and reason is a false contrast—not only because
there is an element of tradition that is rational and worth preserving, but also because
we are always already claimed by tradition even where we, as the German Indologists
did, think to stand entirely on the side of an abstract and ahistorical reason.
But one fi nal point may be made here allied to the criticism of the Enlightenment
in Gadamer’s philosophical hermeneutics. Th is is the question of theology. Here,
Gadamer allies himself with the Romantic critique of method. Hermeneutics allows
us to deal with those aspects of human existence that theology addresses, without
thereby signaling a loss of truth or reason. As he notes, the “crisis of historicism” ush-
ered in by the publication of Dilthey’s collected works 243 led to a “revival of mythol-
ogy.”2 44 Gadamer cites the work of Walter F. Otto and Karl Kerényi as examples of
this new interest in myth in scholarship. But “the example of mythology is only one
among many.”2 45 Gadamer argues that, “in the concrete work of the human sciences,”
242 . Ibid., 285.
243 . Th e expression is usually attributed to Ernst Troeltsch, especially his “Die Krisis
des Historismus,” D ie neue Rundschau 33 (1922): 572–90 (see also Der Historismus und
seine Probleme [Tübingen: Mohr, 1922] and D er Historismus und seine Überwindung
[Berlin: Heise, 1924]), even though notions of a crisis were prevalent in the work of
European writers long before Troeltsch. Charles Bambach provides a useful bibliography
of the concept and the expression; see his Th e Crisis of Historicism , 4, n. 5, and see also the
dissertation by Annette Wittkau, H istorismus: Zur Geschichte des Begriff s und des Problems
(Göttingen: Vandenhoek & Ruprecht, 1992).
244 . Gadamer, T ruth and Method , 509–10.
245 . Ibid., 510.
430 Chapter 05
it is possible to show “many places where there is the same turning away from a
naïve methodologism, the equivalent of which in philosophical refl ection is the
explicit criticism of historical objectivism or positivism. Th is development became
particularly important where originally normative aspects are combined with sci-
ence.” Among the many examples we might adduce, two are especially important
for Gadamer: theology and jurisprudence. He notes that “theological discussion in
recent decades has placed the problem of hermeneutics in the foreground precisely
because it has had to combine the heritage of historical theology with new theologi-
cal and dogmatic departures.”2 46
Th e signifi cance of this remark is topical. Th eology is gradually overcoming the
dichotomy of historical research and philosophical inquiry to once again address
pragmatic, social, and existential concerns. Within European philosophy itself, a
theological turn has been underway since at least the mid-1950s. Heidegger himself
takes a theological turn in his later works, above all in his B eiträge zur Philosophie .
To him, we also owe the dramatic phrase, “only a God can save us now.”2 47 Th is God,
however, is no longer the Lutheran Deus absconditus for Heidegger, whose insuf-
fi ciency as a theological conception became all too apparent in the horrors of World
War II and in Heidegger’s own brush with Nazism. Heidegger’s statement owes more
to Hölderlin and to the Greek gods whose departure Hölderlin was the fi rst to diag-
nose. Since then, the school of French phenomenology—above all, Jean-Luc Nancy,
Jean-François Courtine, and Dominique Janicaud—has been at the forefront of
debate over what Heidegger characterizes as the “fl ight of the gods.” Likewise—again
infl uenced by Heidegger—a fundamental shift in the notion of truth has been under-
way in Continental thought of the past half century.2 48 In his lecture course Parmenides ,
Heidegger explicitly sets apart two notions of truth: alētheia/pseudos and v erum/fal-
sum and undertakes a deconstruction of the reigning notion of truth as “correct-
ness.” 249 He discusses how the modern notion of truth derives from the Latin notions
of v erum and f alsum and how both terms originate in a political, legalistic context. In
246 . Ibid.
247 . Martin Heidegger, “Only a God Can Save Us: Der Spiegel’s Interview with
Martin Heidegger,” trans. Maria Alter and John D. Caputo, Philosophy Today 20, no. 4
(1976): 267–84.
248 . Even before Heidegger, Nietzsche had problematized the notion of truth as correct-
ness. Refusing to succumb to the pretensions of the philologists, Nietzsche subjected their
work to merciless critique. He struggles to include aestheticism, perspectivism, and intoxica-
tion as ways of addressing truth in his work. Aphorism 57 of Th e Gay Science (titled “To the
Realists”) is typical of this interest: “Th at mountain over there! Th at cloud over there! What is
“real” about that? Subtract just once the phantasm and the whole human contribution , from
it, you sober ones! Yes, if you could do that ! If you could forget your background, your past,
your nursery school—all of your humanity and animality! Th ere is no “reality” for us—and
not for you either, you sober ones—we are not nearly as strange to one another as you think,
and perhaps our good will to transcend drunkenness is just as respectable as your belief that
you are altogether incapableo f drunkenness.” Friedrich Nietzsche, Th e Gay Science , ed. Bernard
Williams, trans. Josefi ne Nauckhoff (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 69.
249 . Martin Heidegger, P armenides , trans. André Schuwer and Richard Rojcewicz
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992), see esp. §3. Interestingly, the question of
the deconstruction of the notion of truth as “correctness” is posed in the context of a wider
question concerning the correct translation of the Greek (cid:19) λ (cid:10)θ ε αι . Th us, Heidegger is well
PROBLEMS WITH THE CRITICAL METHOD 431
place of these notions of truth ( veritas, certitudo, rectitudo, iustitia ), Heidegger seeks
to retrieve a notion of truth as alētheia : truth as the presencing or self-disclosure of
Being. Th is is the sense of truth Heidegger fi nds was originally present in the Greek
alētheia , which he translates as “un-concealment” or “dis-closure.” Th e notion of
truth as an un-concealment leads Heidegger to the notion of truth as a happening,
an occurrence (E reignis ), and it is this eventlike character of truth he is ultimately
concerned with recovering. Truth becomes the event of the free self-manifestation
of Being, an event that is always ambiguous, for Being can withhold itself or stay
away and cannot be reduced to or mastered with our technical means. In his writ-
ings from the mid-1930s onward, he becomes increasingly critical of the traditional
defi nition of truth, as well as concepts such as subjectivity, objectivity, Being, the
relation of Being to beings, and the history of this relation. Heidegger fi nds that
Western thought has lost its original relationship to the truth: thinking becomes
merely technical and, everywhere, man only encounters himself. Over against this
literally thoughtless thinking (since the 1969 essay, “Th e End of Philosophy and the
Task of Th inking,” summed up in the concept of “cybernetics”), 250 Heidegger is inter-
ested in recovering an original experience of the truth, an interest that necessitates
a return to the Greeks. Here, he will ultimately fi nd the resources to think of truth
more primordially: as the “granting” or “giving” of Being expressed in the German
“es gibt.” In contrast, in his P armenides lecture notes, Heidegger rejects the notion of
“true” (in the sense of verum ) as “un-German” in its essence. 251 Th us, at the end of a
two-century-long period, when Europe gave way to the seductions of positive sociol-
ogy, there is once again a concern with fundamental human questions, which include
the question of what it means to be a mortal on this earth.
Here is where a fruitful engagement with Indian texts might begin. Since we
began this inquiry into the scientifi c character of German Indology with a review
of German Gītā scholarship, it is only fi tting to conclude by taking a look at the Gītā
once again. How might the Gītā, beyond the so-called text-historical interpretations
of German scholars, enter into dialogue with Western philosophy? What might the
text have to say about a notion of truth as the free self-manifestation of Being? In the
eleventh chapter of the poem, there occurs an unusual exchange between God and
mortal. Arjuna, the great warrior hero of the epic, asks to see K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s divine, plenipo-
tent form ( rūpam aiśvara ṁ , 11.3) and K ṛ ṣ ṇa responds by revealing his universal form.
In van Buitenen’s translation, the verses read:
Pārtha, behold my hundreds and thousands of shapes, of many kinds, divine, in
manifold colors and fi gures. Behold the Ādityas, Vasus, Rudras, Maruts; behold,
Bhārata, many marvels that have never been witnessed before. Behold the entire
aware of the problems with merely lexical defi nitions and would have no sympathy for the
German Indologists who think they merely look up Sanskrit words in their lexica, when in
fact the greater task is for us to translate ourselves into the world of the speakers of the
language.
250 . Martin Heidegger, “Th e End of Philosophy and the Task of Th inking,” in O n Time and
Being , trans. Joan Stambaugh (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972), 58.
251 . Heidegger, P armenides , 47.
432 Chapter 05
universe with standing and moving creatures centered here in this body of mine.
(Bhagavadgītā 11.5–6)
Th at this theophanic vision is not simply a supernatural occurrence but one that sig-
nifi es Being’s self-granting or giving is seen from the use of guhyam (secret or mys-
tery) and related words and from the fact that K ṛ ṣ ṇa has to endow Arjuna with a
divya cak ṣu ḥ, or “divine eye,” before he can behold the god’s self-disclosure. K ṛ ṣ ṇa’s
theophany transposes Arjuna into an ecstasy of vision. He uses the word paśyāmi
(I see) fi ve times in his description of the god’s universal form (in verses 11.15, 16
[twice], 17, 19) and the entire encounter between the two is framed in the language
of vision ( d ṛ ṣ - and p aś -related words). A comprehensive interpretation of the Gītā’s
philosophy would take us far afi eld of the present chapter’s concerns, which were sim-
ply to point to the inadequacy of German Indology from Western perspectives. But
this brief excursus into the poem was necessary to show how the poem’s philosophi-
cal richness cannot be exhausted in terms of a theory of an original epic situation
riddled with later Brahmanic interpolations. It requires philosophical perspectives
developed from Plato to Kant and Hegel and from Nietzsche to Heidegger to be able
to interpret the poem. Compared with the rich interpretation possible from the per-
spective of a Heideggerian understanding of truth as alētheia , the interpretations of
Garbe and Jacobi illustrate the poverty of the text-historical method. By failing either
to recognize Nietzsche’s criticisms or to keep up with philosophy in Germany, these
philological treatises became obsolete. Th us, it is not a matter of opposing the Indian
commentarial tradition to Western scholarship but of evaluating the Indologists’
work strictly in terms of the standards they themselves appeal to.
Here then, at the beginning of the twenty-fi rst century, is a good point to look back
at this history and ask in what way German Indology can be said to contribute to the
task of either the sciences or the humanities. Th e diremption of the text-historical
method and the power structures built up on it simultaneously off ers an opportunity
for the humanities to reclaim and rehabilitate Indian philosophy and literature after
Indology.2 52 Th e work of scholars such as Sukthankar, Biardeau, Charles Malamoud,
and others is testament to the fact that philological rigor can and ought to be com-
bined with philosophical concerns. As attention begins to focus on non-Western phi-
losophies as an essential part of the global humanistic canon, 253 the question is not
“whither the humanities?” but “whither humanities after Indology?”
252 . See Nicholson, arguing presciently that the near-total disappearance of Indian phi-
losophy from the Western and global philosophical canon is due to an uncritical accep-
tance of the work of nineteenth-century Orientalists. “We have,” writes Nicholson, “for
too long been content to repeat these same lists of doctrines, devoid of serious philosophi-
cal analysis or historical examination of their claims (such as the time-worn belief that
the true Sā ṃkhya is atheistic). Such presentations have led readers to conclude that the
beliefs of Indian philosophers were derived from private mystical experiences, operating
entirely outside the realm of warrant and rational argument. Hence the widespread idea
that Indian religions are mystical rather than rational.” Nicholson, U nifying Hinduism , 11.
253 . See Peter K. J. Park’s recent book, Africa, Asia, and the History of Philosophy: Racism
in the Formation of the Modern Canon of Philosophy, 1780–1830 (Albany: State University of
New York Press, 2013).
Conclusion: Gandhi on the Gītā
Characteristic concepts and patterns of Romantic philosophy and literature are a displaced and
reconstituted theology, or else a secularized form of devotional experience, that is, because we
still live in what is essentially, although in derivative rather than direct manifestations, a Biblical
culture, and readily mistake our hereditary ways of organizing experience for conditions of real-
ity and the universal forms of thought.
M. H. Abrams, Natural Supernaturalism
Even where it is spoken by a handful, by the harried remnants of destroyed communities, a lan-
guage contains within itself the boundless potential of rediscovery, or re-compositions of reality,
of articulate dreams, which are known to us as myths, as poetry, as metaphysical conjecture, and
the discourse of law.
George Steiner, After Babel
At the end of this long and complex book, what lessons can we draw from the
diremption of German Indology for the humanities? As we told the story, we
necessarily focused on the emergence and institution of Indology around a few cen-
tral principles (Āryan origins, anti-Brahmanism, the superiority of critical conscious-
ness over the exegetic tradition). But our main aim in this book was not to tell the
story of German Indology for its own sake, which in any case is only of historical
interest now. As a book about how certain people in the nineteenth or the twentieth
century had some strange notions about Indian texts or about the Indian people,
this book would only have made a contribution to the history of ideas. Our main aim,
however, has been to use Indology as an example to raise certain questions regarding
the sociology of the human sciences.
Ultimately, the problems with Indology are not the well known and widely dis-
cussed problems of its Orientalism, colonialism, racism, or even of its evangelism.
Rather, they concern, among other things, the rise of historicism, the displacement
of philosophical concerns from thinking, and the belief in the ability of a technical
method to produce truth. As the paradigmatic example of a positivist science that
underwent rapid expansion in the nineteenth century and declined almost as rap-
idly thereafter, Indology off ers a perfect example for thinking about the humanities’
problematic entanglement in method in the past two centuries.1
1 . Th is is not to suggest that we reject the idea of method tout court. As we have seen, the
real problem with Indology was not its method but that it did not have any. Method has
( 433 )
434 Conclusion: Gandhi on the Gītā
Faith in the kind of narrow methodological positivism practiced by the Indologists
has become unsustainable following the criticisms of scientifi c method discussed
in the last chapter. Th e failure of the humanities to anticipate or guard against the
humanitarian crises of the last century shows that the triumph of method over truth
is not merely an academic problem. It is with the aim of raising these questions con-
cerning the relationship of the human sciences to pragmatic and ethical concerns
that we embarked upon this long journey.
At the end of our journey, it has become clear that so-called critical research does
not off er a viable avenue for future scholarship on Indian literature, thought, or phi-
losophy. Not only was the Indologists’ research not critical in the sense that it failed
to evolve a suffi ciently sophisticated hermeneutics for approaching Indian texts, but
it was also not critical in the sense that it was blind to its own historical presupposi-
tions. From Āryan invasions to racial miscegenations and/or Brahmanic corruptions
every fantasy could be entertained, provided it remained faithful to a Protestant
narrative of religious degeneracy. Basic errors of reasoning could be glossed over,
as long as scholars acknowledged the institutional primacy of Indology and aligned
themselves with a tradition of pseudocritical research. Indeed, a careful look at the
Indologists’ refl ections on method demonstrated that, for all their claims of practic-
ing an esoteric technical art, their primary concern was to protect an institutional
hegemony. Hence the repeated use of the epithet wissenschaftlich .
However, when we asked what made German Indologist scholarship w issen-
schaftlich , we were unable to obtain an answer. As we saw in the fi rst three chap-
ters, Indologists were unable to fulfi ll even basic criteria for a science, and yet they
insisted that scientifi city ( Wissenschaftlichkeit ) was the hallmark of German scholar-
ship on Indian texts. Indeed, when we pushed the question, we found that their ideas
of “science” were gleaned from the most disparate sources. Th ese ideas were not even
true of the natural sciences. Apart from nebulous ideas of positivism and empiri-
cism, we found that what the Indologists meant when they claimed that their work
was w issenschaftlich was that it was historicist. Here, it rapidly became clear that
much of their objection to the tradition was in fact theological. Th ey thought that
tradition, being ahistorical and/or metaphysical, was enmeshed in theology, yet they
could not see that their allegedly historical approach itself entailed a hidden meta-
physics. Likewise, their claim to be confessionally neutral turned out to be a hollow
one, since with this iconoclastic, antimetaphysical project they were actually fulfi ll-
ing a central aim of Lutheran theology—its destruction of the theologia gloriae of the
ancients. Historical-critical research, allegedly theologically neutral, turned out to
its place in research and, where applied judiciously, is indispensable in the humanities as
well (in fact, one of Weinsheimer’s criticisms of Gadamer is that the ideal of the method he
imagines never existed in the natural sciences either. Gadamer’s description of the natural
sciences exaggerates the contrast between the natural and the human sciences as an ele-
ment of his rhetoric against the infi ltration of the humanities by ideals originally lying out-
side their sphere). Our criticism here targets Indology’s claim to possessing a unique (and
superior) method as an element of its rhetorical battle against the commentarial tradition.
CONCLUSION: GANDHI ON THE GĪTĀ 435
have a major role to play in the delegitimization of all alternative sources of intellec-
tual authority—Jewish, Catholic, Greek or Indian. 2
Even a brief glance at European history suffi ced to expose those claims. A geneal-
ogy of method in Indology demonstrated that the German scholars’ origins were not
philosophical or scientifi c, but rather, theological . Indeed, as the turn to Gadamer in
the concluding sections of the last chapter demonstrated, their equation of tradition
with dogmatism was a false one, itself rooted in the Enlightenment prejudice against
all prejudices. Th e “yawning chasm” thus is not—as Myers has it—between history
and faith but between faith and f aith .3 On the one hand, there is the scholar’s faith
in his (historical-critical) method, especially its capacity to disclose a more original
meaning to the text (even if it be as banal a one as that priests conjured up the idea
of the afterlife to control the populace). On the other, there is faith of a more modest
and critical kind, the sense that because individuals are fallible, we should place our
trust in tradition rather than the expert.
Th us, at the end we return to the question we started out with: what does it mean
to read a myth or a text p hilologically ? As we have told the story, we have consistently
highlighted the R ezeptionsgeschichte of texts as an essential element of their mean-
ing. Our central contention was that in ignoring this history, German Indologists
went astray—as self-taught amateurs are likely to do. In advocating a return to tra-
dition, however, we do not mean to suggest that we should return to it uncritically.
Rather, as Gadamer has shown, the fundamental hermeneutic problem concerns the
problem of application . Here, a look at Gandhi’s reading of the Bhagavadgītā can help
us understand how it is possible to negotiate the various demands of reading a text
meaningfully, of taking into consideration its reception, and of making it hermeneu-
tically productive for one’s present.
Gandhi, who combines ultimate concern with historical and pragmatic concerns,
off ers the clearest indication that to read a text philologically ultimately means to
read it thoughtfully. He addresses the task of interpretation explicitly in his com-
mentary on verse 3.9 of the Gītā, which he translates as follows: “Th is world of
2 . Historically, the emergence of the critical method coincided with the displacement
of the Hebrew Bible from the central position it had held for Western civilization for cen-
turies. Th is development was not without consequence for the perception of Judaism. As
Sheehan remarks, “the German eff ort to weld together culture and religion was performed
on the back of the religious group who, it was thought, evidenced an anthropologically
cohesive culture that consistently failed to live up to the normative expectations of cul-
ture more generally. Just as the cultural Bible implied that the Hebrew Bible had become
what Schleiermacher called a ‘mausoleum’—a monument for a dead people—so too was it
already clear to Christian scholars that no community was more rigorously excluded from
this new cultural ideal of religion than those most slavishly dedicated to this monument,
the Jews.” Sheehan, Th e Enlightenment Bible , 234. See also ibid., 236–40 for the attempt to
defi ne Judaism as a distinct, autonomous culture (one closer to the cultures of the Orient
than to classical Greek, “western” civilization), a development that occurred hand-in-glove
with the establishment of a science of Jewish cultural identity. An argument could thus be
made that German anti-Semitism was part of the wider movement to set apart German
culture from all others known as “Orientalism.”
3 . Myers, R esisting History , 4.
436 Conclusion: Gandhi on the Gītā
men suff ers bondage from all action save that which is done for the sake of sacrifi ce
[ yajña ]. To this end, O Kaunteya, perform action without attachment.”4 In his com-
mentary on this verse, Gandhi then takes up the question of interpretation as it
arises in relation to the term yajña . He reads y ajña in a way that includes his struggle
for India’s freedom. Yajña , for him, thus does not mean only ritual action in the nar-
row (traditional) sense, but any just political action. Stietencron and, following him,
Malinar have accused Indian commentators of reading their own political and reli-
gious ideology into the text. Stietencron, as we have seen, argues that “the analyti-
cal thinking of Western scholars trained in historical and philological methodology
stood in contrast to the traditional Indian commentators. Th e latter not only gener-
ously harmonized all the disjunctions in the text [i.e., the Bhagavadgītā] but, above
all, attempted to recognise in particular passages of the text their own philosophical
and theological concepts. Th is was done in order to secure for themselves the divine
authority of K ṛ ṣ ṇ a. In this manner, several philosophical schools developed Gītā
interpretations of their own—a spectrum that has been further expanded through
politically motivated, modern interpretations since the beginning of the Indian inde-
pendence struggle.” 5 Stietencron thus includes not only the tradition, but also and
explicitly the Indian independence struggle in the purview of his criticism of Indian
readings. Implicitly, Gandhi also comes in for his share of criticism for contributing
to the “politically motivated . . . interpretions” of modernity.
If only matters were so simple. Textual interpretation cannot be pure caprice. Nor
can it be rigorously scientifi c and precisely unearth an original meaning. Let us see
how Gandhi’s sensibility not only defeats the naïve, generic, and simplistic criticisms
of German Indologists but also actually tells us what it means to read a text. For
Gandhi, reading a text never occurs in a vacuum and is never divorced from politics,
and the correctness of reading is possible from the intellectual, existential, and—
most important—ethical struggles of the reader:
We accept a broad defi nition of yajna. Yajna means any activity for the good of oth-
ers. A man works for the good of others when he spends his body in their service.
Th is should be done in a spirit of dedication to God. Th e word y ajna comes from the
root y aj , which means “to worship,” and we please God by worshipping Him through
physical labor. Laborare est orare —work is worship.6
Although it appears simple, Gandhi’s understanding reveals the issues involved in
interpretation and a keen awareness of the situatedness of every interpretation.
With a Latin quotation as a segue, Gandhi contextualizes himself and his reader in
a dialectical relationship. Th is relationship involves an exchange (man works for the
good of others), but it is important to note that this exchange is not simply material
in nature. Work, according to Gandhi, has an ethical component and it is this aspect,
4 . Mahadev Desai, trans., Th e Bhagavadgītā According to Gandhi (Berkeley: North Atlantic
Books, 2009), 39.
5 . Stietencron, “Editor’s Introduction,” 6–7.
6 . Mahadev Desai, trans., Th e Bhagavadgītā According to Gandhi , 39.
CONCLUSION: GANDHI ON THE GĪTĀ 437
above all, that he is interested in. Th e exchange is thus not of work for possessions,
but of meanings . Th rough work, one endows others’ lives with meaning and also one-
self acquires meaning.
Related to this is the point of control. As Derrida has shown, no author can fully
control that which is written. In the play of signifi ers that is the text, the authority
of writing exceeds the authority of the author. But neither is just any interpreta-
tion possible. Th ose who think that one can capriciously and manipulatively read
anything into any text are naïve. Th e author, the text, and the interpreter are linked
as wood, fi re, and smoke. Th us, control of the interpretation is not so much domina-
tion over the author’s lexical and semantic domain, or over the text in its historical
primitivity, but a matter of the self-control of the interpreter.
To be sure, German Indologists did understand this, albeit vaguely. Th ey misun-
derstood self-control not as an active service, but as self-abnegation in the face of
the text. A Puritanical spirit underlay their desire to prevent themselves as interpret-
ers from contaminating the text. But this is not enough, as it were. Self-abnegation
only suppresses rather than controls a person. Th ere is a kind of negative self-denial
going on in the face of the text but not a positive self-mastery. Gandhi highlights his
keen awareness of the fact that control primarily means self -control and not author-
ity over a populace, whether the readers of a text or the recipients of political doc-
trine. Concerning the relationship between the author and interpreter, he writes: “As
man’s beliefs become more enlightened, the meanings which people attach to certain
words also become more enlightened. Even if Vyasa had defi ned the words which
he used, we would ask why we should accept the meanings given by him.” 7 At this
point, the Indologists would probably like to protest: “but then anything is possible!”
But Gandhi is far ahead of the Indologists. He cleverly ties his interpretive strategy
fi rmly to just political action. Noting that “non-cooperation has come to mean much
more than we at fi rst intended it to mean,”8 he allows that there can be continuous
infl ation in the use of words a nd yet their essential meaning is preserved . He displays a
keen awareness of meanings not only as extended over a range of semantic connota-
tions but also as evolving over time. With the example of noncooperation, he gives
the example of a word whose meaning changed even within his own time. What then
can we say about the fate of the words intended by Vyāsa? Philology ought to set for
itself a goal higher than fi nding Vyāsa’s dictionary. Such a dictionary is, as Gandhi
seems to say, (1) impossible, (2) useless, and (3) unjust. On the issue of the injustice
of not granting the vitally evolving meaning of words, he writes: “Th ere is no harm in
enlarging the meaning of the word yajna , even if the new meaning we attach to the
term was never in Vyasa’s mind. We shall do no injustice to Vyasa’s words by expand-
ing their meaning. Sons should enlarge the legacy of their fathers.”9
Th e vital process of communication of meaning between an author and a reader
is thus neither as rigid as Derrida claims is the case in orality (which he sees as mod-
eled on the commandment of the father to the son) nor as endless as he claims is
7 . Ibid.
8 . Ibid.
9 . Ibid., 39–40.
438 Conclusion: Gandhi on the Gītā
the case in writing. It is, rather, a matter of inheritance and its enrichment. Just as
a son who obtains a thousand dollars from his father cannot multiply this amount
infi nitely, but only grow it according to circumstance and possibility, so also with the
inheritance and enrichment of meaning. Against the German Indologists’ practice
of treating texts as dead manipulable objects (which now, qua being quantifi able,
enable a “scientifi c” dealing with them), texts are living entities. It is this life of the
Gītā and India’s textual tradition that Gandhi opposes to the technologized world of
the industrial revolution and its domination of India, when he asks: “Why should we
object if anyone regarded the spinning wheel with sentiments other than what we
seek to create in the people about it?”1 0 Th e example is carefully chosen, for the spin-
ning wheel, of course, is the emblem of Gandhi’s resistance to the technologization
and mechanistic domination of the industrial revolution in which India was reduced
to mere labor. To be sure, the example is not the one a philologist might have chosen,
for whom it is more important to go searching for historical meanings. But by choos-
ing a current example, Gandhi frustrates the philologist’s search for origins: at most,
he can go look for the origins of the spinning wheel, but this origin will not give the
true import of the semantic function of the spinning wheel in this situation, which is
what is decisive here .
From a certain perspective, namely, that of the industrial revolution, the spin-
ning wheel appears a symbol of all that is backward and resists progress. From the
point of view of Gandhi’s adoption of the spinning wheel, however, it is a symbol of
liberation and the triumph of life over machine. We therefore ought not underesti-
mate the signifi cance of Gandhi’s unusual choice of a spinning wheel as an example
in this context. He is interpreting y ajña in the most semantically fulfi lled manner
possible by linking it to the spinning wheel. K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s private exhortation to Arjuna
to act (Bhagavadgītā 2.37–38), never private even within the context of the text,
is now brought into maximal understanding whereby the modern oppressed Indian
realizes the text.1 1 Th rough Gandhi’s interpretation, he hears the text (H ören, akouō )
and listens to the text (H orchen, hupakouō ). In a strange way, “Vyāsa” fi nds his tongue
thanks to Gandhi’s metaphor. Gandhi is fully conscious of what he is doing here, for
he says:
It is quite possible that in the future people may see harm in the spinning wheel,
may come to think that no one should wear cotton clothes at all, because they
do harm. Th ey may, for instance, believe that clothes should be made from fi bres
extracted from banana leaves. 12
But this is not a problem. Across the fashions and fads of referents (B edeutung ), sense
( Sinn ) survives translation across languages and time. It is only in the short distance
10 . Ibid., 40.
11 . K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s exhortation to Arjuna is heard (and successively conveyed) by a series of
people: Sa ṁ jaya (who narrates it to Dh ṛ tarā ṣ t ṛa), Vaiśaṁpāyana (who has heard the entire
exchange between Sam ̇ jaya and Dh ṛ tarā ṣ t ṛa from his omniscient teacher Vyāsa), and
Janamejaya (who hears the entire story of the epic from Vaiśaṁpāyana).
12 . Mahadev Desai, trans. Th e Bhagavadgītā According to Gandhi , 40.
CONCLUSION: GANDHI ON THE GĪTĀ 439
between India and Germany that the vital force of authorial speaking and heedful
listening is broken. Gandhi concludes emphatically by drawing together his herme-
neutic principles into one telling passage:
If people should come to feel that way, anyone who still clings to the spinning wheel
would be looked upon as a fool. A wise man, however, will mean by the spinning
wheel not an article made of work but any type of work that provides employment
to all people. Th at is also the case with regard to the meaning of the term y ajna . Th us,
we may—and should—attach to it a meaning not intended by Vyasa.1 3
Nothing could be more diametrically opposed to the German Indologists’ insistence
that no meaning be attached to archaic words in a naïvely apolitical and ahistorical
search for the history of meanings of terms. It is precisely by not attaching meanings
that the Indologist loses all meaning. (Paradoxically, in this attempt to not attach mean-
ings, he nonetheless ends up attaching meanings of the most disparate and random
nature: Āryan incursions, heroic blood-drinking warriors, Ur-Gītās tailored to the “epic
situation,” and a call to the German people to not lose their “sensitivity for the desires of
the nature that creates dispositions and functions.”1 4 ) Here, the term y ajña , in Gandhi’s
interpretation, carries with it the full vitality of the ra ṇ ayajña K ṛ ṣ ṇ a enjoins Arjuna to
perform. Th rough a familial hermeneutic, the interpreter-son serves the author-father
and, if we may be allowed to note the irony, also the motherland. Th is family, of course,
is Vyāsa, Gandhi, India.
Gandhi does grant that “because a poet puts a particular truth before the world, it
does not necessarily follow that he has known or worked out all its great consequences
or that having done so, he is able always to express them fully.” 15 But this is not cause for
dismay. “In this perhaps lies the greatness of the poem and the poet. A poet’s meaning
is limitless.” 16 Th e limitlessness Gandhi has in mind, however, is utterly un-Derridean.
Gandhi continues to insist on the vital resonance between man and text:
Like man, the meaning of great writings suff ers evolution. On examining the his-
tory of languages, we notice that the meaning of important words has changed or
expanded. Th is is true of the Gita. Th e author has himself extended the meanings of
some current words. We are able to discover this even on a superfi cial examination.1 7
Th us, in the struggle for independence, Gandhi brings his audience closer to the
original text of the Gītā by translating it into the modern idiom. Th e Gītā in Gandhi’s
hands becomes an effi cacious text designed to pull the distant audience out of pedan-
tic and political dilemmas, even as K ṛ ṣ ṇ a pulls the warrior Arjuna out of his paralysis.
13 . Ibid.
14 . Hauer, E ine indo-arische Metaphysik , 63.
15 . Mahadev Desai, trans. Th e Bhagavadgītā According to Gandhi , xxiii.
16 . Ibid.
17 . Ibid.
440 Conclusion: Gandhi on the Gītā
What does all this have to do with our central problem here, which concerns the
interpretation of texts? We seem to have strayed far afi eld of philology into the fi elds
of politics, ethics, and national redemption. But as Gandhi points out twice in the
introduction, textual interpretation is inseparable from the interpreter’s ability to
maintain self-control in a political milieu. 18 Th e task of interpretation, then, is not
one of mere academic cleverness, but the responsibility of a life lived. Only when the
text evaluates the interpreter, only when the interpreter risks herself in the interpre-
tation is the interpretation just and complete.
Gandhi is not unaware of the opposition between translation and interpretation,
but he is fully able to account for it within his hermeneutics. He distances himself
from the task of philology and the renderings of other scholars. “Th ey have their own
place. But I am not aware of the claim made by the translators for enforcing their
meaning of the Gita in their own lives.” 19 And yet, Gandhi is qualifi ed: “At the back
of my reading there is the claim of an endeavor to enforce the meaning in my own
conduct for an unbroken period of forty years.” 20 Gandhi demands of the interpreter
not only lexical knowledge but also a lived experience and an existential verifi cation.
He readily acknowledges the limits of his knowledge of Sanskrit. “My knowledge of
Sanskrit being very limited, I should not have full confi dence in my literal transla-
tion. To that extent, therefore, the translation has passed before the eyes of Vinoba,
Kaka Kalelkar, Mahadev Desai and Kishorlal Mashruvala.” 21 Th is insistence on lived
experience and practical verifi cation is not an external prejudice Gandhi imports into
the text. He quotes the Gītā itself, in which Kr ̣ ṣ ṇ a says, “Do not entrust this treasure
[i.e., the Gītā] to him who is without sacrifi ce, without devotion, without the desire
for this teaching and who denies Me. On the other hand, those who will give this pre-
cious treasure to My devotees will, by the fact of this service, assuredly reach Me. And
those who, being free from malice, will with faith absorb this teaching, shall, having
attained freedom, live where people of true merit go after death.”2 2
Preparedness to translate and interpret belong to the man, not to the dictionary
alone. Gandhi’s interpretive translation is accurate to the spirit and the letter of the
Gītā, and, where there is doubt, Gandhi prefers the platform of self-verifi cation over
conjecture about irretrievable meanings. It is hard for us to imagine that the philolo-
gist be trained in malice-free service and be able to absorb the teaching contained in
a text and attain freedom. Here, however, the pretensions of philology to scientifi c
objectivity break down. Truth is never merely fact; whereas the natural scientist,
for example, can try to see facts as value-neutral by trying to bracket off subjectiv-
ity, the philologist can aff ord no such luxury. Especially in the case of religious and
18 . “Th is desire does not mean any disrespect to the other renderings, they have their own
place. But I am not aware of the claim made by the translators of enforcing their reading of
the Gita in their own lives. At the back of my reading there is the claim of an endeavor to
enforce the meaning in my own conduct for an unbroken period of forty years.” Mahadev
Desai, trans. Th e Bhagavadgītā According to Gandhi , xvi.
19 . Ibid., xvi.
20 . Ibid., xvii.
21 . Ibid.
22 . Ibid., xxiv.
CONCLUSION: GANDHI ON THE GĪTĀ 441
philosophical texts, the righteousness of asserting the word over the spirit can go
fearfully astray. Th us Gandhi’s forty years of struggle to master the short Gītā text.
With these considerations in view, he nevertheless off ers his interpretation in the
form of a translation. He says that “this rendering is designed for women, the com-
mercial class, the so-called Sudras, and the like, who have little or no literary equip-
ment, who have neither desire to read the Gita in the original, and yet who stand in
need of its support.”2 3 For Gandhi, philological skill stands or falls on ethical praxis,
primarily oriented in the form of pedagogical philanthropy. Th is is not a bizarre twist
at all: as we pointed out at the very outset of this book, in its fi rst formulation in
Western thought, philologia stands in direct contrast to misology and misanthropy
in Plato’s Phaedo . Gandhi does not naïvely think that it is possible to arrive at an
original meaning of the text without any prejudice. Rather, Gandhi’s sophistication
lies in the self-consciousness of his interpretive stance and his clarifi cation of it to
the reader. He tells us what he is doing and why. And the what and why are subject to
ethical introspection and practice.
In contrast to Gandhi’s lucid and self-aware hermeneutics, the Indologists’
insistence that the Gītā was interpolated into a war epic turned out to be an
external idea imported into the Gītā either through an unwarranted extrapo-
lation from context or through prejudice. As a group, German Indologists all
took the war metaphor literally. A text capable of imagining a v iśvarūpa (K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s
divine, universal form), a supervalent image for phenomenality, was denied by
the Indologists freedom to invoke war as a metaphor for the conflictual nature of
being in the world. In contrast, Gandhi never wavers from reading the text as a
work of art; he refuses to take the war merely as reportage. That this hermeneu-
tic principle was firm in Gandhi’s mind is evident:
A study of the Mahabharata gave it added confi rmation. I do not regard the
Mahabharata as a historical work in the accepted sense. By ascribing to the chief
actors superhuman or subhuman origins, the great Vyasa made short work of the
history of kings and their peoples. Th e persons therein described may be historical
but the author of the Mahabharata has used them merely to drive home his religious
theme. 2 4
In addition to a naïvely historical approach, a prejudice against theology (which itself
turned out to have theological roots) skewed German philology from its outset. It
was important for Indologists such as Stietencron, Malinar, and Hanneder to oppose
the secular aspects of their praxis to the religious, spiritual, or ethical interests of the
Indians. As Hanneder notes in his review of Michael Brück’s translation of the Gītā,2 5
23 . Ibid., xvi.
24 . Ibid., xvii.
25 . Th is more popular edition appeared in the Verlag der Weltreligionen (Library of
World Religions) series of a German publisher rather than in an Indological series and was
translated by a professor of religious studies (Michael von Brück, chair of religious studies
at Ludwigs-Maximilian University, Munich), both of which triggered Hanneder’s ire.
442 Conclusion: Gandhi on the Gītā
Th e fact that Indian religions in the book-trade have wandered out of the scientifi c
domain into that of esoterica is problematic in many respects for the human sci-
ences that are concerned with them. For, it means that there where Indian religions
are to be found, science, by nature, no longer has any place. Th ereby the human
science can no longer fulfi ll its most visible function, namely, to make available fac-
tually supported information and appears socially to be no longer relevant. Th e con-
sequence is the elimination of [academic] positions [in Indology], through which,
however, the imbalance is further strengthened.2 6
But the counterexample of Gandhi shows that there is a way to read texts meaning-
fully and purposefully without succumbing either to a pseudoscientifi c prejudice or
opening oneself to the infi nity of literary criticism. Unlike the German Indologists,
Gandhi does not feel the need to distance himself from the Gītā. He avoids both the
pitfall of a narrow caste-based reading 27 as well as that of a chauvinistic nationalistic
reading. 28 Gandhi does not see the Gītā as belonging exclusively to any one group;
indeed, it does not belong to any individual in virtue of his or her national, political,
or social identity (German, enlightened, Indologist), but in virtue of whether he or
she has made an eff ort to live his or her life in accordance with it.
Th is does not mean he is uncritical: he criticizes many aspects of Indian society
and tries to bring it in line with what he sees as its enduring and true principles—
principles that are contained precisely in its canonical literary and philosophi-
cal texts such as the Bhagavadgītā. Criticism, however, does not mean a return to
antiquity: Gandhi is far from advocating a return to India’s Āryan past, as German
Indologists did. His views of the Mahābhārata’s war images, too, are more sophisti-
cated in that they allow us to understand the Mahābhārata in greater totality than
the so-called scientifi c approach does. “Th e author of the Mahabharata has not estab-
lished the necessity of physical warfare, on the contrary, he has proved its futility. He
has made the victors shed tears of sorrow and repentance and left them nothing but
26 . Hanneder, Review of Bhagavad Gita. Der Gesang des Erhabenen , edited and translated
by Michael von Brück.
27 . “To the unbiased reader, who here supposes, that around the turn of the century in
India some problems of the modern world were already resolved, the sober philologist can
unfortunately only oppose that according to the historical context the basic confl ict of the
Bhagavadgita is a special problem of a member of the Indian warrior-caste. For members
of the military order, the use of violence in battle belongs to their social and therewith ulti-
mately religious duty and the Bhagavadgita is according to the context a detailed justifi ca-
tion for this divine social order. Th e potential deserter is brought with the best arguments
to follow his mission pregiven through birth. Only when one removes the episode of the
gigantic epic from its military context, do other elements let themselves be emphasized
more strongly.” Ibid.
28 . “What will perhaps not be so clear to the reader is that the Bhagavadgita originally
attains its present stature at the [same] moment in time as it is received in the West. Th e
German reader should therefore not see himself as an ethnologist, who, in amazement,
encounters another country and its religion for the fi rst time; rather, he holds here in his
hands the result of long discussions and interactions between his own [culture] and Indian
culture.” Ibid.
CONCLUSION: GANDHI ON THE GĪTĀ 443
a legacy of miseries.” 29 With this statement, the so-called dogmatic and philosophical
interpolations, which provide a commentary and a justifi cation for the war and seek
to elaborate on the essentially confl ictual nature of all Becoming, become necessary
and even primary concerns of the epic rather than later additions.
Finally, Gandhi also has a suitably sophisticated way of accounting for the
worldly-metaphysical divide that has proven such a source of irritation to the
Indologists. German Indologists, notwithstanding their Protestant background
and calling, like to think of themselves as the champions of a worldly, secular, and
rationalistic outlook. As we have seen, a basic presupposition for their research was
the ability to distinguish between an original warrior epic and a later bhakti -colored
Brahmanic text in the Mahābhārata. In the case of the Gītā, that color was practi-
cally a stain, and they tried several tactics to purge the stain and thus purify the text.
Th us, layers were made, archaeological evidence of K ṛ ṣ ṇ a or Vāsudeva worship was
brought in and, when all else failed, the most imaginative of Indologists was prepared
to excise the entire Gītā from the epic, including for good measure several chapters
along with it. 30 However, Gandhi’s interpretation is immune to this criticism of the
Indological equivocation of faith and error. He sets aside the question of K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s
divinity. “Krishna of the Gita is perfection and right knowledge personifi ed; but the
picture is imaginary. Th at does not mean that Krishna, adored of his people, never
lived. But perfection is imagined. Th e idea of perfect incarnation is an aftergrowth.” 31
Th is statement is quite radical. Yet, whatever the theogony of the god mythically and
historically, the Gītā itself provides such an interpretive course. K ṛ ṣ ṇ a says that the
fool thinks he is another being; he repeats that he is the ā tman (Self) of all beings. 32
A case could be made for Kr ̣ ṣ ṇ a as the perfection not only of knowledge but also that
of a human or a god. Gandhi prefers to remain on the human level and bring incarna-
tion into a surprising relationship with service. “In Hinduism, incarnation is ascribed
to one who has performed some extraordinary service of mankind.” 33 Service, once
more, guides Gandhi’s philology: from the human to the divine, service informs the
truth of all worldly existence.3 4 He is clearly aware that the devotional aspects of
the Gītā merely buttress the philosophical and ethical knowledge contained therein,
for he notes: “In order that knowledge may not run riot, the author of the Gita has
insisted on devotion accompanying it and has given it fi rst place. . . . Th e Gita’s assess-
ment of the devotee’s qualities is similar to that of the sage’s.” 35
29 . Mahadev Desai, trans. Th e Bhagavadgītā According to Gandhi , xvii.
30 . See Simson, “Die Einschaltung der B hagavadgītā im Bhī ṣ maparvan des M ahābhārata ,”
159–74.
31 . Mahadev Desai, trans., Th e Bhagavadgītā According to Gandhi , xviii.
32 . a vyaktam ̇ vyaktim āpanna ṁ manyante mām abuddhaya ḥ | para ṁ bhāvam ajānanto
mamāvyayam anuttamam ||; Bhagavadgītā 7.24; see also Bhagavadgītā 7.25: nāham ̇
prakāśah ̣ sarvasya yogamāyāsamāv ṛ ta ḥ | mūd ̣ ho ‘ya ṁ nābhijānāti loko mām ajam avyayam ||.
33 . Mahadev Desai, trans., Th e Bhagavadgītā According to Gandhi , xviii.
34 . sam ̇ niyamyendriyagrāmam ̇ sarvatra samabuddhaya ḥ | t e prāpnuvanti mām eva
sarvabhūtahite ratā ḥ ||; Bhagavadgītā 12.4; see also Bhagavadgītā 4.7: yadā yadā hi dhar-
masya glānir bhavati bhārata | abhyutthānam adharmasya tadātmāna ṁ s ṛ jāmy aham ||.
35 . Mahadev Desai, trans., Th e Bhagavadgītā According to Gandhi , xix.
444 Conclusion: Gandhi on the Gītā
A look at philology as it was practiced in the history of Indology shows that
German Indologists were far from understanding these principles. Th ey placed their
faith in a narrow concept of scientifi c method, which they thought would automati-
cally endow them with the ability to make sense of the text. But the task of inter-
pretation is much more complex. It requires qualities such as patience, sympathy,
maturity, and intellectual and personal humility. In contrast, so-called “layers anal-
ysis” ( Schichtenanalyse or, as it is also called, Textenschichtung3 6 ) takes only a little
sophomoric skill. And thus a generation of Indologists from Holtzmann to Malinar
undertook their dissections of the text, knowing neither what the text said nor what it
actually took to interpret it.
To be sure, this concluding look at Gandhi is not meant to solve all textual problems.
Rather, our aim is to outline an alternative to the scientism of Indology. In contrast to
the Indologists, who valorize their scientifi c status even at the expense of humanity,3 7
we fi nd that reading texts is ultimately a matter of responsibility. It is a matter of that
36 . Th e classic statement of the principles of this method is considered, among
Indologists, to be Paul Hacker’s address to the 1961 D eutscher Orientalistentag (Congress
of German Orientalists); the key passage from this address reads as follows: “From such
changes (I mean: inversions of the text, expansions, interpolations and even individual
word variants) one can at times practically read off intellectual-historical [geistesgeschich-
tliche] processes. And since we for the most part lack direct historical [geschichtliche] evi-
dence, textual history [Textgeschichte] or, speaking more generally, the m ethod of comparing
the multiple transmissions , is often the sole scientifi c [wissenschaftliche] means of knowl-
edge for [understanding? reconstructing?] the historical [geschichtliche] processes. Th e
history of religion [Religionsgeschichte] of Hinduism in its diff erent branches—history
of myths, of cult, of religious ethics and laws, of piety—but also the history of philosophy
[Philosophiegeschichte] in some of its branches can no longer be carried out scientifi -
cally [wissenschaftlich] without the use of this method. . . . At the outset, I had posed the
question: how does one extrapolate the historical one-after-the-other [geschichtlichen
Nacheinander] from out of the seeming one-alongside-the-other [Nebeneinander] of the
compiled texts? Th e part of the answer that I have given so far can be briefl y summarized
thus: at fi rst, one contemplates the transmitted works not as a whole, but rather dissects
them in pieces that are coherent in terms of their content [inhaltliche Zusammenhängende
Stücke] and looks for pieces that correspond partially, whether literally or in terms of their
content, either in other works or in other contexts of the [same] text; one compares these
and then develops the procedure of comparison each time individually from the realities
[Gegebenheiten] of the text. Th is is the method of comparing multiple transmissions .” Paul
Hacker, “Zur Methode der geschichtlichen Erforschung der anonymen Sanskritliteratur
des Hinduismus. Vortrag gehalten auf dem XV. Deutschen Orientalistentag Göttingen
1961,” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 111, no.2 (1961): 489.
37 . Th e attempt by Ernst Steinkellner, a student of the Nazi Erich Frauwallner, to rehabil-
itate his master’s work appears to us to be paradigmatic of this tendency. “To what extent
has his [i.e., Frauwallner’s] ‘Aryan approach’ infl uenced his world-famous two volume
albeit incomplete overview of Indian philosophy so much that one cannot deny its value
as a scientifi c conception [wissenschaftlichen Konzeption] drawn from source texts of the
development of philosophical thought in India? . . . How can one today engage Frauwallner’s
scientifi c work [Wissen] in light of this knowledge [of his Nazi involvement]? . . . We are
essentially confronted with two types of products of Frauwallner’s scientifi c activity [wis-
senschaftlicher Leistung]. On the one hand, with the editions, translations, analyses,
interpretations, and hypotheses. . . . It is these products of his work that . . . have become
indispensable for any further work and against which any further progress in understand-
ing . . . must be measured. Th ey must be seen as the knowledge gained through Frauwallner’s
CONCLUSION: GANDHI ON THE GĪTĀ 445
responsibility which Levinas fi nds is already implicit in the very being of language and
which he links to the imperative to respond to the other. Th e historical-critical method
is to be critiqued because more is at stake here than just the justifi cation of a method.
When truth is traded in for mere empirical correspondence, when ideas are traded in for
an assemblage of facts, when minimalism is applauded in the face of global problems,
when dialogue is suppressed for the sake of a monologue of methodological control,
the historical method must be critiqued. Th is critique is even more urgent and neces-
sary than we have made the case for here. In his book H uman Understanding , Stephen
Toulmin argues that there are two ways in which one can think of a science: “we can
think of it as a discipline, comprising a communal tradition of procedures and tech-
niques for dealing with theoretical or practical problems; or we can think of it as a pro-
fession, comprising the organized set of institutions, roles, and men whose task it is
to apply or improve those procedures and techniques.” 38 In the case of Indology, the
institutional and hegemonic aspects have so dominated the disciplinary aspects that
we can no longer ask the most elementary questions of science: for whom and for what
good? Since this science no longer has a positive motivation such as the reappropriation
of tradition or the upholding of ethical values, its eff ects are negative and nugatory. In
Carne-Ross’s memorable words, “if the humanities failed to humanize us,” it is “because
we deprived them of their humanity by alternately aestheticizing them and handing
them over to scholarship.”3 9 In this sense, German Indology is truly worthy of the epi-
thet “the nay science.”
philological-critical studies, which has a certain permanence and on which one can fur-
ther build. On the other hand, we are confronted with this complex of Frauwallner’s
ideas about periodization [of Indian history], which is scientifi cally untenable [wissen-
schaftlich unhaltbar] because of its racist foundations. Th ese ideas about periodization,
however, . . . are not only largely unusable, but can also be clearly distinguished from his
genuine philosophical-historical work, which is based on sources, and hence can be easily
separated from his work. . . . Just as the natural sciences cannot do without the knowledge
they have acquired and build on this [knowledge] without taking into consideration the
individual character or the fate of the person who acquired this knowledge, so also, it holds
for the knowledge acquired in the human sciences: whatever demonstrates itself as usable,
what one can extend, what one can improve, one cannot relinquish in further research.
However, this is precisely the case with regard to Frauwallner’s achievements, on which we
can and must build today, if we do not want to regress. When we remove the ideologically
conditioned ideas of periodization of Indian thought and Indian culture from his work,
and this means what is actually and in essence ‘only’ his historical writing, what remains is
an impressive work of great clarity and consistency.” Ernst Steinkellner, “Vorbemerkungen
zu Jakob Stuchlik, D er arische Ansatz. Erich Frauwallner und der Nationalsozialismus ,” 1–2, 3,
4; ikga.oeaw.ac.at/Mat/steinkellner_vorwort_stuchlik_2009.pdf.
38 . Toulmin, Human Understanding , 142.
39 . D. S. Carne-Ross, “Scenario for a New Year,” Arion 8, no.2 (1969): 202.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abrams , M. H. Natural Supernaturalism: Tradition and Revolution in Romantic Literature .
New York : Norton , 1973 .
Adluri, Vishwa . Review of Th e Bhagavadgītā: Doctrines and Context by Angelika Malinar .
History of Religions 50 , no. 1 ( 2010 ): 102–7 .
——. “Frame Narratives and Forked Beginnings: Or, How to Read the Ādiparvan.” J ournal
of Vaishnava Studies 19 , no. 2 ( 2011 ): 143–210 .
——. Parmenides, Plato, and Mortal Philosophy: Return from Transcendence .
London : Continuum , 2011 .
——. “Pride and Prejudice: German Orientalism and Indology.” I nternational Journal of
Hindu Studies 15 , no. 3 ( 2011 ): 1–41 .
——. “Hermeneutics and Narrative Architecture in the Mahābhārata.” In W ays and Reasons
for Th inking about the Mahâbhârata as a Whole . Edited by Vishwa Adluri . 1–27. Pune,
India : Bhandarkar Oriental Institute , 2013 .
——. Review of U nifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in Hindu Intellectual History , by
Andrew J. Nicholson. Humanities and Social Sciences Online (H-Net), March 22, 2012,
www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php?id=32207 .
——. “A Th eological Deconstruction of Metaphysics: Heidegger, Luther, and Aristotle.”
Epoché 18, no. 1 (2013): 129–60.
Adluri , Vishwa , and Joydeep Bagchee . “Introduction.” In Reading the Fifth Veda: Studies
on the Mahabharata. Essays by Alf Hiltebeitel , vol. 1. Edited by Vishwa Adluri and
Joydeep Bagchee . xi–xxxvi . Leiden : E. J. Brill , 2011 .
——. “Introduction.” In When the Goddess was a Woman: Mahabharata Ethnographies. Essays
by Alf Hiltebeitel , vol. 2. xi–xxxiii . Edited by Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee .
Leiden : E. J. Brill , 2011 .
——. “From Poetic Salvation to Immortality: Th e Myths of Ruru and Orpheus in Indic and
Greek Myth.” History of Religions 51 , no. 3 ( 2012 ): 239–61 .
——. Philology and Criticism: A Guide to Mahābhārata Textual Criticism . London: Anthem,
forthcoming.
——. “Th e Redemption of the Brahman: Garbe and German Interpreters of the Gītā.” In
Transcultural Encounters between Germany and India: Kindred Spirits in the Nineteenth
and Twentieth Centuries . Edited by Joanne Miyang Cho , Eric Kurlander , and Douglas
T. McGetchin , 68–83 . New York : Routledge , 2013 .
Adorno , T. W. “Cultural Criticism and Society.” In Prisms . Translated by Shierry Weber
Nicholsen and Samuel Weber 17–34. Cambridge, MA : MIT Press , 1967 .
Aklujkar , Ashok. “Th e Pandits from a pi ṇ ḍ a-brahmā ṇ ḍ a Point of View.” In Th e Pandit:
Traditional Scholarship in India . Edited by Michael Axels , 41–59 . Delhi : Manohar , 2001 .
Aland , Kurt. “Editorische Bemerkung.” In Martin Luther , Luther deutsch. Die Werke Martin
Luthers in neuer Auswahl für die Gegenwart , vol. 4. Edited by Kurt Aland , 341 .
Göttingen : Vandenhoek & Ruprecht , 1991 .
448 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Albach , Horst. “Der Indologe Christian Lassen.” In O rden Pour le mérite für
Wissenschaften und Kunst. Reden und Gedenkworte , vol. 36: 2007–8 , 109–13 .
Göttingen : Wallstein , 2007 .
Allen , N. J. “Th eodor Goldstücker.” O xford Dictionary of National Biography 22
( 2004 ): 699–700 .
Alles , Gregory D. “Rudolf Otto (1869–1937).” In K lassiker der Religionswissenschaft. Von
Friedrich Schleiermacher bis Mircea Eliade . Edited by Axel Michaels , 198–210 .
Munich : C. H. Beck , 1997 .
Almond , Philip C. R udolf Otto: An Introduction to his Philosophical Th eology . Chapel Hill and
London : Th e University of North Carolina Press , 1984 .
Alsdorf , Ludwig. Deutsch-indische Geistesbeziehungen . Heidelberg : Kurt Vowinckel , 1942 .
Arnold , Edwin. Th e Song Celestial or Bhagavad-Gîtâ . London : Trübner , 1885 .
Arvidsson , Stefan. A ryan Idols: Indo-European Mythology as Ideology and Science . Translated
by Sonia Wichmann . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 2006 .
Asad , Talal. F ormations of the Secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity . Stanford : Stanford
University Press , 2003 .
Bagchee , Joydeep. “Inversion, K ṛ ṣ ṇ afi cation, Brahmanization: Th e Explanatory Force
of Some Extraordinary Figures of Speech.” Journal of Vaishnava Studies 19 , no. 2
( 2011 ): 127–41 .
——. “Th e Invention of Diff erence and the Assault on Ecumenism: Paul Hacker Becomes
a Catholic.” Paper presented at the 3rd R ethinking Religion in India conference,
Pardubice, Czech Republic, October 11–14, 2011 .
——. “German Indology.” In O xford Bibliographies Online: Hinduism .
Bagchee, Joydeep, and Vishwa Adluri. “Th e Passion of Paul Hacker: Indology, Orientalism,
and Evangelism.” In T ranscultural Encounters between Germany and India: Kindred
Spirits in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries . Edited by Joanne Miyang Cho , Eric
K urlander, and D ouglas T . McGetchin. 2 15–29. N ew York: R outledge, 2 013.
Bagchi , Kaushik. “Orientalism without Colonialism? Th ree Nineteenth-Century German
Indologists and India.” PhD diss., Ohio State University , 1996 .
——. “An Orientalist in the Orient: Richard Garbe’s Indian Journey, 1885–1886.” J ournal
of World History 14 , no. 3 ( 2003 ): 281–325 .
Bailey , Gregory M. Th e Mythology of Brahmā . Delhi : Motilal Banarsidass , 1983 .
Balagangadhara , S. N. Th e Heathen in His Blindness: Asia, the West & the Dynamic of Religion .
Leiden : E. J. Brill , 1994.
Bambach , Charles R. H eidegger, Dilthey, and the Crisis of Historicism . Ithaca, NY : Cornell
University Press , 1995 .
Barth , Karl. Church Dogmatics: A Selection with Introduction by Helmut Gollwitzer . Louisville
Westminster John Knox Press , 1994 .
Bauer , F. C. “Die Christuspartei in der korinthischen Gemeinde, der Gegensatz des
petrinischen und paulinischen Christenthums in der ältesten Kirche, der Apostel
Petrus in Rom.” Tübinger Zeitschrift für Th eologie 3 , no. 4 ( 1831 ): 61–206 .
——. “Über Zweck und Veranlassung des Römerbriefs und die damit zusammenhängenden
Verhältnisse der römischen Gemeinde: Eine historische-kritische Untersuchung.”
Tübinger Zeitschrift für Th eologie 8, no. 3 ( 1836 ): 59–178 .
——. Paulus, der Apostel Jesu Christi: Sein Leben und Wirken, seine Briefe und seine Lehre.
Ein Beitrag zur kritischen Geschichte des Urchristenthums . Stuttgart : Becher &
Müller, 1 845.
——. Paulus, der Apostel Jesu Christi: Sein Leben und Wirken, seine Briefe und seine Lehre.
Ein Beitrag zu einer kritischen Geschichte des Urchristenthums. Zweite Aufl age, nach den
Tode des Verfassers besorgt von Dr. Eduard Zeller , part 2. Leipzig: Fues’s Verlag, 1867.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 449
Bauer , G. L. Entwurf einer Hermeneutik des Alten und Neuen Testaments . Leipzig : In der
Weygandschen Buchhandlung , 1799 .
Bauman , Šā‘ûl. D ie Deutsche Glaubensbewegung und ihr Gründer Jakob Wilhelm Hauer (1881–
1962) . Translated by Alma Lessing . Marburg : Diagonal-Verlag , 2005 .
Bayer , Oswald. Th eology the Lutheran Way . Translated and edited by Jeff rey G. S ilcock and
Mark C. Mattes . Grand Rapids : William B. Eerdmans, 2007 .
Becker , Johann Heinrich. M ahābhārata: Der grosse Krieg . Berlin : printed by author , 1888 .
——. Zur Deutung urzeitlicher Überlieferung . Berlin : printed by author , 1889 .
Beiser , Frederick C. Th e Fate of Reason: German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte . Cambridge,
MA : Harvard University Press , 1987 .
Belvalkar , S. K. “Miscarriage of the Attempted Stratifi cation of the Bhagavadgīta.” J ournal
of the University of Bombay 5 ( 1937 ): 66–133 .
——, ed. Th e Bhî ṣ maparvan for the First Time Critically Edited . Pune : Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute , 1947 .
Benes , Tuska E. In Babel’s Shadow: Language, Philology, and the Nation in Nineteenth-Century
Germany . Detroit, MI : Wayne State University Press , 2008 .
——. “From Indo-Germans to Aryans: Philology and the Racialization of Salvationist
National Rhetoric, 1806–30.” In Th e German Invention of Race . Edited by Sara Eigen
and Mark Larrimore , 167–81 . Albany : State University of New York Press , 2006 .
Benfey , Th eodor. Geschichte der Sprachwissenschaft und Orientalischen Philologie in
Deutschland seit dem Anfange des 19. Jahrhunderts mit einem Rückblick auf die
Früheren . Munich : J. G. Cotta , 1869 .
Benz , Ernst. “Rudolf Otto als Th eologe und Persönlichkeit.” In R udolf Otto’s Bedeutung
für die Religionswissenschaft und die Th eologie heute . Edited by Ernst Benz , 30–48.
Leiden : Brill , 1971 .
Bergunder , Michael. “Die Bhagavadgita im 19. Jahrhundert. Hinduismus, Esoterik und
Kolonialismus.” In Westliche Formen des Hinduismus in Deutschland. Eine Ü bersicht .
Edited by Michael Bergunder , 187–216. Halle : Verlag der Franckeschen Stiftungen
zu Halle , 2006 .
Bhate, Saroja, ed. Indology: Past, Present, and Future . New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 2002.
Biardeau , Madeleine. Études de mythologie hindoue, vol. 1: Cosmogonies purāniques .
Paris: École Française d’Extrême Orient, 1981.
——. Hinduism: Th e Anthropology of a Civilization . Translated by Richard Nice . Delhi : Oxford
University Press , 1989 .
——. Études de mythologie hindoue, vol. 2: Bhakti et avatāra . Paris: École Française d’Extrême
Orient, 1994.
——. Le Mahābhārata. Un récit fondateur du brahmanisme et son interprétation , 2 vols.
Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 2002.
Blumenberg , Hans. Th e Legitimacy of the Modern Age . Translated by Robert M. Wallace .
Cambridg, MA : MIT Press , 1985 . Originally published as Die Legimität der Neuzeit .
Frankfurt a.M. : Suhrkamp Verlag , 1966 .
Boeke , R. “Rudolf Otto: Leben und Werk.” N umen 14 , no. 2 ( 1967 ): 130–43 .
Böhtlingk , Otto. “Bemerkungen zur Bhagavadgîtâ.” Berichte über die Verhandlungen
der Königlichen Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig,
Philologisch-Historische Classe 49 ( 1897 ): 4–16 .
Bopp , Franz. Über das Conjugationssystem der Sanskritsprache in Vergleichung mit jenem
der griechischen, lateinischen, persischen und germanischen Sprache . Frankfurt
a.M. : Andreäischen Buchhandlung , 1816 .
——. A rdschuna’s Reise zu Indra’s Himmel, nebst anderen Episoden des Maha-Bharata .
Berlin : Königliche Akademie der Wissenschaften , 1824 .
450 BIBLIOGRAPHY
——. D ie Sündfl ut nebst drei anderen der wichtigsten Episoden des Mahâ-Bhârata.
Berlin : Königliche Akademie der Wissenschaften , 1829 .
——. N alas und Damajanti. Eine indische Dichtung . Berlin : In der Nicolaischen
Buchhandlung , 1838 .
Bourdeau , Michel. “Auguste Comte.” In Th e Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer
2011 Edition) . Edited by Edward N. Zalta . http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
sum2011/entries/comte/ .
Boxberger , Robert. Bhagavad-Gîtâ oder das Lied der Gottheit . Berlin : Gustav Hempel , 1870 .
Brockington , John L. Th e Sanskrit Epics . Leiden : E. J. Brill , 1998 .
Bronkhorst , Johannes. “Against Methodological Positivism in Textual Studies.” Asiatische
Studien LXIV , no. 2 ( 2010 ): 265–74 .
——. “Indology, What Is It Good For?” Z eitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft 161 , no. 1 ( 2011 ): 115–22 .
Brooke , John Hedley. S cience and Religion: Some Historical Perspectives . Cambridge :
Cambridge University Press , 1991 .
Bruce , Steve. God Is Dead: Secularization in the West . Malden, MA : Wiley-Blackwell , 2002 .
von Brück , Michael. Translated and edited by Bhagavad Gîtâ. Der Gesang des Erhabenen .
Frankfurt a.M. : Verlag der Weltreligion im Insel Verlag , 2007 .
Brustein , William I. R oots of Hate: Anti-Semitism in Europe before the Holocaust .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 2003 .
Th e Mahâbhârata , vol. 1: Th e Book of the Beginning . Chicago : University of Chicago
Press , 1973 .
——. “Introduction.” In Th e Mahābhārata, vol. 1. Th e Book of the Beginning . xiii–xlvii .
Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1973 .
——. “Introduction.” In Th e Mahābhārata . 4. Th e Book of Virā t ạ 5. Th e Book of the Eff ort .
133–84 . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1978 .
——. Th e Bhagavadgîtâ in the Mahâbhârata . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1981 .
von Bunsen , Christian Karl Josias. “Brief an Max Müller vom 23 April 1856.” In Essays
von Max Müller , vol. 3. Translated and edited by Felix Liebrecht , 471–73 . Leipzig :
Wilhelm Engelmann , 1872 . English translation in Chips from a German Workshop .
Edited by Max Müller , vol. 3, 459–63 . New York : Scribner, Armstrong, and Co .,
1876 .
——. “Brief an Max Müller vom 17 Juli 1856.” In Essays von Max Müller , vol. 3. Translated
and edited by Felix Liebrecht , 483–84 . Leipzig : Wilhelm Engelmann , 1872 . English
translation in C hips from a German Workshop . Edited by Max Müller , vol. 3, 469–73 .
New York : Scribner, Armstrong, and Co ., 1876 .
Burckhardt , Jakob. Briefe , vol. 6. Edited by Max Burckhardt . Basel : Schwabe , 1966 .
Cancik , Hubert. “Von Ferdinand Bauer zu Ernst Bloch: religionswissenschaftliche Arbeit
an der Universität Tübingen seit der Spätaufklärung.” S tudi e Materiali di Storia delle
Religioni 62 ( 1996 ): 75–96 .
Cassirer , Ernst. Th e Philosophy of the Enlightenment . Edited by James P. Pettegrove .
Translated by Fritz Koelin . Princeton, NJ : Princeton University Press , 1951 .
Carne-Ross , D. S. “Scenario for a New Year.” Arion 8 , no. 2 ( 1969 ): 171–260 , 262–87 .
Chadwick, Owen. Th e Secularization of the European Mind in the Nineteenth Century .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1975 .
Chakrabarti , Dipesh. Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Th ought and Historical Diff erence .
Princeton, NJ : Princeton University Press , 2000 .
Chapman , Mark D. Ernst Troeltsch and Liberal Th eology: Religion and Cultural Synthesis in
Wilhelmine Germany . New York : Oxford University Press , 2001 .
Charpentier , Jarl. “Some Remarks on the Bhagavadgita .” Th e Indian Antiquary LIX
( 1930 ): 46–50 , 77–80 , 101–5 , 121–26.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 451
Coburn , Th omas B. Encountering the Goddess: A Translation of the Devî-Mâhâtmya and a
Study of its Interpretation . Albany : State University of New York Press , 1991 .
Comte , Auguste. C ours de philosophie positive , vol. 6. Paris : J. Baillière , 1869 .
——. A uguste Comte and Positivism: Th e Essential Writings , edited and with an introduction
by Gertrude Lenzer . New York : Harper & Row , 1975 .
Constable , Phillip. “Scottish Missionaries, ‘Protestant Hinduism’ and the Scottish Sense
of Empire in Nineteenth and Early Twentieth-Century India.” Scottish Historical
Review 86 , 2 : 222 ( 2007 ): 278–313 .
“Constantine V.” In Th e Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium . Edited by Alexander P. Kazhdan .
501 . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1991 .
Cooper , J. M. C. , ed. Plato: Complete Works . Indianapolis : Hackett , 1997 .
Cowan , Robert. Th e Indo-German Identifi cation: Reconciling South Asian Origins and European
Destinies, 1765–1885 . Rochester, NY : Camden House , 2010 .
Dahlmann , Joseph. Das Mahâbhârata als Epos und Rechtsbuch. Ein Problem aus Altindiens
Cultur- und Literaturgeschichte . Berlin : Felix L. Dames , 1895 .
——. Die Genesis des Mahābhārata . Berlin : Felix L. Dames , 1899 .
Dallmayr , Fred R. Beyond Orientalism . Albany : State University of New York Press , 1996 .
Das, Sisir Kumar. Western Sailors, Eastern Seas: German Response to Indian Culture. New
Delhi: Th omson, 1971.
Derrida , Jacques. Writing and Diff erence . Translated by Alan Bass. Chicago : University of
Chicago Press , 1978 .
——. “Plato’s Pharmacy.” In Dissemination . Translated by Barbara Miller . 61–171 . Chicago :
University of Chicago Press , 1983 .
Desai , Mahadev, trans. Th e Bhagavadgîtâ According to Gandhi . Berkeley, CA : North Atlantic
Books , 2009 .
Deussen , Paul. D er Gesang des Heiligen . L eipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1 911.
Deussen , Paul , and Otto Strauss . Vier philosophische Texte aus dem Mahâbhârata . Leipzig:
F. A. Brockhaus , 1906 .
Deutsches Wörterbuch von Jacob Grimm und Wilhelm Grimm , 16 vols. Leipzig : Verlag von
S. Hirzel , 1854 – 1961 .
Dharampal-Frick , Gita. Indien im Spiegel deutscher Quellen der Frühen Neuzeit . Tübingen : Max
Niemeyer Verlag , 1994 .
Dierks , Margarete. “Die preußischen Altkonservativen und die Judenfrage 1810/1847 .”
PhD diss., University of Rostock , 1939 .
——. Jakob Wilhelm Hauer: 1881–1962. Leben, Werk, Wirkung, mit einer Personalbibliographie .
Heidelberg : Schneider , 1986 .
Doniger , Wendy. Th e Implied Spider: Politics and Th eology in Myth . New York : Columbia
University Press , 1998 .
——. S plitting the Diff erence: Gender and Myth in Ancient Greece and India . Chicago :
University of Chicago Press , 1999 .
——. Th e Hindus: An Alternative History . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 2009 .
——. See also O’Flaherty , Wendy Doniger .
Edgerton , Franklin. “Edward Washburn Hopkins, 1857–1932.” Journal of the American
Oriental Society 52 , 4 ( 1932 ): 311–15 .
——. Review of Th e Original Gītā: Th e Song of the Supreme Exalted One , by Rudolf Otto .
Review of Religion 4 ( 1940 ): 448 .
von Eickstedt , Egon. Rassenkunde und Rassengeschichte der Menschheit . Stuttgart : F. Enke ,
1934 . 2nd revised and expanded ed. Stuttgart : F. Enke , 1934 .
Esleben , Jörg , et al. M apping Channels between Ganges and Rhein: German-Indian
Cross-Cultural Relations . Newcastle upon Tyne, England : Cambridge Scholars , 2008 .
452 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ewald , Heinrich. “Plan dieser Zeitschrift.” Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 1
( 1837 ): 3–13 .
——. “Schluss dieser Ausgabe der Zeitschrift.” Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 3
( 1840 ): 490–503 .
——. Geschichte des Volkes Israel bis Christus . 7 vols. Göttingen : In der Dieterich'schen
Buchhandlung , 1843–1859 .
Felsch , C. “In welchem Verhältnisse steht die Moral der B hag . zur Moral der Inder um
die Zeit der Entstehung dieses Gedichtes?.” Z eitschrift für exakte Philosophie XVI
( 1888 ): 369–412 .
de Feller , François Xavier. B iographie universelle ou dictionnaire historique , vol. 4. Paris : J.
Leroux , 1848 .
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb. Reden an die deutsche Nation . Berlin: In der Realschulbuchhandlung,
1808.
Figueira , Dorothy M. Th e Exotic: A Decadent Quest . Albany : State University of New York
Press , 1994 .
——. T ranslating the Orient: Th e Reception of Sakuntala in Nineteenth-Century Europe .
Albany : State University of New York Press , 1994 .
——. A ryans, Brahmins and Jews: Th eorizing Authority through Myths of Identity . Albany :
State University of New York Press , 2002 .
Fitzgerald , James L. “Th e Great Epic of India as Religious Rhetoric: A Fresh Look at the
Mahābhārata.” J ournal of the American Academy of Religion 51 ( 1983 ): 611–39 .
——. “India’s Fifth Veda: Th e Mahābhārata’s Presentation of Itself.” In Essays on the
Mahābhārata. Edited by Arvind Sharma, 150–71. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991.
——. “ Mahābhārata .” In Th e Hindu World . Edited by Sushil Mittal and Gene Th ursby, 52–74.
New York and London: Routledge, 2004.
——. “Negotiating the Shape of ‘Scripture’: New Perspectives on the Development and
Growth of the Epic Between the Empires.” In Between the Empires: Society in India,
300 BCE to 400 CE . Edited by Patrick Olivelle , 257–87 . Oxford : Oxford University
Press , 2006 .
——. “No Contest between Memory and Invention: Th e Invention of the Pā ṇ ḍ ava Heroes
of the M ahābhārata .” In Epic and History . Ed. David Konstan and Kurt A. Raafl aub ,
103–21 . Malden, MA : Wiley-Blackwell , 2010 .
O’Flaherty , Wendy Doniger. Th e Origins of Evil in Hindu Mythology . Berkeley : University of
California Press , 1976 .
——. Śiva: Th e Erotic Ascetic . New York : Oxford University Press , 1981 .
Foucault , Michael. P ower/Knowledge . New York : Vintage , 1980 .
——. “Nietzsche, Genealogy, History.” In Essential Works of Foucault, 1954–1984 . Edited
by Paul Rabinow. Vol. 2, Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology . Edited by James D.
Faubion , 369–91. New York : New Press , 1998 .
——. “Truth and Power.” I n Essential Works of Foucault, 1954–1984 . Edited by Paul Rabinow.
Vol. 3, Power . Edited by James D. Faubion. 112–33. New York: New Press, 2000.
——. Th e Order of Th ings: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences . London and
New York : Routledge , 2002 .
Franco , Eli , and Karin Preisendanz . B eyond Orientalism: Th e Work of Wilhelm Halbfass and
Its Impact on Indian and Cross-Cultural Studies . Atlanta, GA : Rodopi , 1997 .
——. “Foreword.” In Erich Frauwallner , D ie Philosophie des Buddhismus . Berlin: Akademie
Verlag , 200 10.
Frank , Othmar. “Bhagavadgītae: loca selecta cum versione.” In C hrestomathia Saṇsk ṛ ita ,
vol. 2. Munich : printed by author , 1821 .
Frauwallner , Erich. “Der arische Anteil an der indischen Philosophie.” W iener Zeitschrift für
die Kunde des Morgenlandes 46 ( 1939 ): 267–91 .
BIBLIOGRAPHY 453
——. Geschichte der indischen Philosophie , vol. 1. Salzburg : Otto Müller Verlag , 1953 .
Fries , Jakob Friedrich. W issen, Glaube und Ahndung . Jena : J. C. G. Göpferdt , 1805 .
——. N eue oder anthropologische Kritik der Vernunft , vol. 1, 2nd ed. Heidelberg : C. F. Winter ,
1828 .
Fritsche , Peter. Stranded in the Present: Modern Time and the Melancholy of History .
Cambridge, MA : Harvard University Press , 2004 .
Fuchs , W. P. “Was heisst das: ‘bloss zeigen, wie es eigentlich gewesen’?” G eschichte in
Wissenschaft und Unterricht 11 ( 1979 ): 655–67 .
Gadamer , Hans-Georg. Truth and Method . Translated by Joel Weinsheimer and Donald G.
Marshall . London : Continuum , 2004 .
Gaeff ke , Peter. “A Rock in the Tides of Time: Oriental Studies Th en and Now.” A cademic
Questions 3 , no. 2 ( 1990 ): 67–74 .
Garbe , Richard. Vaitāna Śrautasūtra: Das Ritual des Atharvaveda . Strassburg : K. J.
Trübner , 1878 .
——. Th e Śrauta Sútra of Ápastamba, belonging to the Taittiríya Samhitá with the Commentary
of Rudradatta , 3 vols. Calcutta : Asiatic Society , 1882–1902 .
——. Indische Reiseskizzen . Berlin : Gebrüder Paetel , 1889 .
——. Die Sâ ṃ khya-Philosophie: Eine Darstellung des indischen Rationalismus nach den Quellen .
Leipzig : H. Haessel , 1894 .
——. Sâ ṃ khya and Yoga . Strassburg : K. J. Trübner , 1896 .
——. Th e Philosophy of Ancient India . Chicago : Open Court , 1899 .
——. Beiträge zur indischen Kulturgeschichte . Berlin : Gebrüder Paetel , 1903 .
——. Th e Redemption of the Brahman . Chicago : Open Court , 1894 . Originally published
as “Die Erlösung des Brahmanen. Eine Erzählung von Richard Garbe.” Illustrierte
Deutsche Monatshefte ( 1892 ): 201–31 .
——. “Roth, Rudolf.” In Beiträge zur Kunde der indogermanischen Sprachen , vol. 22. Edited by
Adalbert Bezzenberger . 139–52 . Göttingen : Vandenhoek & Ruprecht , 1897 .
——. D ie Bhagavadgîtâ. Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt und mit einer Einleitung über ihre
ursprüngliche Gestalt, ihre Lehren und ihr Alter versehen . Leipzig : H. Haessel , 1905 .
2nd revised ed. Leipzig : H. Haessel , 1921 .
——. “Roth, (Walter) Rudolf (von).” In Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie , vol. 53, 549–64 .
Leipzig : Duncker & Humblot , 1907 .
——. “Bhagavad-Gītā.” In E ncyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics . Edited by James Hastings .
Vol. 2, 535–38 . Edinburgh : T & T Clark , 1909 .
——. I ndien und das Christentum. Eine Untersuchung der religionsgeschichtlichen
Zusammenhänge . Tübingen : J. C. B. Mohr , 1914 .
——. “Noch einmal das Bhagavadgītā-Problem.” D eutsche Literaturzeitung 43 , no. 6 ( 1922 ):
97–104 .
——. “Mein Schlusswort zum Bhagavadgītā-Problem.” D eutsche Literaturzeitung 43 , no. 28
( 1922 ): 604–5 .
Gelders , Raf , and Willem Derde . “Mantras of Anti-Brahmanism: Colonial Experience of
Indian Intellectuals.” Economic and Political Weekly 38 , no. 43 ( 2003 ): 4611–617 .
Gerdmar , Anders. Roots of Th eological Anti-Semitism: German Biblical Interpretation and the
Jews, from Herder and Semler to Kittel and Bultmann . Leiden : E. J. Brill , 2009 .
Germana , Nicholas A. Th e Orient of Europe: Th e Mythical Image of India and Competing Images
of German National Identity . Newcastle upon Tyne : Cambridge Scholars , 2009 .
Gilson , Etienne. R eason and Revelation in the Middle Ages . New York : Charles Scribner , 1963 .
von Glasenapp , Helmuth. D ie Literaturen Indiens. Von ihren Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart .
Wildpark-Potsdam : Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft Athenaion , 1929 .
——. Das Indienbild deutscher Denker . Stuttgart : K. F. Koehler , 1960 .
454 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Goldstücker , Th eodor. “Th e Inspired Writings of Hinduism.” Th e Westminster Review , n.s.,
25 ( 1864 ): 144–69 . Reprinted in Literary Remains of the Late Professor Goldstücker ,
vol. 2, 50–85 . London : W. H. Allen , 1879 .
——. “Hindu Epic Poetry: Th e Mahâbhârata.” Th e Westminster Review , n.s., 33 ( 1868 ): 380–
419 . Reprinted in Literary Remains of the Late Professor Goldstücker , vol. 2, 86–154 .
London : W. H. Allen , 1879 .
Gooch , Todd A. Th e Numinous and Modernity: An Interpretation of Rudolf Otto’s Philosophy of
Religion . Berlin : Walter de Gruyter , 2000 .
Goodrick-Clarke, Nicholas. Th e Occult Roots of Nazism: Secret Aryan Cults and their Infl uence
on Nazi Ideology. New York: New York University Press, 2005.
Graf , Friedrich Wilhelm. “Zur Begriff sgeschichte einer theologischen Chiff re.” Archiv für
Begriff sgeschichte 28 ( 1984 ): 214–68 .
Graf Reventlow , Henning. “Die biblischen Schriften aus ihrer Zeit heraus begreifen: Johann
Salomo Semler.” In E pochen der Bibelauslegung , vol. 4: Von der Aufklärung bis zum 20.
Jahrhundert . 175–89. Munich : C. H. Beck , 2001 .
——. “In idealistischer Schau das Neue Testament historisch-kritisch untersuchen und
geschichtlich verstehen: Ferdinand Christian Bauer.” In E pochen der Bibelauslegung ,
vol. 4: Von der Aufklärung bis zum 20. Jahrhundert . 269–78. Munich : C. H. Beck , 2001 .
Grant , Charles Observations on the State of Society among the Asiatic Subjects of Great Britain,
Particularly with Respect to Morals; and on the Means of Improving It . London : 1792 .
Grünendahl , Reinhold. “Wissenschaftsgeschichte im Schatten postorientalistischer De/
Konstruktion.” Orientalistische Literaturzeitung 103 , nos. 4–5 ( 2008 ): 457–78 .
Günther , Hans. Die nordische Rasse bei den Indogermanen Asiens: zugleich ein Beitrag
zur Frage nach der Urheimat und Rassenherkunft der Indogermanen . Munich : J.
F. Lehmann , 1934 .
Gupta , S.P. and K.S. Ramachandran , “Mahābhārata: Myth and Reality.” In D elhi: Ancient
History . Edited by Upinder Singh , 77–116 . New Delhi : Social Science Press , 2006 .
Gurd , Sean Alexander. Iphigenias at Aulis: Textual Multiplicity, Radical Philology . Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press , 2005 .
Hacker , Paul. “Zur Methode der geschichtlichen Erforschung der anonymen
Sanskritliteratur des Hinduismus. Vortrag gehalten auf dem XV. Deutschen
Orientalistentag Göttingen 1961.” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft 111 , no. 2 ( 1961 ): 483–92 .
——. “Aspects of Neo-Hinduism as Contrasted with Surviving Traditional Hinduism.” In
Kleine Schriften . Edited by Lambert Schmithausen , 580–608 . Wiesbaden : Franz
Steiner , 1978 .
Halbfass , Wilhelm L. I ndia and Europe: An Essay in Understanding . Albany : State University
of New York Press , 1988 .
Handelman , Don , and David Shulman . G od Inside Out: Śiva’s Game of Dice . New York : Oxford
University Press , 1997 .
Hanneder , Jürgen. Review of Beyond Orientalism. Th e Work of Wilhelm Halbfass and
Its Impact on Indian and Cross-Cultural Studies , edited by Eli Franco and Karin
Preisendanz . Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 151 , 1
( 2001 ): 238–39 .
——. Review of Th e Pandit. Traditional Scholarship in India , edited by Michael Axels .
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 155, no. 2 ( 2001 ): 671–72 .
——. Review of Rājavidyā: Das kö nigliche Wissen um Herrschaft und Verzicht. Studien zur
Bhagavadgītā , by Angelika Malinar . Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft 151 , 1 ( 2001 ): 239–41 .
——. Review of Bhagavad Gītā: Der Gesang des Erhabenen , translated and edited by Michael
von Brück . M arburger Forum 9 , 4 ( 2008 ); www.philosophia-online.de/mafo/
heft2008-4/Han_Bhag.htm .
BIBLIOGRAPHY 455
——. Marburger Indologie im Umbruch: Zur Geschichte des Faches 1845–1945 . Munich : P.
Kircheim Verlag , 2010 .
——. “Search the WEB: ‘Deutsche Indologie.’ ” In Marburger Indologie im Umbruch: Zur
Geschichte des Faches 1845–1945 , 81–87 . Munich : P. Kircheim Verlag , 2010 .
Harré , Rom. “Positivist thought in the nineteenth century.” In Th e Cambridge History of
Philosophy 1870–1945 . Edited by Th omas Baldwin , 11–26 . Cambridge : Cambridge
University Press , 2003 .
Hartmann , Franz. Die Erkenntnislehre der Bhagavad Gita im Lichte der Geheimlehre betrachtet.
Ein Beitrag zum Studium derselben . Leipzig : W. Friedrich , 1897 .
——. Die Bhagavad Gita oder das Hohe Lied enthaltend der Lehre der Unsterblichkeit .
Leipzig : W. Friedrich , 1899 . Reprint: Munich: Schatzkammer Verlag, n.d.
——. Die Bhagavad Gita. Das Lied von der Gottheit oder die Lehre vom göttlichen Sein und von
der Unsterblichkeit . Leipzig : Altmann , 1907 .
Härtel , H erbert. “Ernst Waldschmidt (1897–1985).” Zeitschrift der Deutschen
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 137 ( 1987 ): 6–11 .
Hauer , Jakob Wilhelm. Letter to the Ministry of Culture and Education in Berlin (Prof.
Windelband), October 28, 1927. Federal Archives Koblenz, literary remains of
Hauer, vol. 123, fol. 391–94 .
——. D as religiöse Artbild der Indogermanen und die Grundtypen der indo-arischen Religion .
Stuttgart : Kohlhammer , 1937 .
——. Glaubensgeschichte der Germanen, part I: Das religiöse Artbild der Indogermanen
und die Grundtypen der indo-arischen Religion. Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer, 1937.
——. Glaubensgeschichte der Indogermanen . Stuttgart : Kohlhammer , 1937 .
——. Eine indo-arische Metaphysik des Kampfes und der Tat: Die Bhagavadgîtâ in neuer Sicht
mit Übersetzungen . Stuttgart : Kolhammer , 1937 .
Hayek , F. A. S tudies on the Abuse and Decline of Reason: Text and Documents . Edited by Bruce
Caldwell . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 2010 .
Heesterman , J. C. Th e Inner Confl ict of Tradition: Essays in Indian Ritual, Kingship, and
Society . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1985 .
Hegel , G. W. F. “Ueber die unter dem Nahmen Bhagavad-Gita bekannte Episode des
Mahabharata; von Wilhelm von Humboldt.” J ahrbücher für wissenschaftliche Kritik
7 / 8 (January 1827 ): 51–63 and 181–88 (October 1827 ): 1441–1492. Reprinted in
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , Gesammelte Werke, vol. 16: Schriften und Entwürfe
II (1826–1831) . Edited by Friedrich Hoegemann with the assistance of Christoph
Jamme. 19–75. Hamburg : Felix Meiner , 2001 . Translated by Herbert Herring as
On the Episode of the Mahābhārata known by the name Bhagavad-Gītā by Wilhelm von
Humboldt . New Delhi : Indian Council of Philosophical Research , 1995 .
——. Phenomenology of Spirit . Translated by A. V. Miller . Oxford : Oxford University
Press, 1 977.
Heidegger , Martin. “The End of Philosophy and the Task of Thinking.” In On Time and
Being. Translated by J oan S tambaugh, 5 5–73. C hicago: U niversity of Chicago
Press , 1972 .
——. “Only a God Can Save Us: Der Spiegel ’s Interview with Martin Heidegger.” Translated
by Maria Alter and John D. Caputo . Philosophy Today 20 , no. 4 ( 1976 ): 267–84 .
——. Parmenides . Translated by André Schuwer and Richard Rojcewicz . Bloomington, IN :
Indiana University Press , 1992 .
Heiler , Friedrich. “Die Bedeutung Rudolf Ottos für die vergleichende Religionsgeschichte.”
In Religionswissenschaft in neuer Sicht. Drei Reden über Rudolf Ottos Persönlichkeit
und Werke . Edited by Birger Forell , Heinrich Frick , and Friedrich Heiler . 13–26 .
Marburg : N. G. Elwert , 1951 .
Heine , Heinrich. H einrich Heines Sämtliche Werke , vol. 5. Edited by Ernst Elster . Leipzig
and Vienna : Bibliographisches Institut , 1893 .
456 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Hendrix , Scott. “Rerooting the Faith: Th e Reformation as Re-Christianization.” C hurch
History 69 , no.3 ( 2000 ): 558–77 .
Herder , J. G. “Gedanken einiger Brahmanen.” In Johann Gottfried Herder, Sämtliche Werke .
Edited by Bernhard Suphan . Vol. 26: P oetische Werke . Edited by Carl Redlich , 406–16 .
Hildesheim : G. Olms , 1968 .
Herling , Bradley L. Th e German Gîtâ : Hermeneutics and Discipline in the German Reception of
Indian Th ought, 1778–1831 . New York: Routledge , 2006 .
——. “Either a Hermeneutical Consciousness or a Critical Consciousness: Renegotiating
Th eories of the Germany-India Encounter.” Th e Comparatist 34 ( 2010 ): 63–79 .
Higton , Mike. A Th eology of Higher Education . New York : Oxford University Press , 2012 .
Hilgenfeld , Adolf. “Die wissenschaftliche Th eologie und ihre gegenwärtige Aufgabe.
Vorwort des Herausgebers.” Zeitschrift für wissenschaftliche Th eologie 1 ( 1858 ): 1–21 .
Hiltebeitel , Alf. “K ṛ ṣ ṇ a in the Mahābhārata: A Bibliographic Essay.” A nnals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 60 ( 1979 ): 65–110 .
——. R ethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education of the Dharma King .
Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 2001 .
——. “Th e Mahābhārata and the Stories Some People Tell about It—Part 1.” Exemplar: Th e
Journal of South Asian Studies 1 , no. 2 ( 2012 ): 2–26 .
Hodges , H. A. Th e Philosophy of Wilhelm Dilthey . London : Routledge and Kegan Paul , 1952 .
Hoff mann, H elmut. “Garbe, Richard Karl von.” In N eue Deutsche Biographie , vol. 6, 69.
Berlin : Duncker und Humblot , 1964 .
Hogemann, Friedrich. “Editorischer Bericht: Humboldt-Rezension.” In Georg Wilhelm
Friedrich Hegel, G esammelte Werke , vol. 16: S chriften und Entwürfe II (1 826–31 ).
Edited by Friedrich Hoegemann with the assistance of Christoph Jamme, 460–2.
Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 2001.
Holdrege , Barbara A. V eda and Torah: Transcending the Textuality of Scripture . Albany : State
University of New York , 1996 .
Holtzmann , Jr., Adolf. Das Mahâbhârata und seine Th eile , 4 vols. Kiel : C. F. Haessler ,
1892 – 95 .
——. Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahâbhârata . Kiel : C. F. Haessler , 1892 .
——. Die neunzehn Bücher des Mahâbhârata . Kiel : C. F. Haessler , 1893 .
——. Das Mahābhārata im Osten und im Westen . Kiel: C. F. Haessler, 1895.
——. Arjuna. Ein Beitrag zur Reconstruction des Mahâbhârata . Leizpig : K. J. Trübner ,
1879 .
Holtzmann Sr., Adolf. I ndische Sagen. Erster Th eil. Savitri, nebst andern kleineren indischen
Sagen . Karlsruhe : Georg Holtzmann , 1845 .
——. I ndische Sagen. Zweiter Th eil. Die Kuruinge. Ein indisches Heldengedicht . Karlsruhe : Georg
Holtzmann , 1846 .
——. Indische Sagen. Dritter Th eil . Karlsruhe : Georg Holtzmann , 1847 .
——. I ndische Sagen. Zweite verbesserte Aufl age in zwei Bänden . 2 vols. Stuttgart : Adolf
Krabbe , 1854 .
——. Untersuchungen über das Nibelungenlied . Stuttgart : Adolf Krabbe , 1854 .
——. Kampf um der Nibelunge Hort gegen Lachmann’s Nachtreter . Stuttgart : Adolf
Krabbe , 1855 .
——. D as Nibelungenlied in der ältesten Gestalt mit den Veränderungen des gemeinen Textes
herausgegeben und mit einem Wörterbuch versehen von Adolf Holtzmann . Stuttgart : J.
Metzler’sche Buchhandlung , 1857 .
——. Schulausgabe des Nibelungenlieds in der ältesten Gestalt herausgegeben und mit
einem Wörterbuch versehen von Adolf Holtzmann . Stuttgart : J. Metzler’sche
Buchhandlung , 1858 .
BIBLIOGRAPHY 457
——. Die Klage in der ältesten Gestalt mit den Veränderungen des gemeinen Textes, als Anhang
zum Nibelungenlied herausgegeben und mit einem Wörterbuch und einer Einleitung
versehen von Adolf Holtzmann . Stuttgart : J. Metzler’sche Buchhandlung , 1859 .
——. Deutsche Mythologie. Vorlesungen von Adolf Holtzmann . Edited by Alfred Holder .
Leipzig : B. G. Teubner , 1874 .
Holwell , John Zephaniah. A Review of the Original Principles, Religious and Moral, of the
Ancient Bramins: Comprehending an Account of the Mythology, Cosmogony, Fasts, and
Festivals, of the Gentoos, Followers of the Shastah . London : Printed for T. Vernor , 1779 .
Holzhey , H . “Kritik.” In Historisches Wörterbuch der Philosophie , vol. 4: I–K. Edited by
Joachim Ritter and Karlfried Gründer . 1249–82 . Basel : Schwabe , 1976 .
Hopkins , Edward Washburn. “Th e Social and Military Position of the Ruling Caste in
Ancient India, as Represented by the Sanskrit Epic.” Journal of the American Oriental
Society 13 ( 1889 ): 57–376 .
——. Review of “Zur Geschichte und Kritik des” Mahābhārata, von Dr. Adolf Holtzmann .
Th e American Journal of Philology 13 , 4 ( 1892 ): 499–501 .
——. Th e Religions of India . Boston and London : Ginn & Company , 1895 .
——. “Th e Bhārata and the Great Bhārata.” Th e American Journal of Philology 19 , no. 1
( 1898 ): 1–24 .
——. Th e Great Epic of India: Its Character and Origin . New York : Ch. Scribner , 1901 .
——. Review of “Die Bhagavadgītā, aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt, mit einer Einleitung über
ihre ursprüngliche Gestalt, ihre Lehren und ihr Alter” , by Richard Garbe . J ournal of
the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland ( 1905 ): 384–89 .
Horstmann , Axel. “Philologie.” In H istorisches Wörterbuch der Philosophie , vol. 7. Edited by
Joachim Ritter and Karlfried Gründer , 552–72 , Basel : Schwabe , 1989 .
Howard , Th omas Albert. Religion and the Rise of Historicism: W. M. L. de Wette, Jacob
Burckhardt, and the Th eological Origins of Nineteenth-Century Historicism .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 2000 .
——. P rotestant Th eology and the Making of the Modern German University . Oxford : Oxford
University Press , 2006 .
Hufnagel , Ulrich. “Religionswissenschaft und indische Religionsgeschichte in den Arbeiten
Jakob Wilhelm Hauers: Wissenschaftskonzept und politische Orientierung.”
In Indienforschung im Zeitenwandel: Analysen und Dokumente zur Indologie und
Religionswissenschaft in Tübingen , 145–74 . Edited by Heidrun Brückner , Klaus
Butzenberger , Angelika Malinar , and Gabriele Zeller . Tübingen : Attempto
Verlag , 2003 .
von Humboldt , Wilhelm. “Ueber die Bhagavad-Gîtâ. Mit Bezug auf die Beurtheilung
der Schlegelschen Ausgabe im Pariser Asiatischen Journal. Aus einem Briefe von
Herrn Staatsminister von Humboldt.” Indische Bibliothek 2 , no. 2 ( 1826 ): 218–58
and 2, 3 (1 826 ): 328–72 . Reprinted in W ilhelm von Humboldts Gesammelte Schriften ,
vol. 5: Werke, 1823–1826 . Edited by Albert Leitzmann , 158–89 . Berlin : B. Behr’s
Verlag , 1906 .
——. “Über die unter dem Namen Bhagavad G ítá bekannte Episode des Mahá-Bhárata .”
Abhandlungen der historisch-philologischen Klasse der könglichen Akademie der
Wissenschaften zu Berlin aus dem Jahre 1825 ( 1828 ): 1–44 and 45–64 . Reprinted
as Ü ber die unter dem Namen Bhagavad Gítá bekannte Episode des Mahá-Bhárata .
Berlin : Königliche Akademie der Wissenschaften , 1826 and in W ilhelm von Humboldts
Gesammelte Schriften , vol. 5: Werke, 1823–1826 . Edited by Albert Leitzmann ,
190–232 and 325–44 . Berlin : B. Behr’s Verlag , 1906 .
——. “Letter from 21 May 1827 to Friedrich von Gentz.” In Friedrich von Gentz , Schriften,
vol. 5: Ungedruckte Denkschriften, Tagebücher und Briefe . Edited by Gustav Schlesier .
290–92 . Mannheim : Verlag von Heinrich Hoff , 1840 .
458 BIBLIOGRAPHY
——. “Letter from 1 March 1828 to Friedrich von Gentz.” In Friedrich von Gentz , Schriften,
vol. 5: Ungedruckte Denkschriften, Tagebücher und Briefe . Edited by Gustav Schlesier ,
297–301 . Mannheim : Verlag von Heinrich Hoff , 1840 .
——. “Über die innere und äußere Organisation der höheren wissenschaftlichen Anstalten
in Berlin.” In W ilhelm von Humboldts Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 10: Politische
Denkschriften . Edited by Bruno Gebhardt , 250–56 . Berlin : B. Behr’s Verlag , 1903 .
——. “Letter from 21 June 1823 to A. W. Schlegel.” In Briefwechsel zwischen Wilhelm von
Humboldt und August Wilhelm Schlegel . Edited by Albert Leitzmann , 157–63 . Halle
a.S. : Max Niemeyer , 1906 .
Hütter , Reinhard. Bound to be Free: Evangelical Catholic Engagements in Ecclesiology, Ethics,
and Ecumenism . Grand Rapids : Wm. B. Eerdmans , 2004 .
Ickert , Scott S. “Catholic Controversialist Th eology and Sola Scriptura : Th e Case of Jacob
van Hoogstraten.” Th e Catholic Historical Review 74 , 1 ( 1988 ): 13–33 .
Iggers , George G. “Historicism: Th e History and Meaning of the Term.” J ournal of the
History of Ideas 56 , 1 ( 1995 ): 129–52 .
Inden , Ronald. “Orientalist Constructions of India.” M odern Asian Studies 20 , 3
( 1986 ): 401–46 .
——. Imagining India . Bloomington : Indiana University Press , 2000 .
Jacobi , Hermann. “Über die Einfügung der Bhagavadgītā im Mahābhārata.” Z eitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 72 ( 1918 ): 323–27 .
——. “Die Bhagavadgītā,” review of Die Bhagavadgîtâ , by Richard Garbe . D eutsche
Literaturzeitung 42 , 50/51 ( 1921 ): 715–24 .
——. “Weiteres zum Bhagavadgītā-Problem.” D eutsche Literaturzeitung 43 , 14
( 1922 ): 265–73 .
——. “Über Vi ṣ ṇ u-Nārāya ṇ a-Vāsudeva.” In Streitberg Festgabe , 159–68 . Leipzig : Markert &
Petters Verlag , 1924 .
Jary D. and J. Jary , eds. Collins Dictionary: Sociology . 3rd ed. Glasgow : HarperCollins , 2009 .
Jetter , Werner. D ie Taufe beim jungen Luther: Eine Untersuchung über das Werden der reforma-
torischen Sakraments- und Taufanschauung . Tübingen : Mohr Siebeck , 1954 .
Ježi ć , Mislav. “Textual Layers of the Bhagavadgītā as Traces of Indian Cultural History.” In
Sanskrit and World Culture: Proceedings of the Fourth World Sanskrit Conference . Edited
by Wolfgang Morgenroth , 628–38 . Berlin : Akademie Verlag , 1986 .
Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society , Centenary Memorial Volume
( 1905 ).
Junginger , Horst. V on der philologischen zur völkischen Religionswissenschaft: das Fach
Religionswissenschaft an der Universität Tübingen von der Mitte des 19. Jahrhunderts
bis zum Ende des Dritten Reiches . Stuttgart : Steiner , 1999 .
——. “Das ‘Arische Seminar’ der Universität Tübingen 1940–1945.” In I ndienforschung
im Zeitenwandel: Analysen und Dokumente zur Indologie und Religionswissenschaft in
Tübingen . Edited by Heidrun Brückner , Klaus Butzenberger, Angelika Malinar , and
Gabriele Zeller, 177–207. Tübingen : Attempto Verlag , 2003 .
——. “Die Tübinger Schule der völkischen ‘Religionswissenschaft’ in den dreiziger und
vierziger Jahren.” In I m Dienste der Lügen: Herbert Grabert (1901–1978) und seine
Verlage . Edited by Horst Junginger and Martin Finkenberger , 10–35. Aschaff enburg,
Germany : Alibri , 2004 .
——. “From Buddha to Adolf Hilter: Walther Wüst and the Aryan Tradition.” In Th e
Study of Religion under the Impact of Fascism . Edited by Horst Junginger , 107–77.
Leiden : Brill , 2008 .
——. Th e Study of Religion under the Impact of Fascism . Leiden : E. J. Brill , 2008 .
Jürgens , Hanco. “German Indology avant la lettre: Th e Experiences of the Halle
Missionaries in Southern India 1750–1810.” In S anskrit and Orientalism: Indology
BIBLIOGRAPHY 459
and Comparative Linguistics in Germany, 1750–1958 . Edited by Damodar SarDesai ,
Peter K. J. Park , and Douglas McGetchin , 41–82 . Delhi : Manohar , 2004 .
——. “German Indologists A vant la Lettre : Changing Horizons of the Halle Missionaries
in Southern India.” In Halle and the Beginning of Protestant Christianity in India ,
vol. 3. Edited by Andreas Gross , Y. Vincent Kumarados , and Heike Liebau , 1047–91 .
Halle : Verlag der Franckeschen Stiftungen , 2006 .
Kant , Immanuel. “Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View.” In A nthropology, History
and Education . Edited by Robert B. Louden and Günter Zöller, 231–429. Cambridge :
Cambridge University Press , 2007 .
Karttunen , Klaus. “Christian Lassen (1800–76): A Neglected Pioneer of Indology.” In
Expanding and Mergin Horizons: Contributions to South Asian and Cross-Cultural
Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass . Edited by Karin Preisendanz ,
109–19 . Vienna : Austrian Academy of Sciences , 2007 .
Kaufmann , Michael W. “Th e Religious, the Secular, and Literary Studies: Rethinking the
Secularization Narrative in Histories of the Profession.” New Literary History 38 ,
no. 4 ( 2007 ): 607–28 .
Khair , Gajanan Shripat. Q uest for the Original Gita . Mumbai and Delhi : Somaiya
Publications, 1 969.
Kieff er-Pülz , Petra. Ed. Der Vidûs ̣ aka. Herausgegeben vom Weimarischen Indologenkreis 1–6
(2008–12); h ttp://vidushaka.de/ .
Kierkegaard , Sören. Concluding Unscientifi c Postscript to Philosophical Fragments , vol. 1.
Translated and edited by Howard V. Hong and Edna H. Hong Princeton, NJ :
Princeton University Press , 1992 .
King , Richard. O rientalism and Religion: Postcolonial Th eory, India and “the Mystic East”.
New York: Routledge , 1999 .
Kirfel , Willibald. D as Purâ ṇ apañcalak ṣ a ṇ a: Versuch einer Textgeschichte . Bonn : Kurt
Schroeder, 1 927.
Klatt , Johannes. “Lassen, Christian.” In Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie , vol. 17, 784–88 .
Leipzig : Duncker und Humblot , 1883 .
Kleeberg , Bernhard. “Th e Will to Meaning: Protestant Reactions to Darwinism in
Nineteenth-Century Germany.” In Nature and Scripture in the Abrahmic Religions,
1700–Present , vol. 1. Edited by Jitse M. van der Meer and Scott Mandelbrote ,
257–91 . Leiden : E. J. Brill , 2008 .
Klemm , Kurt. “Indologie.” Z eitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 60
( 1906 ): 275–83 .
Kölver , Bernhard. “ Jacobi , Hermann. ” In N eue Deutsche Biographie , vol. 10, 228–29 .
Berlin : Duncker & Humblot , 1974 .
Kontje , Tod. German Orientalisms . Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press , 2004 .
Körner , Josef. “Indologie und Humanität.” In F estschrift Moritz Winternitz . Edited by Otto
Stein and W. Gampert , 117–38 . Leipzig : Otto Harrassowitz , 1933 .
Kraatz , Martin. “Otto, Karl Louis Rudolph.” In N eue Deutsche Biographie , vol. 19, 709–11 .
Berlin : Duncker & Humblot , 1998 .
Krauss , Hans-Joachim. Geschichte der historisch-kritischen Erforschung des Alten Testaments
von der Reformation bis zur Gegenwart . Neukirchen : Verlag der Buchhandlung des
Erziehungsvereins , 1956 .
Langlois , A. S. “Bhagavad Gītā id est thespesion melois . . . traduit par M. A. G. de Schlegel.”
Journal Asiatique 4 ( 1824 ): 105–16 , 236–52 .
Lariviere , Richard. Protestants, Orientalists, and Brāhman ̣ as: Reconstructing Indian Social
History . Amsterdam : Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences , 1995 .
460 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Larson , Gerald James. “Two Centuries of the ‘Bhagavad-Gītā’ in English.” P hilosophy East
and West 31 , no. 4 ( 1981 ): 513–41 .
——. “Th e Bhagavad Gītā as Cross-cultural Process: Towards an Analysis of the Social
Locations of a Religious Text.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 43 , no. 4
( 1975 ): 651–69 .
Lassen , Christian. De pentapotamia indica: Commentatio geographica atque historica .
Bonn : Weber , 1827 .
——. “Beiträge zur Kunde des Indischen Alterthums aus dem Mahâbhârata I: Allgemeines
über das Mahā bhā rata .” Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 1 ( 1837 ): 61–86 .
——. “Beiträge zur Kunde des Indischen Altertum aus dem Mahâbhârata II: Die Altindischen
Völker.” Z eitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 1 ( 1837 ): 341–53 ; 2 ( 1839 ): 21–70
and 3 ( 1840 ): 183–217 .
——. Bhagavad-Gita, id est, Th espesion Melos sive almi Crischnae et Arjunae colloquium de
rebus divinis . Bonn : E. Weber , 1846 .
——. I ndische Alterthumskunde, vol. 1: Geographe und die älteste Geschichte . Bonn : H.
B. Koenig , 1847 .
——. I ndische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1, part 1: Geographie und Ethnographie . 2nd revised and
expanded ed. Leipzig : L. A. Kittler , 1866.
——. Indische Alterthumskunde , vol. 1: Geographie, Ethnographie und älteste Geschichte . 2nd
revised and expanded ed. Leipzig : L. A. Kittler , 1867 .
——. Indische Alterthumskunde , 4 vols. and appendices. Bonn : H. B. Koenig and Leipzig: L. A.
Kittler, 1843–62 .
Lauster , Jörg. P rinzip und Methode: die Transformation des protestantischen Schriftprinzips
durch die historische Kritik von Schleiermacher bis zur Gegenwart . Tübingen : Mohr
Siebeck , 2004 .
Legaspi , Michael C. Th e Death of Scripture and the Rise of Biblical Studies . New York : Oxford
University Press , 2010 .
Leifer , Walter. India and the Germans: 500 Years of Indo-German Contacts . Bombay :
Shakuntala , 1971 .
Leskien , August. “Goldstücker, Th eodor.” In Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie , vol. 9, 341 .
Leipzig : Duncker & Humblot , 1879 .
Lessing , Ulrich. D ie Idee der Kritik der historischen Vernunft . Freiburg: Alber , 1984 .
Letter to Vidû ṣ aka . Der Vidûs ̣ aka. Herausgegeben vom Weimarischen Indologenkreis 4
(2 010) : 2 ; http://vidushaka.de/Vidusaka-4.pdf .
Levenson, Jon. Th e Hebrew Bible, the Old Testament, and Historical Criticism . Louisville :
Westminster/John Knox , 1993 .
Lindner , B runo. “Grundzüge der allgemeinen Religionswissenschaft auf geschichtlicher
Grundlage.” In Handbuch der theologischen Wissenschaften, vol. 3. Edited by Otto
Zöckler , 565–708 . Munich : C. H. Beck , 1890 .
Link , Christian. “Über den biblischen Umgang mit Geschichte im neuzeitlichen Kontext.” In
Das Alte Testament: Ein Geschichtsbuch? . Edited by Erhard Blum , William Johnstone ,
and Christoph Markschies . 185–97 . Münster : Lit Verlag , 2005 .
Leo , Heinrich. Vorlesungen über die Geschichte des Deutschen Volkes und Reiches , vol.
1. Halle : Anton , 1854 .
Lorinser , F ranz. Die Bhagavad-Gita . Breslau : G. P. Aderholz’ Buchhandlung , 1869 .
——. “Anhang. Ueber die in der Bhagavad-Gita vorhandenen Spuren einer Benützung
christlicher Spuren und Ideen.” In D ie Bhagavad-Gita . 267–89 . Breslau : G. P.
Aderholz’ Buchhandlung , 1869 .
Löwith , Karl. “Weltgeschichte und Heilsgeschehen. Die theologischen Voraussetzungen
der Geschichtsphilosophie (1949/1953).” In S ämtliche Schriften , vol. 1. Edited by
Klaus Stichweh and Marc B. de Launay , 7–239 . Stuttgart : J. B. Metzler , 1983 .
BIBLIOGRAPHY 461
Ludwig , Alfred. “Über das Verhältnis des mythischen Elements zu der historischen
Grundlage des Mahâbhârata.” Abhandlungen der königlich böhmischen Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften 6 , no. 12 ( 1884 ).
——. “Über die mythische Grundlage des Mahâbhârata.” S itzungsberichte der königlichen
Böhmischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften 9 ( 1895 ): 1–26 .
Luther , Martin. L uther deutsch. Die Werke Martin Luthers in neuer Auswahl für die Gegenwart .
10 vols. Ed. Kurt Aland . Göttingen : Vandenhoek & Ruprecht , 1991 .
——. “On the Ineff able Name and on the Lineage of Christ.” In Martin Luther, the Bible,
and the Jewish People: A Reader. Edited by Brooks Schramm and Kirsi I. Stjerna,
177–180. Minneapolis: Fortress, 2012.
——. Th e Smalcald Articles (1537). In Concordia: Th e Lutheran Confessions . Edited by Paul T.
McCain , 253–88 . St. Louis : Concordia , 2005 .
Lutt , Jürgen. “Einleitung.” Zeitschrift für Kulturaustausch 2 ( 1987 ): 391–93 .
——. “Indische Wurzeln des Nationalsozialismus?” Zeitschrift fü r Kulturaustausch 2
( 1987 ): 485–79 :
Maier , Gerhard. D as Ende der historisch-kritischen Methode . Wuppertal, Germany : R.
Brockhaus Verlag , 1974 .
Majer , Friedrich , trans. “Der Bhaguat-Geeta, oder Gespräche zwischen Kreeshna und
Arjoon.” A siatisches Magazin 1 ( 1802 ): 406–53 and 2 ( 1802 ): 105–35 , 229–55 ,
273–93 , 454–71 , and 477–90 .
Malinar , Angelika. Rājavidyā: Das königliche Wissen um Herrschaft und Verzicht .
Wiesbaden : Otto Harrassowitz , 1996 .
——. “ ‘K ṣ atriya-Glaube’ und ‘Opferwesen’: Richard Garbe und die indischen Religionen.”
In Indien-Forschung im Zeitenwandel. Analysen und Dokumente zur Indologie und
Religionswissenschaft in Tübingen . Edited by Heidrun Brückner , Klaus Butzenberger ,
Angelika Malinar , and Gabriele Zeller . 121–41 . Tübingen : Attempto Verlag , 2003 .
——. Bhagavadgîtâ: Doctrines and Contexts . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ,
2007 .
Mangold , Sabine. E ine “weltbürgerliche Wissenschaft”: Die deutsche Orientalistik im 19.
Jahrhundert . Wiesbaden : Fritz Steiner Verlag , 2004 .
Marchand , Suzanne L. G erman Orientalism in the Age of Empire: Religion, Race, and
Scholarship . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 2010 .
Marchignoli , Saverio. “Canonizing an Indian Text? A. W. Schlegel, W. von Humboldt,
Hegel, and the B hagavadgītā .” In Sanskrit and ‘Orientalism’: Indology and Comparative
Linguistics in Germany, 1750–1958 . Edited by Douglas T. McGetchin , Peter K. J.
Park , and Damodar SarDesai , 245–70 . Delhi : Manohar , 2004 .
Marichal , Robert. “La critique des textes.” In L’histoire et ses méthodes . Ed. Charles Samaran ,
1246–366 . Paris : Éditions Gallimard , 1961 .
Martin , David. A General Th eory of Secularization . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1978 .
——. On Secularization: Towards a Revised General Th eory . Aldershot : Ashgate , 2005 .
McGetchin , Douglas T. I ndology, Indomania, and Orientalism: Ancient India’s Rebirth in
Modern Germany . Madison, NJ : Fairleigh Dickinson University Press , 2009 .
——. “Wilting Florists: Th e Turbulent Early Decades of the Societe Asiatique, 1822–1860.”
Journal of the History of Ideas 64 , 4 ( 2003 ): 565–80 .
——. “Th e Whitney-Müller Confl ict and Indo-German Connections.” In Mapping Channels
Between Ganges and Rhein: German-Indian Cross-Cultural Relations . Edited by Jörg
Esleben , Christina Kraenzle and Sukanya Kulkarni . 29–50 . Newcastle upon Tyne,
England : Cambridge Scholars Publishing , 2008 .
McGetchin , Douglas T. , Peter K. J. Park , and Damodar SarDesai , eds. Sanskrit and
“Orientalism”: Indology and Comparative Linguistics in Germany, 1750–1958 . New
Delhi: M anohar, 2 004.
462 BIBLIOGRAPHY
McGrath , Kevin. Th e Sanskrit Hero: Kar ṇ a in Epic Mahābhārata . Leiden : E. J. Brill , 2004 .
——. Jaya: Performance in Epic Mahābhārata . Boston, MA : Ilex Foundation , 2011 .
McGrath, S. J. H eidegger: A Very Critical Introduction . Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans
Publishing Co., 2008.
Minor , Robert N. “Th e Bhagavad Gītā and Modern Scholarship: An Appraisal of Introductory
Conclusions.” Journal of Studies in the Bhagavadgītā 1 ( 1981 ): 29–60 .
——, ed. Modern Indian Interpreters of the Bhagavadgîtâ . Albany : State University of
New York Press , 1986 .
von Mises , Richard. “Ernst Mach and the Empiricist Conception of Science.” In Ernst
Mach: Physicist and Philosopher . Edited by Robert S. Cohen and Raymond J. Seeger .
Dordrecht : D. Reidel , 2010 .
Mitchell , John Murray. An Essay on the Best Means of Civilising the Subjects of the British
Empire in India, and of Diff using the Light of the Christian Religion throughout the
Eastern World . Edinburgh : W. Blackwood , 1805 .
——. “Notice of Dr. Roth’s Investigations of the Veda [A review of Zur Litteratur und
Geschichte des Veda , by Rudolf Roth].” Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal
Asiatic Society 11 ( 1847 ): 404–10 .
More , Th omas. Responsio ad Lutherum . In Th e Yale Edition of Th e Complete Works of St.
Th omas More , vol. 5. Edited by J ohn M. H eadley. N ew Haven and London: Yale
University Press , 1969 .
Morgenroth , Wolfgang. “Albrecht Friedrich Weber—A Pioneer in Indology.” I ndologica
Taurinensia 3–4 ( 1975–76 ): 321–38 .
Most , Glenn W. “Editor’s Introduction.” In Sebastiano Timpanaro , Th e Genesis of Lachmann’s
Method . Translated by G. W. Most . 1–32 . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 2005 .
Murti , Kamakshi. India: Th e Seductive and Seduced “Other” of German Orientalism . Westport,
CT : Greenwood , 2001 .
Müller , Friedrich Max. A History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature So Far As It illustrates the
Primitive Religion of the Brahmans . London : Williams and Norgate , 1859 .
Myers , David N. Resisting History: Historicism and its Discontents in Jewish-German Th ought .
Princeton : Princeton University Press , 2003 .
Myers , Perry. G erman Visions of India, 1871–1918: Commandeering the Holy Ganges during
the Kaiserreich . New York : Palgrave Macmillan , 2013 .
Mylius , Klaus. Die Bhagavadgita . Leipzig : Reclam , 1980 .
——. Geschichte der altindischen Literatur . 2nd rev. ed. Wiesbaden : Otto Harrassowitz ,
2003 .
Nanko , Ulrich. Die Geschichte des Lehrstuhls für Vergleichende Religionswissenschaft an
der Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen (1848–1945). Master’s Th esis, University
of Tübingen, 1980.
——. “Die Geschichte des Lehrstuhls für Vergleichende Religionswissenschaft an der
Universität Tübingen (1848–1945).” In I ndienforschung im Zeitenwandel: Analysen
und Dokumente zur Indologie und Religionswissenschaft in Tübingen . Edited by
Heidrun Brückner , Klaus Butzenberger, Angelika Malinar , and Gabriele Zeller,
63–74. Tübingen : Attempto Verlag , 2003 .
Nicholson , Andrew J. Unifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in Hindu Intellectual
History . New York : Columbia University Press , 2010 .
Nieden , Marcel. Die Erfi ndung des Th eologen . Tübingen : Mohr Siebeck , 2006 .
Nietzsche , Friedrich. Th e Birth of Tragedy and Other Writings . Edited by Raymond Geuss
and Ronald Speirs . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1999 .
——. “On Truth and Lying in a Non-Moral Sense.” Translated by Ronald Speirs. In Th e
Birth of Tragedy and Other Writings . Edited by Raymond Geuss and Ronald Speirs ,
141–53 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1999 .
BIBLIOGRAPHY 463
——. Th e Gay Science . Edited by Bernard Williams . Translated by Josefi ne Nauckhoff .
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 2001 .
——. Th e Anti-Christ, Ecce Homo, Twilight of the Idols and Other Writings . Edited by Aaron
Ridley and Judith Norman . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 2005 .
Oberman, Heiko. “Teufelsdreck: Eschatology and Scatology in the ‘Old’ Luther.” Sixteenth
Century Journal 19 , no. 3 ( 1988 ): 435–50 .
Oldenberg , Hermann. “De sacris fratrum arvalium quaestiones.” PhD diss.,
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität (University of Berlin) , 1875 . Simultaneously pub-
lished as De sacris fratrum arvalium quaestiones . Berlin : J. Windolff , 1875 .
——. Buddha: sein Leben, seine Lehre, seine Gemeinde . Berlin : Wilhelm Hertz , 1881 .
——. “Ueber Sanskritforschung.” Deutsche Rundschau 47 ( 1886 ): 386–409 .
——. “Jahresbericht über die indische Philosophie.” Archiv für die Geschichte der Philosophie
1 ( 1888 ): 407–11 .
——. “Jahresbericht über die indische Philosophie 1887–1889.” Archiv für die Geschichte
der, Philosophie 3 ( 1890 ): 295–301 .
——. “Indische Religion.” Archiv für Religionswissenschaft 7 ( 1903 ): 212–31 .
——. “Die Erforschung der altindischen Religionen im Gesamtzusammenhang der
Religionswissenschaft: Ein Vortrag.” Deutsche Rundschau 121 ( 1904 ): 248–61 .
Reprinted in Hermann Oldenberg , Indien und die Religionswissenschaft: Zwei
Vorträge von Hermann Oldenberg , 1–30 . Berlin : J. G. Cotta’sche Buchhandlung
Nachfolger , 1906 .
——. “Göttergnade und Menschenkraft in den altindischen Religionen, Rede gehalten beim
Antritt des Rektorats der Königlichen Christian-Albrechts-Universität, 5. März
1906.” In I ndien und die Religionswissenschaft: Zwei Vorträge von Hermann Oldenberg ,
31–57 . Berlin : J. G. Cotta’sche Buchhandlung Nachfolger , 1906 .
——. “Indische und klassische Philologie.” N eue Jahrbücher für das klassische Altertum,
Geschichte und deutsche Literatur und für Pädagogik 17 ( 1906 ): 1–9 . Reprinted in
Hermann Oldenberg , Kleine Schriften , vol. 2. Edited by Klaus L. Janert . 1515–523 .
Wiesbaden : Fritz Steiner Verlag , 1967 .
——. “Indologie.” I nternationale Wochenschrift für Wissenschaft, Kunst und Technik 1
( 1907 ): 635–44 .
——. “Bericht der Religionswissenschaftlichen Kommission.” NG Geschäftliche Mitteilungen
( 1915 ): 13 .
——. D ie Lehre der Upanishaden und die Anfänge des Buddhismus . Göttingen : Vandenhoeck
& Ruprecht , 1915 .
——. “Zur Geschichte der Sā ṃ khya-Philosophie.” Nachrichten von der königlichen Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Philologisch-historische Klasse ( 1917 ): 218–53 .
Reprinted in Hermann Oldenberg , Kleine Schriften , vol. 2. Edited by Klaus L. Janert .
1423–458 . Wiesbaden : Fritz Steiner Verlag , 1967 .
——. “Neue indologische Entdeckungen.” NG Geschäftliche Mitteilungen ( 1918 ): 87–108 .
——. “Bemerkungen zur Bhagavadgītā.” NG, Philologisch-historische Klasse ( 1919 ): 321–38 .
Reprinted in Hermann Oldenberg , Kleine Schriften , vol. 2. Edited by Klaus L. Janert .
1459–76 . Wiesbaden : Fritz Steiner Verlag , 1967 .
——. Das Mahâbhârata: Sein Inhalt, seine Entstehung, seine Form . Göttingen : Vandenhoeck
& Ruprecht , 1922 .
Otto , Rudolf. Geist und Wort nach Luther. Licentiate Th esis, University of Göttingen,
1898. Published in an expanded version as Die Anschauung vom Heiligen Geiste bei
Luther . ( Göttingen : Vandenhoek & Ruprecht , 1898 ).
——. “Naturalistische und religiö se Weltansicht . ” PhD diss., University of Tübingen , 1904 .
Simultaneously published as Naturalistische und religiöse Weltansicht . Tübingen : H.
Laupp , 1905 .
464 BIBLIOGRAPHY
——. “Wissen, Glaube und Ahnung.” Die Christliche Welt 48 ( 1908 ): 818–22 .
——. K antisch-Fries’sche Religionsphilosophie und ihre Anwendung auf die Th eologie .
Tübingen : J. C. B. Mohr , 1909 . Translated by E. B. Dicker as Th e Philosophy of Religion
based on Kant and Fries . New York : Richard R. Smith , 1931 .
——. Dīpika des Nivāsa. Eine indische Heilslehre . Tübingen : J. C. B. Mohr , 1916 .
——. Vischnu-Nārāyana: Texte zur indischen Gottesmystik I . Jena : Diederichs , 1917 .
——. Siddhānta des Rāmanuja: Texte zur indischen Gottesmystik II . Jena : E. Diederich , 1917 .
——. D as Heilige: Über das Irrationale in der Idee des Göttlichen und sein Verhältnis zum
Rationalen . Breslau : Trewendt und Granier , 1917 . Translated by John W. Harvey as
Th e Idea of the Holy: An Inquiry into the Non-Rational Factor in the Idea of the Divine and
Its Relation to the Rational . London : Oxford University Press , 1923 .
——. West-Östliche Mystik. Vergleich und Unterscheidung zur Wesensdeutung . Leipzig :
Leopold Klotz , 1926 .
——. Christianity and the Indian Religion of Grace . Madras : Christian Literature Society for
India, 1 928.
——. Die Gnadenreligion Indiens und das Christentum . Gotha : L. Klotz , 1930 . Translated
by Frank Hugh Foster as India’s Religions of Grace and Christianity Compared and
Contrasted . London : Student Christian Movement Press , 1930 .
——. Gottheit und Gottheiten der Arier . Giessen : A. Töpelmann , 1932 .
——. Die Urgestalt der Bhagavadgîtâ . Tübingen : Mohr , 1934 .
——. D er Sang des Hehr-Erhabenen. Die Bhagavad-Gîtâ übertragen und erläutert .
Stuttgart : Kohlhammer , 1935 .
——. “Krishna’s Lied.” Zeitschrift für Missionskunde und Religionswissenschaft 50
( 1935 ): 1–12 .
——. Lehrtraktate der Bhagavad-Gîtâ . Tübingen : Mohr , 1935 .
——. “Th e God of the Gita, Vasudeva-Vishnu-Narayana and His Origin.” Translated by
Margarete Spiegel. Visva-Bharata Quarterly n.s., 1, no. 2 ( 1935 ): 16–33 .
——. “Worte der Gita.” Die christliche Welt 49 , no. 18 ( 1935 ): 829–32 .
——. Die Ka t ḥ a Upani ṣ ad. Übertragen und erläutert . Berlin : Alfred Töpelmann , 1936 .
——. Varuna-Hymnen des Rig-Veda. Vol. 1 of Religionsgeschichtliche Texte . Edited by Gustav
Mensching . Bonn : Ludwig Röhrscheid , 1948 .
——, ed. Rabindranath Tagore’s Bekenntnis . Tübingen : J. C. B. Mohr , 1931 .
Park , Peter K. J. “A Catholic Apologist in a Pantheistic World: New Approaches to Friedrich
Schlegel.” In S anskrit and Orientalism: Indology and Comparative Linguistics in
Germany, 1750–1958 . Edited by Damodar SarDesai , Peter K. J. Park , and Douglas T.
McGetchin , 83–106 . Delhi : Manohar , 2004 .
——. Africa, Asia, and the History of Philosophy: Racism in the Formation of the Philosophical
Canon, 1780–1830 . Albany : State University of New York Press , 2013 .
Paulsen , Friedrich. Die deutschen Universitäten und das Universitätsstudium . Berlin : Verlag
von A. Asher , 1902 .
Peiper , Carl Rudolph Samuel. Bhagavad-Gita, das hohe Lied der Indus, aus der Sanskrit-Sprache
metrisch und möglichst treu in's Deutsche übersetzt . Leipzig : Friedrich Fleischer , 1834 .
Pickering , Mary. C omte: An Intellectual Biography , vol. 1. Cambridge : Cambridge University
Press , 1993 .
Polaschegg , Andreas. Der andere Orientalismus:R egeln deutsch-morgenländischer Imagination
im 19. Jahrhundert . Berlin : de Gruyter , 2005 .
Poliakov , Léon. Th e Aryan Myth: A History of Racist and Nationalistic Ideas in Europe .
New York : Basic Books , 1974 .
Pollock , Sheldon. “Deep Orientalism? Notes on Sanskrit and Power beyond the Raj.” In
Orientalism and the Postcolonial Predicament: Perspectives on South Asia . Edited by
Peter van der Veer and Carol A. Breckenridge , 76–133 . Philadelphia : University of
Pennsylvania Press , 1993 .
BIBLIOGRAPHY 465
Popper , Karl. Th e Poverty of Historicism . New York : Routledge , 1957 .
Rabault , Pascal. “Le Mahābhārata dans l’Indianisme allemande: Genèse d’un objet scien-
tifi que.” In L a Fascination de L’Inde en Allemagne 1800–1933 . Edited by Marc Cluet ,
63–90 . Rennes : Presses Universitaires de Rennes , 2004 .
Rabault-Feuerhahn , Pascale. L’archive des origines: Sanskrit, philologie, anthropologie dans
l’Allemagne du XIXe siècle . Paris : Éditions du Cerf , 2008 .
Raupp , Werner. “SEMLER, Johann Salomo.” In Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexicon ,
vol. 14. 1444–473 . Herzberg : Verlag Traugott Bautz , 1998 .
Repgen , Konrad. “Ueber Rankes Diktum von 1824: ‘Bloss sagen, wie es eigentlich gew-
esen.’ ” Historisches Jahrbuch 102 ( 1982 ): 439–49 .
Review of D e pentapotamia indica: Commentatio geographica atque historica by Christian
Lassen . Jenaische Allgemeine Literaturzeitung 193 ( 1828 ): 97–101 .
Ricoeur , Paul. “Hermeneutics and the Critique of Ideology.” In Hermeneutics and the Human
Sciences . Edited and translated by John B. Th ompson , 63–100 . Cambridge : Cambridge
University Press , 1993 .
Rieckenberg , Hans Jürgen. “Hauer, Jakob Wilhelm.” In N eue Deutsche Biographie , vol.
8, 83–84. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 1969 .
Ritchie , Susan J. “Contesting Secularism: Refl exive Methodology, Belief Studies,
and Disciplined Knowledge.” Journal of American Folklore 115 , no. 457/458
( 2002 ): 443–456 .
Robinson , Catherine A. I nterpretations of the Bhagavad-Gîtâ and Images of the Hindu
Tradition: Th e Song of the Lord . New York: Routledge , 2006 .
Rocher, Ludo. Th e Purāṇas . Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1986.
Römer , Ruth. Sprachwissenschaft und Rassenideologie in Deutschland . Munich : Wilhelm
Fink , 1985 .
Röttgers , Kurt. Kritik und Praxis: Zur Geschichte des Kritikbegriff s von Kant bis Marx .
Berlin : de Gruyter , 1974 .
Rorty , Richard. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature . Princeton, NJ : Princeton University
Press , 1979 .
Roth , Rudolf von. Zur Literatur und Geschichte des Weda . Stuttgart : Liesching , 1845 .
——. “Zur Geschichte der Religion.” Th eologische Jahrbücher 5 ( 1846 ): 346–63 .
——. “Die höchsten Götter der arischen Völker.” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft 6 ( 1852 ): 67–77 .
——. “On the Morality of the Veda.” Translated by William D. Whitney . J ournal of the
American Oriental Society 3 ( 1853 ): 331–47 .
——. “Vorwort.” In Otto Böhtlingk and Rudolf von Roth, S anskrit-Wörterbuch , vol.
1. Petersburg, Germany : Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften , 1855 .
——. “Ueber die heiligen Schriften der Arier.” Jahrbücher für deutsche Th eologie 2
( 1857 ): 141–53 .
——. “Ueber gelehrte Tradition im Alterthume besonders in Indien.” Z eitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 21 ( 1867 ): 1–9 .
——. “Zur Geschichte des Sanskrit-Wörterbuchs (Gesprochen in der Versammlung der
Orientalisten zu Innsbruck, am 29. Sept. 1874).” Bulletin de l’academie imperiale des
sciences de St.-Petersbourg 21 ( 1876 ): 410–26 .
——. “Proben aus einer Übersetzung des Atharvan.” In Festgruss an Otto von Böhtlingk zum
Doktor-Jubiläum, 3. Februar 1888 von seinen Freunden . Edited by Rudolf von Roth.
95–99. Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer, 1888.
Ruben , Walter. Krishna. Konkordanz und Kommentar der Motive seines Heldenlebens .
Vienna: Adolf Holzhausens Nfg. , 1943 .
——. “Die Lehre vom Handeln in der Bhagavadgītā.” In B eiträge zur indischen Philologie und
Altertumskunde. Walter Schubring zum 70. Geburtstag dargebracht von der deutschen
Indologie , 170–79 . Hamburg : de Gruyter , 1951 .
466 BIBLIOGRAPHY
——. “Die Religion der Bhagavadgītā.” In D ie Entwicklung der Religion im alten Indien,
vol. 2. D ie gesellschaftliche Entwicklung im alten Indien , 121–25 . Berlin : Akademie ,
1 971.
Rudolf von Roth, 1821–1895: Die Weite Welt nach Tübingen geholt . Wiesbaden : Otto
Harrassowitz , 1996 .
Rückert , Friedrich. B rahmanische Erzählungen . Leipzig : C. Beyer , 1839 .
Rüstau , Hiltrud. “Die Bhagavagītā in 21. Jahrhundert.” In Indische Kultur im Kontext . Edited
by Klaus Mylius and Lahrs Göhler , 327–50. Wiesbaden : Otto Harrassowitz , 2005 .
Ryan , Christopher. Schopenhauer’s Philosophy of Religion: Th e Death of God and the Oriental
Renaissance . Leuven : Peeters , 2010 .
Said , Edward. Orientalism . New York : Vintage , 1979 .
Sauppe , Hermann. “Johann Matthias Gesner und Christian Gottlob Heyne.” In Göttinger
Professoren. Ein Beitrag zur deutschen Cultur und Literaturgeschichte in acht Vorträgen ,
59–98 . Gotha : Friedrich Andreas Porthes , 1872 .
Schaff , Philip. History of the Christian Church , vol. 6: Modern Christianity: Th e German
Reformation . New York : Charles Scribner’s Sons , 1901 .
Scherer , Wilhelm. “Holtzmann, Adolf.” In Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie , vol. 13, 16–18 .
Leipzig : Duncker & Humblot , 1881 .
Schlegel , August Wilhelm. Bhagavad-gita, id est Th espesion melos sive Almi Krishnae et
Arjunae colloquium de rebus divinis, Bharateae episodium . Bonn : E. Weber , 1823 .
——. “Observations sur la critique du Bhagavad Gîtâ, insérée dans le Journal Asiatique.”
Journal Asiatique 9 ( 1826 ): 3–27 .
Schlegel , Friedrich. Die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier . Heidelberg : Mohr und Zimmer ,
1808 . Reprinted in Kritische Friedrich Schlegel Ausgabe . Edited by Ernst Behler et al.
Vol. 8: Studien zur Philosophie und Th eologie . Edited by Ernst Behler and Ursula
Struc-Oppenberg . Darmstadt : Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft , 1975 .
Schleiermacher , F. “Über die Religion. Reden an die Gebildeten unter ihren Verächtern
(1799).” In K ritische Gesamtausgabe , vol. 1.2: Schriften aus der Berliner Zeit 1769–
1799 . Edited by Günter Meckenstock , 185–326 . Berlin : Walter de Gruyter , 1984 .
——. H ermeneutik und Kritik. Mit einem Anhang sprachphilosophischer Texte Schleiermachers .
Ed. Manfred Frank . Frankfurt a.M. : Suhrkamp , 1977 .
Schneider , Ulrich. “K ṛ ṣ ṇ a’s Postumer Aufstieg: Zur Frühgeschichte der Bhakti-Bewegung.”
Saeculum 33 , no. 1 ( 1982 ): 38–49 . Reprinted in Opera Minora . Edited by Marion
Meisig , 215–28 . Wiesbaden : Otto Harrassowitz , 2002 .
Schmitt , Arbogast. “Symmetrie im Platonismus und in der Stoa. Ein antiker Gegensatz
und seine Nivellierung in der Renaissance.” In P laton, Plotin und Marsilio Ficino.
Studien zu den Vorläufern und zur Rezeption des Florentiner Neuplatonismus,
International Symposium, Vienna, October 25–27, 2007 . Edited by Maria-Christine
Leitgeb , Stéphane Toussaint , and Herbert Bannert , 13–50 . Vienna : Verlag der
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften , 2009 .
——. Modernity and Plato: Two Paradigms of Rationality . Translated by Vishwa Adluri .
Rochester, NY : Camden House , 2012 .
Schmitt , Carl. P olitical Th eology: Four Chapters on the Concept of Sovereignty . Translated by
George Schwab . Cambridge, MA : MIT Press , 1985 .
Schmitt , Rüdiger. “Roth, Walther Rudolph von.” In Neue Deutsche Biographie , vol. 22, 109–
10 . Berlin : Duncker & Humblot , 2005 .
Schrader , F. O. “Über Bhagavadgītā II, 46.” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft 64 ( 1910 ): 336–40 .
——. “Neues über die Bhagavadgītā.” In Aus Indiens Kultur. Festgabe zum 70. Geburtstag
von Richard von Garbe , 171–83 . Edited by Julius von Negelein. Erlangen : Palm und
Enke , 1927 .
BIBLIOGRAPHY 467
——. “Zur Überlieferung der Bhagavadgītā.” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft 82 ( 1928 ): 97 .
——. “Th e Sacrifi cial Wheel taught in the Bhagavadgītā.” I ndian Historical Quarterly 5 , no. 2
( 1929 ): 173–81 .
——. “Concerning Bhagavadgītā III, 5.” Indian Historical Quarterly 5 , no. 4 ( 1929 ): 790–91 .
——. Th e Kashmir Recension of the Bhagavadgītā . Stuttgart : Kohlhammer , 1930 .
——. “Th e Bhagavad-Gita in Ancient Kashmir.” Th e Aryan Path ( 1931 ): 748–53 .
——. “Rezensionen der Bhagavadgītā.” In F estschrift Moriz Winternitz . Edited by O. Stein
and W. Gampert , 40–51 . Leipzig : Otto Harrassowitz , 1933 .
——. “Ancient Gītā Commentaries.” I ndian Historical Quarterly 10 , no. 2 ( 1934 ): 348–57 .
——. “On the Form of the Bhagavadgī tā Contained in the Kashmirian Mahā bhā rata.”
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 1 ( 1935 ): 146–49 .
——. Review of Ś rīmad Bhagavadgītā Edited with Numerous Variants, an Exhaustive
Introduction, and Critical Notes , by S. N. Tadpatrikar . O rientalische Literaturzeitung
38 , no. 6 ( 1935 ): columns 386–88 .
——. Review of D ie Urgestalt der Bhagavad-Gītā, Die Lehrtraktate der Bhagavad-Gītā , and
Der Sang des Hehr-Erhabenen , by Rudolf Otto . O rientalistische Literaturzeitung 39 ,
no. 2 ( 1936 ): columns 107–17 .
——. “An Implication of the Bhagavadgītā Riddle.” N ew Indian Antiquary 1 , no. 1 ( 1938 ):
62–68 .
——. Review of Th e Bhagavadgītā. A Fresh Approach with Special Reference to Śa n k̇ arācārya’s
Bhās ̣ ya. Text with Śā n k̇ ara Bhā ṣ ya and an Introduction and Notes , by P. M. Modi .
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 108 ( 1958 ): 222–23 .
Schreiner , Peter , trans. Bhagavadgita. Wege und Weisungen . Zürich : Benziger , 1991 .
von Schroeder , Leopold. I ndiens Literatur und Cultur in historischer Entwicklung: ein Cyklus
von fünfzig Vorlesungen . Leipzig : Haessel , 1887 .
——. Bhagavadgita. Des Erhabenen Sang . Jena : Eugen Diederichs Verlag , 1912 .
Schulze , Manfred. “Luther, Martin (1483–1546).” In Biographisch-Bibliographisches
Kirchenlexicon , vol. 5. 447–82. Herzberg : Verlag Traugott Bautz , 1993 .
Schürmann , Reiner. “Methodology of the Social Sciences.” Typewritten lecture notes,
Reiner Schürmann Papers, Th e New School Archives and Special Collections,
Fogelman Social Sciences & Humanities Library.
——. Broken Hegemonies . Translated by Reginald Lilly . Bloomington : Indiana University
Press , 2003 .
Schwab , Raymond. Th e Oriental Renaissance: Europe’s Rediscovery of India and the East,
1680–1880 . New York: Columbia University Press , 1984 .
Semler , Johann Salomo. A bhandlung von freier Untersuchung des Canon nebst Antwort
auf die tübingische Vertheidigung der Apocalypsis , vol. 1. Halle : Carl Hermann
Hemmerde , 1771 .
——. A bhandlung von freier Untersuchung des Canon , 4 vols. Halle : Carl Hermann Hemmerde ,
1771–75 .
Senart , Émile. L a Bhagavadgîtâ. Traduite du sanscrit avec une introduction . Paris : Éditions
Bossard , 1922 .
Sengupta , Indra. “State, University, and Indology: Th e Politics of the Chair of
Indology at German Universities in the Nineteenth Century.” In S anskrit and
“Orientalism”: Indology and Comparative Linguistics in Germany, 1750–1958 . Edited
by Douglas T. McGetchin , Peter K. J. Park , and Damodar SarDesai , 271–305 .
Delhi : Manohar , 2004 .
——. “ Shishyas of Another Order: Students of Indology at the Universities of Bonn and
Berlin.” In S anskrit and “Orientalism”: Indology and Comparative Linguistics in
468 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Germany, 1750–1958 . Edited by Douglas T. McGetchin , Peter K. J. Park , and
Damodar SarDesai , 137–71 . Delhi : Manohar , 2004 .
——. From Salon to Discipline: State, University and Indology in Germany, 1821–1914 .
Heidelberg : Ergon Verlag , 2005 .
Sharma , Krishna. B hakti and the Bhakti Movement—a New Perspective: A Study in the History
of Ideas . Delhi : Munshiram Manoharlal , 1989 .
Sharpe , Edward J. Th e Universal Gita: Western Images of the Bhagavad Gita. A Bicentenary
Survey . La Salle, IL : Open Court , 1985 .
Sheehan , Jonathan. Th e Enlightenment Bible: Translation, Scholarship, Culture . Princeton :
Princeton University Press , 2005 .
Sieferle , Rolf Peter. “Indien und die Arier in der Rassentheorie.” Z eitschrift für
Kulturaustausch 2 ( 1987 ): 444–67 .
Siegert , Hans. “Zur Geschichte der Begriff e ‘Arier’ und ‘arisch.’ ” In W örter und Sachen.
Zeitschrift für Indogermanische Sprachwissenschaf t, Volksforschung und Kulturgeschichte
22, no. 4 ( 1941 –4 2 ): 73–99.
von Simson , Georg. “Die Einschaltung der Bhagavadgītā im Bhī ṣ maparvan des Mahābhārata .”
Indo-Iranian Journal 11 ( 1969 ): 159–74 .
——. Altindische epische Schlachtbeschreibung, Untersuchungen zu Kompositionstechnik
und Entstehungsgeschichte der Bücher VI bis IX des Mahābhārata .
Habilitationsschrift , University of Göttingen , 1974 .
——. Das Mahābhārata: Die große Erzählung von den Bhāratas . Berlin : Verlag der
Weltreligionen , 2011 .
Slaje , Walter. “Was ist und welchem Zweck dient die Indologie.” Z eitschrift der Deutschen
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 153 , no. 2 ( 2003 ): 311–31 .
——. Review of Der arische Ansatz: Erich Frauwallner und der Nationalsozialismus , by Jakob
Stuchlik . É tudes Asiatique 64 , no. 2 ( 2010 ): 447–62 .
Smith , Frederick M. Th e Self-Possessed: Deity and Spirit Possession in South Asian Literature
and Civilization . New York : Columbia University Press , 2006 .
Snooks , Graeme Donald. Th e Laws of History: Exploding the Myth of Social Evolution .
New York : Routledge , 1998 .
Spencer , Herbert. First Principles . London : Williams and Norgate , 1862 .
Springmann , Th eodor. Deutschland und der Orient: Das Kolonialreich der Zukunft auf geisti-
gem und materiallem Gebiet . Hagen i.W. : Hammerschmidt , 1915 .
——. Bhagavad Gîtâ: Der Gesang des Erhabenen . Gelnhausen : Heinrich Schwab Verlag ,
1962 . Originally published: Freideutscher Jugendverlag, 1 920; p aperback: A lfred
Saal, 1 921.
Staal , Frits. Exploring Mysticism . Berkeley : University of California Press , 1975 .
Stache-Rosen , Valentina. German Indologists: Biographies of Scholars in Indian Studies
Writing in German . Delhi : Max Müller Bhavan , 1981 . Second revised edition by
Agnes Stache-Weiske. Delhi. Max Müller Bhavan , 1990 .
Steck , Odil Hannes. Old Testament Exegesis: A Guide to the Methodology . Translated by
James D. Nogalski . Atlanta : Scholar’s Press , 1995 .
Steiner , George. A fter Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation , 3rd ed. Oxford : Oxford
University Press , 1998 .
Steinkellner , Ernst. “Vorbemerkungen zu Jakob Stuchlik, D er arische Ansatz. Erich
Frauwallner und der Nationalsozialismus .” ikga.oeaw.ac.at/Mat/steinkellner_vor-
wort_stuchlik_2009.pdf.
“Stellungnahme von Fachvertreterinnen und -vertretern der Islamwissenschaft und
benachbarter akademischer Disziplinen zur Einrichtung des Faches ‘Islamische
BIBLIOGRAPHY 469
Studien’ an deutschen Universitäten,” October 25, 2010. www.dmg-web.de/pdf/
Stellungnahme_Islamstudien.pdf .
von Stietencron , Heinrich. “Indology in India and Germany: Questions and Tasks.”
In Indology in India and Germany: Problems of Information, Coordination and
Cooperation , 21–27 . Tübingen : Seminar für Indologie und vergleichende
Religionswissenschaft, 1 981.
——. “Where Does Indology Stand Today? Questions Regarding the Indian and German
Position.” Indo-Asia Annual Edition 1 ( 1985 ): 115–7 .
——. “Voraussetzungen westlicher Hinduismusforschung und ihre Folgen.” In . . . aus
der anmuthigen Gelehrsamkeit . Edited by E. Müller , 123–53 . Tübingen : Attempto
Verlag , 1988 .
——. “Hinduism: On the Proper Use of a Deceptive Term.” In Hinduism Reconsidered . Edited
by G. D. Sontheimer and Hermann Kulke , 11–27. Delhi : Manohar , 1989 .
——. “Perspektiven des Faches Indologie.” In D ie sogenannten Geisteswissenschaften.
Innenansichten . Edited by Wolfgang Prinz and Peter Weingart , 388–99 . Frankfurt :
Suhrkamp , 1990 .
——. “Skizze zur Entwicklung der Indologie an der Universität Tübingen.” In H ermann
Gundert. B rücke zwischen Indien und Europa . Edited by Albrecht Frenz , 72–8 .
Ulm: S üddeutsche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1 993.
——. “Editor’s Introduction.” In Angelika Malinar, Rājavidyā: Das königliche Wissen um
Herrschaft und Verzicht , 6–11. Wiesbaden : Otto Harrassowitz , 1996 .
——, ed. Representing Hinduism: Constructions of Religious Tradition and National Identity .
New Delhi : Sage , 1996 .
——. Hindu Myth, Hindu History: Religion, Art, and Politics , Delhi : Permanent Black , 2005 .
——. “Religious Confi gurations in Pre-Muslim India and the Modern Concept of Hinduism.”
In H indu Myth, Hindu History: Religion, Art, and Politics . 249–89 . Delhi : Permanent
Black , 2005 .
——. “Hinduism.” In S ecularization and the World’s Religions . Edited by Hans Joas and Klaus
Wiegandt , 122–40 . Liverpool : Liverpool University Press , 2009 .
von Stietencron , Heinrich , and G. D. Sontheimer . German Indology: Past and Present .
Bombay : Shakuntala , 1969 .
Strauss , Otto. Review of E ine indo-arische Metaphysik des Kampfes und der Tat. Die
Bhagavadgītā in neuer Sicht , by J. W. Hauer . D eutsche Literaturzeitung für Kritik der
Internationalen Wissenschaft ( 1934 ): 2413.
Struc-Oppenberg , Ursula. “Einleitung.” In Kritische Friedrich Schlegel Ausgabe . Edited by
Ernst Behler et al. Vol. 8: Studien zur Philosophie und Th eologie . Edited by Ernst Behler
and Ursula Struc-Oppenberg . Darmstadt : Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft , 1975 .
Stuchlik , Jakob. D er arische Ansatz: Erich Frauwallner und der Nationalsozialismus .
Vienna : Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften , 2009 .
——. “Replik auf Walter Slajes Rezension meines Buches.” Études Asiatique 65 , no. 1
( 2011 ): 287–308 .
Sukthankar , Vishnu S. “Prolegomena.” In Th e Ādiparvan for the First Time Critically Edited .
i–cx. Pune : Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute , 1933 .
——. On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata . Bombay : Asiatic Society , 1957 .
Sukthankar , Vishnu S. , and Shripad K. Belvalkar , eds. Th e Mahābhārata. For the First Time
Critically Edited . Pune : Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute , 1933 – 66 .
Sutton , Nicholas. Religious Doctrines in the Mahābhārata . Delhi : Motilal Banarsidass , 2000 .
Swāmi Gambhīrānanda , trans. B hagavad Gītā: With the Commentary of Śa n k̇ arācārya .
Kolkota : Advaita Ashrama , 2006 .
470 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Szabó , Anikó . Vertreibung, Rückkehr, Wiedergutmachung: Göttinger Hochschullehrer im
Schatten des Nationalsozialismus . Göttingen : Wallstein , 2000 .
Telang , Kashinath Trimbak. Th e Bhagavadgîtâ with the Sanatsugâtîya and the Anugîtâ. Vol. 8
of Th e Sacred Books of the East . Edited by Max Müller . Oxford : Clarendon Press , 1882 .
Th omson , Ann. Bodies of Th ought: Science, Religion, and the Soul in the Early Enlightenment .
Oxford : Oxford University Press , 2008 .
Timpanaro , Sebastiano. Th e Genesis of Lachmann’s Method . Translated by G. W. Most .
Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 2005 .
Toulmin , Stephen. Human Understanding . Princeton, NJ : Princeton University Press , 1972 .
Trautmann , Th omas R. Aryans and British India . Berkeley : University of California
Press , 1997 .
Troeltsch , Ernst. “Rückblick auf ein halbes Jahrhundert der theologischen Wissenschaft.”
Zeitschrift für wissenschaftliche Th eologie 51 ( 1908 ): 97–135 .
——. “Die Krisis des Historismus.” Die neue Rundschau 33 ( 1922 ): 572–90 .
——. Der Historismus und seine Probleme . Tübingen : Mohr , 1922 .
——. Der Historismus und seine Überwindung . Berlin : Heise , 1924 .
Tschackert , Paul. “Semler, Johann Salomo.” In A llgemeine Deutsche Biographie , vol. 33.
698–704 . Leipzig : Duncker & Humblot , 1891 .
Tsuchida , Ryutaro. “Considerations on the Narrative Structure of the M ahābhārata .”
Studies in Indian Philosophy and Buddhism 15 ( 2008 ): 1–26 .
Turner , Steven R. “Th e Growth of Professorial Research in Prussia, 1818–1848.” Historical
Studies in the Physical Sciences 3 ( 1971 ): 137–82 .
——. Th e Prussian Universities and the Research Imperative . PhD diss., Princeton
University, 1973 .
——. “Th e Prussian Universities and the Concept of Research.” I nternationales Archiv für
Sozialgeschichte der Deutschen Literatur 5 ( 1980 ): 68–93 .
Vaidya , Chint aman Vinayak . Epic India, or India as Described in the Mahābhārata and the
Rāmāya ṇ a . Bombay : Mrs. Radhabai Atmaram Sagoon , 1907 .
van der Veer , Peter. “Monumental Texts. Th e Critical Edition of India’s National Heritage.”
In I nvoking the Past. Th e Uses of History in South Asia . Edited by Daud Ali , 134–55 .
New Delhi : Oxford University Press , 1999 .
Vercruysse , Jos. E. “Luther’s Th eology of the Cross at the Time of the Heidelberg
Disputation.” Gregorianum 57 , no. 3 ( 1976 ): 523–48 .
——. ‘ Th eologia crucis’—‘Th eologia gloriae’ bei Martin Luther: Eine terminologische
Untersuchung.” L uther-Bulletin 10 ( 2001 ): 27–40 .
La Vopa , Anthony J. “Th e Philosopher and the Schwärmer : On the Career of a German
Epithet from Luther to Kant.” Huntington Library Quarterly 60 , no. 1/2 , E nthusiasm
and Enlightenment in Europe, 1650–1850 ( 1997 ): 85–115 .
Wagner , Christian. Die Bedeutung Südasiens in der Forschungs- und Universitätslandschaft
der Bundesrepublik Deutschland: eine Bestandsaufnahme . Hamburg : Institut für
Asienkunde , 2001 .
Maurice Wallerstein , Immanuel. E uropean Universalism: Th e Rhetoric of Power . New York : Th e
New Press , 2006 .
Weber , Albrecht. “Ueber die Literatur des Sâmaveda.” In Indische Studien. Zeitschrift für die
Kunde des indische Alterthums , vol. 1. Edited by Albrecht Weber , 25–67 . Berlin : Ferd.
Dümmler’s Buchhandlung , 1850 .
——. A kademische Vorlesungen über indische Literaturgeschichte . Berlin : Ferd. Dümmler’s
Verlagsbuchhandlung , 1852 .
——. Indische Studien. Beiträge für die Kunde des indischen Alterthums , vol. 2. Berlin : Ferd.
Dümmler’s Verlagsbuchhandlung , 1853 .
BIBLIOGRAPHY 471
——. L etter to Karl Otto von Raumer, 12.10.1855 . Humboldt University Archives , P. F. 1433 .
——. Indische Streifen . 3 vols. Berlin : Nicolaische Verlagsbuchhandlung , 1868–79 .
Weinsheimer , Joel. Gadamer’s Hermeneutics: A Reading of Truth and Method . New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press , 1985 .
Welch , Cheryl B. “Social science from the French Revolution to positivism.” In Th e
Cambridge History of Nineteenth Century Political Th ought . Edited by Gareth Stedman
Jones and Gregory Claeys , 171–99 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 2011 .
Wesseling , Klaus-Gunther. “ROTH, Rudolf [Walter Rudolph].” Biographisch-Bibliographisches
Kirchenlexikon , vol. 24, 1232–242 . Herzberg : Verlag Traugott Bautz , 2005 .
de Wette , W. M. L. Biblische Dogmatik Alten und Neuen Testaments oder kritische Darstellung
der Religionslehre des Hebraismus, des Judenthums und Urchristentums . Berlin :
Real schulbuchhandlung , 1813 .
Wilhelm , Friedrich. “Th e German Response to Indian Culture.” Journal of the American
Oriental Society 81 , no. 4 ( 1961 ): 395–405 .
——. “Holtzmann, Adolf.” In N eue Deutsche Biographie , vol. 9, 559–60 . Berlin : Duncker &
Humblot , 1972 .
——. “Oldenberg, Hermann.” In Neue Deutsche Biographie , vol. 19, 507–8 . Berlin : Duncker
& Humblot , 1999 .
Wilkins , Charles. Th e Bhâgvât-Gêêtâ, or Dialogues of Krêêshnâ and Ârjôôn . London : C.
Nourse , 1785 .
Williamson , George S. Th e Longing for Myth in Germany: Religion and Aesthetic Culture from
Romanticism to Nietzsche . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 2004 .
Windisch , Ernst. Review of Die Bhagavadgîtâ. Uebersetzt u. erläutert von Dr. F. Lorinser .
Literarisches Zentralblatt 43 , Oct. 15 ( 1870 ): 1165–168 .
——. Review of Bhagavad-Gîtâ oder: Das Lied der Gottheit. Aus dem Indischen übersetzt von
Robert Boxberger . Literarisches Zentralblatt 43 , October 15 ( 1870 ): 1168 .
——. Geschichte der Sanskrit Philologie und indischen Altertumskunde , 2 vols. Berlin : de
Gruyter , 1917 – 20 .
——. Philologie und Altertumskunde in Indien . Leipzig : F. A. Brockhaus , 1921 .
Winternitz , Moriz. G eschichte der indischen Literatur , vol. 1: Einleitung—Der Veda—Die
volkstümlichen Epen und die Purā ṇ en . 2nd ed. Leipzig: Brockhaus, 1909.
——. Review of V ier philosophische Texte aus dem Mahâbhârata , by Paul Deussen and Otto
Strauss. Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 21 (1907): 194–202.
Wittkau , Annette. H istorismus: Zur Geschichte des Begriff s und des Problems .
Göttingen : Vandenhoek & Ruprecht , 1992 .
Wolf , F. A. “Darstellung der Alterthums-Wisssenschaft.” In F. A. Wolf’s Darstellung der
Alterthumswisssenschaft nebst einer Auswahl seiner kleinen Schriften; und litterarischen
Zugaben zu dessen Vorlesungen über die Alterthumswissenschaft . Edited by S. W. F.
Hoff mann . Leipzig : August Lehnhold , 1834 .
Zander , H elmut. A nthrosophie in Deutschland , vol. 1. Göttingen : Vandenhoek &
Ruprecht , 2007 .
Zeller , Gabrielle. “On Manuscripts and Letters from Rudolf von Roth’s Legacy.” Paper pre-
sented at the ninth World Sanskrit Conference, Melbourne, Australia, 1994 .
——. “Rudolf von Roth and the South Asia Collection of Tübingen University Library.”
Paper presented at the tenth World Sanskrit Conference, Bangalore, India, 1997 .
Zscharnack , Leopold. Lessing und Semler. Ein Beitrag zur Entstehungsgeschichte des
Rationalismus und der kritischen Th eologie . Gießen : Töpelmann , 1905 .

