ESSAYS ON
THE MAHABHARATA
Original fron1
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
BRILL'S
INDOLOGICAL
LIBRARY
EDITED BY JOHANNES BRONKHORST
VOLUME I
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ESSAYS ON
- -
~
THE MAHABHARATA
EDITED BY
ARVIND SHARMA
E.J. BRILL
LEIDEN·NEW
YORK·K~BENHAVN·KOLN
1991
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
; ·i
'J / The paper ·;n this book meets the guidelines for permanence and durability of the
' •· ' C.Omm.ittce on Production Guidelines for Book Longevity of the C.Ouncil on Library
Resources.
Permission by The Univenity ofC hicago Press to cite pp. 276- 282 from the Mahiibh4rala:
I Tu Boole of the Bt~, translated and edited by j.A.B. van Buitenen, and published
in 1973, is gratefully acknowledged.
Chap1e11 1-10 of this book appeared originally in Tiu Jounud of Soutlr Asian literature
(Vol. XX, No. I, Part 1:1- 168; Winter, Spring, 1985) and arc included here with slight
modificatioru. Permission to include them in this volume is gratefully acknowledged.
Library ol c-p...a ~PabUcadoe Data
Essays on the Mahibhirata/edi1cd by Arvind Sharma.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 9004092110
I. Mahibhirata-Criticis·m, interpretation, etc. I. Sharma,
Arvind.
BLI 138.26.E77 1991 90-49866
294.5'923-dc20 CIP
ISSN 0925·2916
ISBN 90 04 09211 0
@ Copyright 1991 by E.J. Brill, Uidm, Tht ,Vttherlands
All rights rtstrvtd. No part of thiJ book ""'Y bt reproduud or
trans'4Ud in any form, by print, p/lotaprint, microfilm, microf1<ht
or any othn mtans withold writlm pmniJsio• from thr publishrr
Autlr~atU.n "' p/u>lo<opy illmS far internal or pnsonal
iJ grtlllUd by E.J. Brill provided that
llSt
the O#'JfJTiak fats are paid direetly to Copyright
Cuaranu Cmtn, 27 Congress Street, SALEM MA
01970, USA. Fus ore subjeet to changt.
Pllll'ITf.D IN THE NETHEkl.ANDS
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
This book is dtditaud w
Prof. Dr. }at1 Gortda
GOL)gle 011g1r al frorn
01g1111•d by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
GOL)gle 011g1r :,I frorn
01g111zeduy UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
----- - - --
CONTENTS
Preface
IX
I. Manuscripts used in the Critical Edition of the
Mahiihharala: A Survey and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I
JOHN D UNHAM
II. The Mahabharata: Stylistic Study, Computer Analysis
and Concordance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS & DANIEL H.H. INGALLS, jR.
Ill. KanµJbhara: The Trial of Kan:ia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
BARBARA STOLER MILLER
IV. Orubhatiga: The Breaking of the Thighs . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
EDWIN GEROW
V. Epic Parthenogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
MARY CARROLL SMITH
VI. Two Knr:ias, Three Knr:ias, Four Knr:ias, More Knr:ias:
Dark Interactions in the Mahabharata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I 0 I
ALF HILTEBEITEL
VII. The Original Saga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Dak~a
KLAUS KLOSTERMAIER
VIII. The Sauptilca Episode in the Structure of the Mahabharata 130
R UTH KATZ
IX. India's Fifth Veda: The Mahabharala's Presentation of
Itself . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
jAMES L. FITZGERALD
X. Sanlarasa in the Mahabharata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
GARY A. T UBB
XI. The Epic's Two Grandfathers, and Vyasa . . . 204
Bhi~ma
BRUCE M . SULLIVAN
XII. Arjuna's Combat with the Kirata: Rasa and Bhakti in
Bharavi's Kiratarjunfya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 212
INDIRA V. PETERSON
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
CONTENTS
VIII
XIII. The Jaina Mahabharata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
B.N. SUMITRA BAI and ROBERT J. ZYDENBOS
XIV. Ritual and Performance in the Pai;iQ.avaffia ofGarhwal 274
WILLIAM SAX
XV. Bhlma: Wolfbelly among Ogres and Brahmans
Rak~asa
in the Sanskrit Mahabharata and the VeT)isamhara . . . . . 296
DAVID L. GITOMER
XVI. Savitri: Old and New . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 324
VIDYUT AKLUJKAR
'
XVII. The Epic Context of the Bhagavadgita ..... •......... _,,.'.334)
(V
MADHAV M. DESHPANDE
XVIII. The Battle of in Topological
Kuru~etra
Transposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 349
VICTORIA URUBSHUROW and T.R. SINGH
XIX. Arlhafiislra Categories in the Mahabharata: from Da11</anili
to Rajadhanna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 369
BR.NM. SINHA
XX. Snakes, Sallras and the Mahabharata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 384
CHRISTOPHER MINKOWSKI
. . . . . . . . . . . .
XXI KnQa: In Defence of a Devious Divinity
BIMAL KRISHNA MATILAL
XXII. Repetition in the Mahabharata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 419
A.K. RAMANUJAN
XXIII. Himalayan Variations on an Epic Theme 444
JOHN LEAVITT
Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 475
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 479
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
PREFACE
This volume, like the epic it deals with, passed through several stages
before assuming its present form. Originally some of these essays
appeared in the Journal of South Asian Literature (XX: 1: 1- 168). I would
like to take this opportunity to thank Professor Carlo Coppola for
inviting me to edit the section of that issue devoted to the Mahablzarata
and for permitting me to incorporate it in this volume.
Not everyone who wanted to write could do so in time for the issue,
and so the idea of a book emerged. In due course the alchemy of patience
(and repeated requests) gradually transformed promises into finished
products. Thus, after several years of a merely notional existence the
book is now in your hands. But then some things are worth waiting
for- a sentiment I hope the appearance of this volume will confirm.
Arvind Sharma
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
GOL)gle 011g1r·:,I frorn
01g111zeduy UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
- - -- ---·
- -
MANUSCRIPTS USED IN THE CRITICAL EDITION OF
THE MAHABHARATA: A SURVEY AND DISCUSSION
JOHN DUNHAM
There has never been a census of manuscripts of the Mahabharata, and
there is never likely to be. Such a census, significant as it could be in
providing more information about the magnitude of the number ofc opies
made of that enormous literary work, could never pretend to complete
comprehensiveness. It might, to forestall such criticism, be limited to the
Indian subcontinent, putting aside the other parts of Asia in which the
Mahabharata was, at one time or another, copied and recited. It could
also ignore the libraries and private collections in more remote parts of
the world where manuscripts were acquired in relatively recent times as
a concomitant of colonial rule or the European historical and literary
interest in ancient India. Yet it would still be doomed to failure because
of the intractable complexities of locating, describing and comparing old
manuscripts within India and its neighboring countries today.
The most extensive search undertaken for manuscripts oft he Mahabharata
was that of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, which was begun
soon after the institute's founding in 1917 and continued for almost fifty
years after that date. The purpose of that search was to acquire
manuscripts in order to prepare a critical edition of the text, using
manuscripts in various scripts and of the oldest period possible. It was
not a census as such, and many manuscripts were passed over in the
selection of others which the institute felt fulfilled its purposes better.
Nevertheless it has uncovered unexpected and hitherto unnoticed
branches of the Mahab/rarata's textual tradition and has produced exciting
possibilities for futher research. These results have as yet been incompletely
recorded and analyzed, mainly because the critical edition (C.E.) was
not completed until 1966, and it was impossible until then to consider
the critical apparatus as a whole. Editors of the particular paroans have
limited their discussion, more or less, to the manuscripts which they had
used for their own work. The time has now come when a more
comprehensive discussion can properly be undertaken.
In this paper a start has been made on this wider analysis. Necessarily
this has involved, at the beginning, a complete enumeration of the
manuscripts used in the entire C.E. with details oft heir dates and locations
ofc opying and copyists involved. It has also included reference to instances
Google Onginal fron1 -
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
2
JOHN DUNHAM
where the same codex has been used for different parvans, although in
many circumstances this information is not given in the details of the
critical apparatus of those parvans which were completed before others,
using the same codices, had begun. In some cases these omissions were
not the fault of the editors so much as of the cataloging policies of the
libraries holding the manuscripts. Some libraries have cataloged as separate
codices manuscripts which are by the same copyist but are of different
parvans of the MaM.bhiirata. When editors of the C.E. were not able to sec
the manuscripts for themselves, relying instead on collation sheets alone,
it was impossible to describe the contents of some codices fully. Incom
pleteness of this kind is not at all uncommon in the critical apparatus of
most parvans oft he C.E., and it now requires a very considerable familiarity
with the critical apparatus of the entire C.E. before a reader is able to
make a fully informed assessment of the usefulness of some manuscripts.
A more important consequence of this analysis is to show quite plainly
the pattern of the foundations on which the C.E. has been erected and
to suggest under what stresses and strains these have been placed. The
manuscripts have been grouped in the list according to the script in which
they are written, with the important exception of the category I (B),
"Transcripts ofSliradli Manuscripts". This category was the original idea
of V .S. Sukthankar and accords with his view of the importance of
Kashmir as the home of the "purest" version of the Mahiibhiirata. It is
almost exclusively a category of Devanagari manuscript, but it does
include two manuscripts which were not written in this script. The other
groupings are regular ones.
The scripts of manuscripts of the MaM.bhiirata used in the C.E. do not
exhaust the number of those identified as having been used in India
during the past five hundred years. Among the most significant omissions
would appear to be Uriyli, Kannac;la and Nandinligari. Why manuscripts
in these scripts were not used is not stated in the C.E. It may have been
that old manuscripts in these scripts are very rare, or that the manuscripts
turned out to contain versions which were "eclectic on no recognizable
principles".
What follows is a summary of the main features ofe ach of the categories
of manuscript, followed by a discussion of some of the methodological
problems to be confronted by the historian in his use of the C.E. as a
source of Mahiibhiirata tradition.
I (A) . Siiradii Manuscripts
The manuscripts written in this script are rare. There were only six located
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
-··-- - - --
3
THE MAHJBHJRATA: A SURVEY ANO DISCUSSION
for use in the C.E.1 These six do not provide a complete coverage of the
MaMhharaJa, as no Sarada manuscript oft he Amdiisanaparvan, Mausalaparvan,
Mahi.prasthanikaparvan, and S1J0rgarohaTJllparvan have been found to datc.2
Second Sarada manuscripts are available for the whole, or part, of six
parvans, with one parvan (Ararva-(aparoan) having a third, fragmentary
Sarada codex.
The extant manuscripts are not especially old. The earliest possibly
belongs to the later half of the sixteenth century. It was written in
Himalayan birchbark (biirjapatra) and is quite unique. The others arc
dated and belong to the late seventeenth century or the early eighteenth
century, or arc not dated but appear to belong to the same period or later.
The manuscripts are not heavily annotated. There arc, instead,
occasional variant readings, usually entered interlincarly, which serve to
demonstrate that manuscripts were compared with others. That this
practice of comparison applied to manuscripts that had originated in
centers far removed from Kashmir is shown by a marginal note in the
Telugu script in S2 at 7.24.24.
In quite a few instances it is possible to see how marginal notes, glosses
and variant readings were absorbed into the text itself through this practice
of comparison. The explanation of a word, kfam.ii, once a marginal gloss,
has become part of the text after 4.27.26ab in SI, for example. A passage
from NTiaka1:iiha's commentary has been absorbed into the same Sarada
manuscript after 4.27 .22 (254* ). One copyist of the commentary of
Arjunamisra, who was adding it to a text of the Mahi.bhitrata which was
not the version followed by the commentator, has attempted to correct
the text in the light of the commentary, though this was done marginally
and interlinearly in SI of the Santiparvan (p. xxi).
There is evidence, though, that the copyists of these Sarada manuscripts
were, on the whole, conservative in regard to additional passages and
readings from non-Sarada sources. While it is difficult to make precise
comparisons it is nonetheless generally true that the Sarada manuscripts
present shorter versions of all the parvans for which they are extant. It
was this characteristic of the manuscripts above any other which
' This figure does not include the Siirada manweripts uS<d in the supplementary
apparat1ts for the Bh41"""4git4 alone pp. lvi-lviii). The Raghunath Temple
(Bk~,
Library injammu held Siradi manweripts of the Virii4af>arvan, but Raghu Vira said thCK
had to be rejected from the critical apparatus of that parvan because, on detailed
examination, they "turned out to be recent copies of Nilaltar;i1ha's text and hence of no
value as Siradli codices" ( Viriil0f><Jrv<111, pp. ix-x).
2 Only the lint two adhfaJ"S and two staruas of the third adhfa.JO of the Afr~
arc extant in a Siradi manuscript. Sec MramtJJJisikaparvan, p. xii.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN -
4 JOHN DUNHAM
encouraged V.S. Sukthankar to declare the Sarada version the ttxtus
simplicior in the C.E., and to regard it as "the best Northern version, and
probably, taken as a whole, the best extant version" (Adiparvan, pp. xlviii,
lvi).
I(B). Tr011Scripts of Sarada Manuscripts
That transcripts of the MakabharaJa were made from Sarada exemplars
is evidenced by both the appearance of some manuscripts and the close
correlation of their contents with those of the Sarada manuscripts. In
describing Kl, iftliparvan, V.S. Sukthankar has drawn attention to both
these characteristics. Of the former he wrote:
The lines of writing, as in Saradi (bhiirjapatra) manuscripts, run parallel
to the narrow side of the folio. The signatures in the margin arc like those
found in Ka8miri books. The numerous clerical errors, which disfigure every
page, betray the writer to be a professional scribe, not thoroughly familiar
with the awkward Saradi script, and still less so with the language of the
text, easily misled by the deceptive similarity between certain letters of the
Sarada and Devanagari alphabets.•
Others editors in the C.E. have noted information about the copyist or
the place of copying given in the colophons which indicated a northern
(even Kashmiri), or at least northwestern origin of these manuscripts.•
In making these observations they support V .S. Sukthankar's suggestion
that "the Mss comprising this version ... may in part represent the version
of a province or a region adjoining the Sarada zone which it has not been
possible to localize more precisely".•
Not all manuscripts grouped under this heading in the C.E. display
their connection with the Sarada manuscripts superficially. This is
especially so in the case of the manuscripts in the Bengali and Telugu
scripts-K4 Bhifmaparvan, T2 Santiparvan (sec pp. clxix-clxx), K5 Afvamed
where the outward appearance of the manuscript gives no hint of its
primary affiliation. With these, as with all the other manuscripts included
in the K version, it was the appearance of characteristically S readings
in the text, the inclusion of "additional passages" peculiar to S, transpo
sitions ofp assages into an order that follows S, and the omission of passages
' Adipan1tin, p. xi. V.S. Sukthankar also refers 10 a typical s1yle ofKashmiri handwri1ing
(e.g. AranJalraparvan, p. ui). Raghu Vira gives examples of mislections of the Siirada sc.rip1,
Virii1aparvan, p. iv). _
• For example, Aran..Jakaparvan, p. iii; Anu.fisanaparvan, p. xviii; Alra.mavisikaparlJ(Jn, p.
xxxiv_j Mau.salaparoan, p. xx.iv. etc.
} Ara1[Jakaparvan, p. xxi.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
---- - -- -- -
THE MAHABHARATA: A SURVEY AND DISCUSSION 5
that were likewise omitted by S, that determined for the editors a
manuscript's basic relationship.
Devanagari manuscripts of the Kashmiri type were found to be
relatively common, and editors of the C.E. were usually able to use five
or more K manuscripts in the critical apparatus of each paroan.• Some
forty-eight manuscripts were used in this way, though this figure can only
be taken as notional since there are instances where different editors have
used the same manuscript as a K and a D manuscript in editing different
paroans of the Mahabharata.'
The vast majority of dated manuscripts (nineteen out of a total of
twenty-three) were copied in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
They arc most often copies of a single parvan or a part thereof. Only four
of the K manuscripts survive now as almost complete texts of the
Mahabharata, and in only one of these instances has an editor in the C.E.
drawn attention to the likelihood of the manuscript having been written
by a single hand (K2, Udyogaparvan) .
The manuscripts are sometimes accompanied by marginal glosses,
marginal and interlinear variant readings (sometimes in the same hand,
sometimes in another), and corrections. In one case, K4 of the Adiparvan,
the manuscript includes supplementary folios at five places which give
additional episodes to be fitted into the text at the appropriate places.
In one place in the manuscript at least ( 1.1.53), there is a marginal note
to indicate where the episode is to be inserted. Another manuscript, K4
Udyogaparvan, has a commentary which is not written in the usual manner
(above and below the text in the margins) but is "imbeddcd" in the text
itself.
Being for the most part Devanagari copies of Sarada exemplars, the
K manuscripts are much more susceptible to the inclusion of passages
from other manuscripts written in Devanagari than those written in the
less accessible Sarada script. Nevertheless the editors of the C.E. usually
found one or two of their K manuscripts to be very close to the Sarada
text. The editor of the KaT1}aparvan, for example, concluded that his KI
and K2 were "Devanagari transcripts probably from one and the same
codex, of which our SI and S2 arc copies".8 In the Virii/aJ>arvan the editor
' The editor of the Anuliisanaparvan did not classify any manuscripts as K on the grounds
that there was no Sarada manuscripts for that parvan extant, and therefore it was
hypothetical to suggest that any manuscript was a transcript of such. Sec Anuiiis1Jt1aparrx:n,
p. xvii.
' Sec II {ii), (v), (vi), (xviii), (xx), {xxx), (xlviii) in manuscript enumeration and
description.
• K4f7111/>0TV011, p. xxxvii.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
6
JOHN DUNHAM
found that he could not separate the two: "Our S and K are equally
good Ka8miri Mss. They do not fonn separate categories".9
At the other extreme some manuscripts have been very heavily
influenced by other Devanagari, Bengali, and southern texts. Such
influences have been readily detected in such manuscripts as K4 in the
Udyogaparuan, Ar01IJOlcaparoan, tl1ld B/U.vn4paroan, to give but a few examples.
It was with such disparity before him that V.S. Sukthanlr.ar wrote of this
class of manuscript that it "cannot be said to be quite homogeneous" .10
II. Nepali Manuscripts
Neplifi manuscripts were found for only four parvans of the MaJiiibharata:
Adiparoan, Sabhaparvan, Sauptilcaparvan, and Stnparoan. The five manuscripts
located were written in Newlin characters and appear to be older, as
a group, than any other manuscripts used in the C.E., though only one of
the manuscripts actually gave a date in the colophon. The manuscripts are
not described in detail in the C.E. because they were mostly collated, not at
the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, but by local pandits in Nepal.
The Nepali manuscripts are closely related to the Maithili, Bengali, and
Devanagari (except K) manuscripts rather than the Sarada or Sarada
transcript manuscripts.
11
V.S. Sukthankar drew attention to the fact that despite their age and the
distance of Nepal from south India there were numerous instances where
these manuscripts shared interpolations common in southern manuscripts.',
In the Sabhaparvan such borrowings were not found among what Franklin
Edgerton called "common secondary insertions"." Instead, these passages
(which were fewer in number than for any other class of manuscript other
than the Sarada) were exclusively drawn from Maithili, Bengali or
Devanagari sources, or were peculiar to the Nepali manuscripts.
III. Maithili Manuscripts
The five manuscripts written in this script of northern Bihar each contain
a single parvan. Four are dated in the Laqmai:ia era, and belong either to
' VirQ/aflaro011, p. xvi.
10 "7' "11·.-r-·'P· <I"""'· p. xx•u•.
11 Cf. Adiparvan, p. lix, Sal>~. p. xii, Savptikaf>a,..,., p. xxvi.
12 Adiparvan, p. lix. H.D. Velanlr.ar also d.raws anrntion to the inftuenee of thr "versions
thu
of the S recension" in reference to manuscript Ill (iii). He concluded that manuscript's
"agreement with the ~iradi or thr Ka.shmirian vrrsion is very rare" (Sa.ptikaparoOll, p.
xxvi) .
.. S-L•;A. xii'
'""'-r-rvan, p. a.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE MJ.HABHAIU TA.: A SURV EY AND DISCUSSION 7
the second half of the fifteenth century or the early part of the sixteenth
century. This mearu that, in company with the Nepali manuscripts, they
fonn the oldest stratum of the manuscript tradition and arc of special
interest for this reason among others.
Three of the five manuscripts were collated in Nepal, and there arc few
details given in the C.E. about the appearance of these manuscripts. The
fourth, the manuscript in the possession of the Bihar and Orissa Research
Society, has occasional marginal corrections and additions made by the
same writer of the manuscript. It is a manuscript which has been
"normalized and carefully prepared" in view of its special purpose in
a coronation ceremony.•• This has meant that the copyist has excluded all
"additional" passages which did not have other textual precedents in the
manuscripts available to him (and to the editor of the C.E.). On the other
hand, he appears to have been extraordinarily zealous in including as
many "additional" passages for which he had authority. There arc 239 of
these passages out of a total of 90 I found in the critical apparatus of the
Santiparoan as a whole.
IV. Bengali Manuscripts
The editors of the C.E. selected predominantly eighteenth-century
manuscripts (thirty out of a total of forty-five dated manuscripts) that
usually contained only a single paruan. There were no manuscripts of the
complete Ma/Ujh/iiirala in this script used in the C.E., though this omission
may only be apparent, and due to a tendency found in the C.E.'s
description of Bengali manuscripts which frequently overlooks the full
extent of a manuscript. u
Although the Bengali manuscripts arc often described in the C.E. as
a very homogeneous group, they contain few passages which arc exclusive
to themselves. In the Siintiparuan there arc only two such passages, and
in the Bhivnaparvan it is only two omissions which they share in common.
Elsewhere editors seem to have come to much the same conclusion as
Raghu Vira when he wrote: "There arc no such things as specific
B[engali) or D[evaniganl passages, i.e. passages found in the whole of
B or the whole of D, but nowhere else". 16
Once again V.S. Sukthankar has drawn attention to the influence of
south India on manuscripts in this script. He wrote that "sporadic
" l~o=H-I.N:ff·"-"--> p. xi V. l.
" Stt, for example, this tendency in regard to (viii). It is not fully described in the
Vir~ (p. iv) or the Ka,.,,.pa"""' (p. xiv).
" Vir~, p. xxi. Compare Dr.,,.ptz""'11, p. xxiii, and UdyogafJ4rva•, p. xxxix.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
8
JOHN DUNHAM
contamination between B and S, as a whole, cannot be altogether denied
and that there arc, as a matter off act, some Bengali manuscripts that stand,
palpably, under the influence oft he Southern tradition, even in the matter
of minor readings ... " 17
V(A). Devanagari MamLScripts (with Commentaries)
Manuscripts of the MaM.bharata arc often accompanied by commentaries
which arc wually written in strips on either side of the text. The six
commentators whose works accompany texts of the Mahabharata used in
the C.E. arc Arjunanmra (c. 1450-1500 A.D.),
Caturbhujami~ra
(c. 1350-1550 A.D.), (c. 1700 A.D.), Ratnagarbha (?),
Nnakai;i~a
Sarvaji'ia-Narliyai;ia (c. 1100-1300 A.D.) and Vidyasagara (c. 1350 A.D.).
The commentaries of Arjunamiira (Bharalarthapriulipikii) and Nnakai;i1ha
(Bharatabh4Dadipa) arc attached to the largest number of texts used in the
C.E., while those with Ratnagarbha's were used only in three instances,
and then only for two atlliyayas of the Adiparvan. 18 In addition to the use of
the text of the MaM.bharala found in conjunction with these commentaries,
extensive use was made of the commentaries themselves in the C.E. as
testimonia.
The text of the MaM.bharata used by these commentators is closely
related to the part of India in which they lived. Arjunamisra and
CaturbhujamiSra were both from the eastern part of India and their text
follows closely other manuscripts from this pan of the country. Similarly
and Vidyasagara, both westerners, shared a text that had
Nnakai;i~a
much in common with the Devanagari manuscripts from there.••
In general this kind of manuscript is well written, with few corrections
and only occasional marginal notes.20
V (B). Devanagari Manuscripts
The total numbers of Devanagari manuscripts used in the C.E. was 230,
though this figure would be reduced somewhat if manuscripts belonging to
a single codex were properly counted as such. Nevertheless this approxima
tion gives some idea of the dominance of Devanagari manuscripts in the
11 Adiparvan, p. lxii.
" These manuscripts arc not included in the brid' dcscriptioru that follow.
" On the more complex relationships of the text which accompanies the commentary
of Sarvajiia-Niirayar.ia, sec the comments of S.K. De, Udyogaf>arvan, pp. xvi-xvii.
,. A manuscript like Dn3, Aral[JOkapanxm, is quite exceptional from this point of view.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE MAHABHARATA: A SURVEY AND DISCUSSION 9
textual tradition sampled in the C.E. It is a dominance which is seen in the
fact that Devanagari manuscripts arc greater in number than the total of
manuscripts in all other scripts.
Despite their number there have been very few old manusc.ripts
discovered in this script. The oldest dated manuscript is D 1, Viriitaparvan
(dated V. Saritvat 1493 = c. 1437 A.D.), which is considerably more
recent than the dated Nepalese manuscripts (NI, Adiparvan) and the dated
Bengali manuscripts (Bl, Ar~aparvan). The majority of Devanagari
manuscripts which carry a date were copied in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries A.D.
Manuscripts in this script, unlike those in other scripts, were found in
many parts of India. The largest collections drawn upon for the C.E. were
those of the Sarasvati Mahal Library, Thanjavur, and the Bombay
Government Collection; but important manuscripts were found in collec
tions as separated from one another as the Day anand Anglo-Vedic College
Library in Lahore and the Adyar Library, Madras.
The variations between Devanagari manuscripts are almost as vast as
these distances. It was V.S. Sukthankar's view that "a Devanagari
manuscript of the Mahabharata may, in fact, contain any version or
combination of version".21 They were likely to swing from following
a southern tradition to a northern without reason, and he specifically
mentioned the Mahilbhiirata collection in the Sarasvati Mahal Library as an
example of manuscripts which from his point ofv iew were oflittlc value in
the C.E.22
The Devanagari manuscripts described above usually contain only
a single paroan, with the exception of the shorter, later parvans where it
appears to have been usual to copy four or more together.
VI. Telugu Marw.scripls
Although a minimum of two Telugu manuscripts were used in each parvan
of the C.E. the total number of manuscripts described there is not large.
This was partly due to the fact that many of the manuscripts used
contained more than oneparvan, a feature oft he Telugu manuscripts which
distinguishes them, to some degree, from the other groups of manuscripts.
Another reason for the small number may have been the low estimate
which V.S. Sukthankar placed on their value so far as the textual criticism
oft he Mahiibhiirata was concerned. They were, in his view, probably ofl ess
" .,,,,,___
,_,.
P·
11 • .,._._., VUI.
n ~. p. lxxii.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
10
JOHN DUNHAM
value for the C.E. than the Devanagari manuscripts because, like this
group, they were "eclectic" without a recognizable principle, and had little
to offer in the way of passages shared by themselves exclusively." Other
editors confirmed this view by showing how very few passages the Telugu
version had to itself, and how closely it followed other Grantha manus·
cripts. 2
•
Only two of the manuscripts are dated, but one of these dates cannot be
properly read. The other is dated Jalca 1974( c. 1973 A.O.}, which makes it
the most recently copied manuscript used in the critical apparatus of the
C.E. A third Telugu manuscript can be taken to indicate that it was copied
at some time in the period 1684-1710 A.O.
VI. Grantha Manuscripts
Copies of all the parvans of the MaM.bhii.rala written in the Grantha script
were available for the C.E. and a minimum of three such manuscripts was
used for each parvan. Very few of the Grantha manuscripts are dated. Those
that do have dates have ones for which it is difficult to find equivalents.
Libraries have hesitated to estimate the age of the manuscripts, and this
practice has been adopted by the editors of the C.E. However, there is no
indication that these Grantha manuscripts are older than, or even as old as,
the northern manuscripts.
Some twenty-nine of the forty-nine manuscripts in the Grantha script
contain only a single parvan or part thereof. There were no complete or
nearly complete manuscripts oft he Mahii.bhii.rala located for use in the C.E.
Only four of the manuscripts give the name of the copyist, and none gives
the place of copying.
That the Grantha manuscripts were not the product of an isolated
development is shown by the large measure of agreement that is found
between their texts and those of the Telugu and Malayalam manuscripts.
It is significant, though, that there are relatively few Grantha manuscripts
which include any number of"additional" passages common in northern
manuscripts.
VIII. Malayalam Manuscripts
The Malayalam manuscripts used in the C.E. were located, with only four
exceptions, in collections in Kerala. It was this location in the extreme
" 7" .
rparvan, p. lxxii' .
11,
2 Sec, for example, Sahlraparv1J11, p. xliv, Blr4mapaTNR, p. ex, Dro,,,.paroan, p. xxviii.
'
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
---- - - -- -
THE MAHABHARATA: A SURVEY AND DISCUSSION I I
south west of the Indian subcontinent which helped to preserve the
"purity" of the text as it is found in these manuscripts, according to the
editors of the C.E. "Indeed, the M[alayalam] version may, in a sense, be
regarded as being in relation to S[outhern Recension] what S[arada
version] is in relation to N[orthern Recension]", Professor R.N. Dandcltar
suggested.20 The Malayalam manuscripts do not share abundantly in the
"additional" passages of the Telugu and Grantha manuscripts. Instead,
they tend to remain apart, maintaining a textual tradition of their own
"which shows little alliance with T[elugu version], G[rantha version] and
not very much with N."26
The Malayalam manuscripts arc not without their record ofc omparison
with other manuscripts as is shown by the large number of interlinear
variant readings in such manuscripts as M4, Virii/aparoan, and Ml,
Udyogap(Jf7}(Jn. These additions to the manuscripts have not come directly
from the north but can be shown to have percolated through Tor TG (cf.
Udyogaparoan, p. xlvii).
Those Malayalam manuscripts which are dated were all copied in the
nineteenth century, with only one exception, a manuscript dating from the
first halfo ft he eighteenth century. They form, therefore, the most recent of
the dated manuscripts in the critical apparatus of the C.E.
The collection and comparison of a large number of manuscripts from
a wide area of the subcontinent in the preparation of the C.E. of the
Mali4bliiirata has contributed substantially to the knowledge of the nature
of the processes of preservation and growth of that literary tradition. 27 It
has conclusively demonstrated that all the extant manuscripts, whatever
their place or origin and whatever the version or recension to which they
might be assigned, have been subject to a process ofa ddition and alteration
that has occurred for the entire period for which there is manuscript
.. -·-· '~· P· x]"I X.
,. B~, p. cxiii.
" TM So.,,.,.;r oft lrt Comflldiqft of tlrt Critital Ediliotr oft lrt Mahdbh4tal4 (Pune: 1966) gives
the figures 1,259 and 734 as the total numbcn of manuscripts examined for, and actually
used in the C.E. respectively. The latter figure, in particular, should bc treated with caution
in the light ofc omments made on p. 2 above. Franklin Edgerton believed that as a result of
the search for MoM/Jliiiral4 manuscripts "in most parts oflndia .. . the chances arc that they
[V.S. Sukthankar and his colleagues) have included within their purview examples of all
important streams of tradition" and added that "the search should ofcounc be continued,
especially in out-of-the-way regions, such as Nepal . .. Kashmir, too, may yield imponant
:results" (}AOS, vol. 48 (1928), 186). After V.S. Sukthankar's death in 1943 the interest in
the scarCh for old manuscripts in these areas, which he had stimulated, seems to have
extinguiJhed. There were no futher Nepail manuscripts used in par-of the C.E. published
after that date, and the only other ~4r""4 manuscript was obtained from the Bibliothequc
Nationalc in Paris (SI, Sa.ilif>O"""'l·
Google Onginal fron1
-
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
12
JOHN DUNHAM
evidence at least. 21 There is no such thing as a static branch of the
manuscript tradition anywhere in India. There is no "pure" venion oft he
Mahiibllii.rata, a venion that has steadfastly resisted the inclusion of new
material from manuscripts or other sources, a perfect copy of the fint text.
Instead most manuscripts show a complex pattern of affiliations which
makes it extremely difficult to classify them into clearly demarcated
venions.29
The explanation for this circumstance has hardly anything to do with
a lack of integrity or skill on the part of the copyists, though there is
evidence oft his to some degree in the manuscript material now available. so
" V .S. Sulr.thankar dcteribed the situation thus:
We have unfortunately no single thread to guide us out of the maze, but rather
a collection of strands intertwined and entangled and leading along
diver~ent
paths. With the epic text as preserved in the extant Mahabharata manuscnpts,
successive syntheses of divergent texts, carried out-providentially-in a haph
azard fashion, through centuries of diaslr.euastic activities; and that with the
possible exception of tJu Sirad4 (Kaimin") version, which appean to have been
protected by its largely unintelligible script and by the difficulties of access to the
province, all DtTsions art indiscriminalt!J t()njlaud. (Adiparvan, p. lxxxii)
An opposite point of view is represented by Professor P.P.S. Sastri. He wrote:
It will ... be clear that the main text-tradition oft he Mahabharata is one that has
been preserved with remarkable accuracy and that the whole worlr. as we have it
now in 18 Parvans is the worlr. of a single author, Vyasa, thoug!i it may be per
missible to assume that some of the preliminary chaptcn of the Adiparvan arc in
their very nature connecting links supplied by V aiiampayana and Siita to suit the
occasion when each in his turn was called to narrate the story ... we arc
u~n
driven to the irresistible conclusion that the Mo4habharata text-tradition, as we
have it now in the Southern Recension, is quite authentic and reliable, that the
final reduction of the story from the bcgi.nning of the fint chapter as narrated by
Siita is equally trustworthy and the extent and scope of the Mahabharata even
during Siita's time consisted of eighteen main parvans with one hundred
subparvans, divided into two thousand chapten and comprising one hundred
J,
thomand stanzas (Tiu Malrabhara/4 [Southmi Recmsion][Madras, 1931 vol. 2, Adi
Parvan-part II, xxi- xxii).
For V.S. Sukthanlr.ar's discussion of these vicws see Adiparoan, pp. xcvii notc, Aran.Jakaparva11,
pp. xxix, xxx, xxxiii- xxxv. Sec also Raghu Vira, Vir0l4{lan:<ul, p. xxiv; Franklin Edgerton,
pp. xxx-xxxi; S.K. De, Udyogapamm, pp. xlviii-xlix; P.L. Vaidya, Ka"141>0rva11,
Sabli4~,
PP·
XXXJU-XXXV.
21 Franklin Edgerton was quite prepared to admit this. He wrote:
It is ... a question fundamentally of more or less, when we undertake to decide
which "recension" a particular manuscript belongs to. And having oncc decided,
we must be prepared for all sorts of qualifications of our answer. Even different
parts of the same Ms may suggest diffcrcnt groupings. (Sabhaparvan, p. xxxiii).
'°
An cxample of error of this kind is noted in relation to 1.85.20 of thc C.E. whcrc the
copyist of Kl has mistakcnly made a tran•pooition in the text by copying the reverse of th<
folio in place of thc obverse and vice vcna.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE MAHABHARATA: A SURVEY AND DISCUSSION 13
The copyist's duty, as he saw it, was to keep the tradition as completely
intact as possible:
If a reciter or commentator came across, in another manuscript, an
additional passage, there was every chance ofh is copying it down somewhere,
either in the margin of his own copy, or in a supplementary folio; for there
would be, in his mind, always present the possibility that the passage in
question was some part of the original that his own manuscript had
unaccountably lost. How else, forsooth, could the passage get into the other
manuscripts?"
Libraries containing multiple copies in manuscripts of the one title are, no
doubt, a recent phenomenon in India.0 2 More usually an individual or
a family could only hope to own a single, complete manuscript of a work of
the dimensions of the Maliii.bharata. See! for example, the manuscripts
which belonged to, and in some cases were written by, various members of
the Da5aputra family of brahma!µu. DI ofSalyaparvan belonged to GaQeia
DaSa.putra (c. 1592 A.D.); D3 of Ki1111fJparvan belonged to Govinda
DaSa.putra (c. 1603 A.D.), DI ofB hi.fmaparf!IJn belonged to, and was written
by, Gai:ieia, the son of Vinhala (c. 164-0 A.D.), while DaSa.puua's son,
Sundarapanta, is said to have been the copyist ofD2 ofD rolJllparvan (c. 1684
A.D.). Even in the more extensive hereditary libraries of rulers and patrons
of literature where it was possible for a large number of copyists to be
employed over long periods oft ime, it is hard to imagine that there would
have been any deeply felt need for more than replacement copies of the
Maliii.bharata." So the opportunity for comparing manuscripts oft he widest
" A~noan, p. Iv. The copyist was not the only one to feel this responsibility. Very
frequently manuscripts were corrected and annotated by their owners and those who used
thtm professionally. For examplts of a later copyist making "corrections" to a number of
manuscripts (~en when thtse wtrt written in different scripts), stt D2-4, T2, Cl-2 of
Marginal notes wtrc added " presumably for txpooitory discoul'Se$" in K3,
Ulytg~J1J011.
AJrlllltmldsikaj>crvan, for cxamplt. In his article "A Sanskrit Deed of Sale concerning
a Kaimirian Mahabharata Manuscript" (]RAS, 1900, pp. 187-194), M.A. Sttin drew
attention to the work. ofa KaSmirian "gloosator", Taka<jc Bhatta Haralta, who "annotated
and revised not only the archttypus oftht Rajatarailgii;U, but also a considrrablt number of
other manuscripts which Ratnaka111ha ("the scholarly scribe of the codex arche1ypus") had
copied cvWently for his own use" (p. 191). Bhana Harak.a was the writer of the Sanskrit
deed of sale referred to in the title of M.A. Sttin's article.
" There wert, of course, cities in which many copies of the one title could have been
obtained. Places like VirlQasi and Thanjavur feature often as the place where manuscripts
were copied (e.g., DI of Sai.ptiMpdrwn, DI of Stn)arpaJr, T3 of Adiporvan). Thert must have
been instances, 100, like that ofV I of Santipmvan, where quite a number of manuscripts were
wed as exemplan in order for some special purpo$C to be satisfied.
" In the manuscripts used in the critical appartus of the C.E. there is no ca$C ofa patron
rcqueating more than one copy, though this docs not guarantee that such a practice was not
usual. That a copy of the complete MaM/iMra/4 took considerable time to produce is shown
by the dates given in K2 and Dn2 ofB hi.fmaparvan. (The editor of that porvan calculated that
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
14
JOHN DUNHAM
possible variation did not generally exist, as far as can be judged.,.
A great many commentators and copyists of the MaJaabhiiraJa, perhaps
even the majority, did work from more than one exemplar and they were
able to select and substitute what they regard as the best readings, if not at
the time ofc opying then later in the manuscript's existence." This Ir.ind of
"limited" comparison and editing of texts acted to restrain the growth of
the manuscript tradition. Its place in the overall history of the text is
a relatively small one and is easily outweighed by the profusion of growth
that was the result of less selective comparisons.
The initial source of change was not in the written records ofv ersions of
the MaJaabhiirata. It was in the oral tradition and then as a result of the
interaction between reciters, their learned versions of the tradition, and
their many and varied audiences." Only secondarily, and at a later date,
was the MaJaabhiirala a textual tradition to which alterations could be made
as a result of the comparison of manuscripts. The oral tradition, with its
own capacities for growth, has always been the impulse for many changes
to the textual tradition. When trying to characterize the earliest history of
the textual tradition, V.S. Sulr.thankar rightly emphasized the formative
influence of the oral tradition:
Whenever and wherever the text was then written down- and it was
probably written down independently in different epochs and under different
circumstances-these transmissions by word ofm outh must have contamina
ted the written text and introduced innumerable variations in it. The
assumption of some such complicated derangement, beyond the normal
vicissitudes of transmission, is necessary to account for the abnormal
discrepancies and strange vagaries oft he Mahabharata manuscript tradition.
the six copyiJts took three months to complete the codex, No. 246 BORI Collection, and
that in the case of the manuscript Dn2, the copyist was able to complete 112 stanzas per day
of the ArmvoJtoparvan.) The cost of complete texts of the Ma114bhiirala must have been very
coruiderable. Sec, for example, the evidence of M.A. Stein, p. 192ff. The existence of so
many "composite" manuscripts probably indicates that there was a common practice of
renewing parts of parvans (as well as whole parvans) by employing a copyist to replace the
damaged or missing part. These "patched up" manuscripts would further indicate that the
Mahiihhiirota, or even parts of it, was not usually held by the one owner in multiple copies.
" Compare above, p. 3.
" Nitakai;itha, for example, compared manuscripts of the Mahiihhiirota collected from
different parts of India, as well as the scholia of other authorities, in preparing his
commentary. His stated intention was to make the text about which he WTote "a thesaurus
of all excellences" (Adiparvan, p. lxvff.}, a motive that was not always conducive to the
restraint mentioned below.
a
11Le mCmc rapsode variait sans doutc d'une recitation 1' autre, soit defailla,ncc d(
"
mcmoirc, soit confusion entre passages ou fonnulcs analogurcs, soit goiat d'innover, soit
encore bien d 'autres raisons", Sylvain Levi wrote in reference to this tradition of the
Mahiihhiirala (Jo•rttal Asiati91U), vol. 215 (1929), 348).
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
15
TIIE MAH1BH11UTA: A SURVEY AND DISCUSSION
In other wonia, we arc compelled to auumc that even in its early phases the
Mahibhirata textual tradition mwt have been not uniform and simple, but
multiple and polygcnow."
It follows from this undentanding of the textual tradition that any
attempt to restore it to what it was at some period in the past would not be
able to reduce the variety in that tradition to a single version, one text. If
this were possible then it would have suggested that there had been a time
in history when the Malliihhiirata tradition had been static and not subject
to the textual or oral dynamics suggested above. Yc t it is certain that such
a situation never existed in India at any time in the past. There was no
agency, religious or political, which could have imposed this conformity or
would have desired it.
The C.E. is an attempt at restoring the Malliihhiirala on historical lines. It
is claimed to be "du oldest form oft he uxt which it is possihk to ""h, on the basis
of
the manuscript material available".» The editor, V.S. Sukthankar, did not
claim that the C.E. was the "Ur-Mahabharata" or "Vyasa's Bharata" and
made it quite clear that he believed that it was "useless to think of
reconstructing a ftuid text in a literally original shape, on the basis of an
archetype and a stnnma codialm."."
Even ifthis "original shape" could not be reconstructed by this approach,
V.S. Sukthankar believed that the "oldest form of the text ... on the basis
oft he manuscript material available" could. He grouped manuscripts into
nine versions and made up a pedigree in which each version was shown to
have descended from either a northern {N} or a southern (S} source via, in
most cases, lost archetypes.• 0
This procedure, together with its results, can be criticized on a number of
grounds. First, the manuscripts which V.S. Sukthankar grouped under the
headings "Sarada", "K," "Nepali," etc., arc not homogeneous, nor has it
been established that the manuscripts chosen for the critical apparatus arc
" 1~. p. lxxix.
• ldip.m.a.,p. lxxxvi.
• Ibid. Madelaine Biardcau has argued that the C.E. of the MaMblrdrallJ rcprcserns an
attempt to employ western scientific method for purposes which arc not really scientific
but religious. See her ''Some more considerations about textual criticism'1 i'MriJJa,
,
vol. X (1968), I 1~123 .
.. 1~. p. xxx; Ar~, p. xiii. See also Vir~, p. xvi, UdyogDp.""'1t, p.
xxiv. In Blr"iprulpanxut, p. cxv, the Pedigree of Manuscripts shows each manuscript and gives
iu secondary affiliation. Franklin Edgerton, alone among editors of the C.E., assumed the
existence ofl lrra independent rccensions- Wcstern (W), Eastern (E), Southern (SJ-instead
of N and S. "For this book", he wrote, "I do not regard 'N' as a historic reality. I do not
believe that Wand E arc descended from a common secondary archetype" (Sob,,.,,.,_, p.
xlvili).
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
16
JOHN DUNHAM
representative examples oft heir groups.•• The lack ofh omogeneity is most
manifest among the Devanagari (including K) and Telugu manuscripts,
while it is less apparent in the Malayalam and Bengali groups. However all
groups contain manuscripts which show complex affiliations and in no
group is there any one manuscript which can be said to contain the "pure"
type of that text. To some extent this heterogeneity is a deliberate result of
editorial policy, where manuscripts were selected for the critical apparatus
because they were thought to reveal the extremes of variation within the
version.•• But by adopting this criterion of selection without a complete
survey of all extant manuscripts, it has been impossible to assert with
complete certainty that the manuscripts chosen arc fully representative, or
for that matter, of the way in which they arc representative.
Nor can the groups of manuscripts be properly claimed to derive from
archetypes. An archetype is, after all, "the exemplar from which the first
split originated"0 and an assumption that is usually made in stcmmatics is
that "copies made since the primary split in the tradition each reproduce
one cxamplar only, i.e. that no scribe has combined several exemplars
(contaminatio) ".••Without this assumption "the science ofs tcmmatics in the
strict sense breaks down" .0 There arc few, ifa ny, manuscripts or groups of
manuscripts of the Mahabharata of which this assumption can safely be
made. That V .S. Sukthankar was himself aware of this criticism there can
be no doubt. He wrote in the Foreword to Fascicule I that
... it is impossible to apply to the Mahibhirata the special canons of textual
criticism which arc derived from a study of classical (Greek and Latin) texts
and which depend ultimately upon their being a more or less complete
concatenation of copies and exemplars reaching finaUy back to a single
authentic (written) archetype.••
" Policy differed between editors in the C.E. over the number of manuscripts they
selected to represent a version and even on the classification of the manuscripts as belonging
to one or other version, as has been shown in Appendix 1. In some unfortunate
cir"cu m.,.s,t .a nces edito .rs had to u.c a single extant manuscript to "represent" a version.
... 1parvan, p.
vi.
" Paul Maas, Textruil Critieisrn (Oxford: 1958), p. 2.
" Ibid., p. 3.
" Ibid., p. 48.
" M~MrallJ, Adiparvan, Fasc. 1, p. ii. In "Epic Studies Ill. Or. Ruben on the Critical
Edition of the ABORJ, vol. 11 (1930), 261, V.S. Sukthanltar quoted with
M~MrallJ",
approval the paper delivered by Maurice Wintemitz at the XVII th International Congress
ofOrientalists (Oxford: 1928):
The general principles followed in the critical editions of classical texts, Greek or
Latin or Sanskrit, can be applied to a critical edition of the Mahibhirata only
with great limitations and modifications. It is simply impossible to trace
a genealogical tree ofa ll the Mss oft he Adiparvan, and only in some cases are we
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
-- - - -- - -
THE MAHABHARATA: A SURVEY AND DISCUSSION 17
Having admitted the force of these criticisms V.S. Sukthankar pleaded
that the C.E. of the Maliiibhiirata should be evaluated, not by the standards
used for a classical text, but by a standard of its own. "The Mahabharata
problem is a problem suigmeTis", he often repeated,47 and he appealed for
"prolonged and considerable discussion and exchange of ideas and
opinions" before "the principles of textual reconstruction could be finally
considered as settled". This emphasis on the uniqueness oft he Maliiibhiirata
textual tradition and the inadequacy of traditional techniques of textual
criticism to deal with the problem is of special relevance to the historian.
He cannot, in the light of this warning, treat the Maliiibhiirala as a source
whose textual tradition can be traced, with a high degree ofp robability, to
an original text to which an author, date and locality might be assigned.
Instead he has to be prepared to deal with a text of which there is not
a single line which is free from variations, or even complete omission, in
a larger or smaller number of manuscripts. This variation extends to all
other units oft he text in some degree or other: adhyii.yas, sub-parvans, parvans.
The text oft he Maliiibhiirala as it appears in the C.E. cannot be regarded
as a version known in any part ofI ndia at any time in the past. To accept it
as such would be to ignore what has been shown about the "regionalism" of
every version of the Maliiibhiirala for which there is evidence. Ift his regional
variation is eliminated (or is only conceded to a limited degree) so that only
the parts of the text which are shared by all versions (or those versions
regarded as "purer") remain, then the resulting text is a reconstruction
that is not genuinely historical at all. It is, instead, an edition based on the
"common denominators" (which are not necessarily all of the oldest
common denominators) ofa ll versions, but it cannot be shown to have been
a stage in the historical development of any one of them.
Before historians make use of any edition of the Maliiibhiirala they must
inquire into the critical apparatus on which it is based. They should be
aware of the kinds of manuscripts used and whether these can be
tentatively assigned to any particular branch of the manuscript tradition.
They should not disregard features of the edition which appear to be
characteristic of only one of the tradition's branches, dismissing them too
able to state how Mss arc related to one another. On the whole we have to be
satisfied with a classification oft he Mss according to the script, and the provinces
to which they belong. And we have more often to refer to classes of Mss than to
individual Mss.
1 Sec "Epic Studies I. Some Aspects of the Mahibhlrata Canon", JBBRAS, n.1. vol.
•
4 ( 1928), IS6; "Epic Studies III. Dr. Ruben on the Critical Edition of the Mahlbhlrata",
ABORJ, vol. 11 ( 1930), 262; ildiparvan, p. lxxxvi.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
18
JOHN DUNHAM
readily as "later" interpolations. Even ifa convincing case cannot be made
out for accepting such features as being part of the earliest phases of the
development of the Mahiibhiirala, it should be borne in mind that they may
be part ofa pattern ofd evelopment peculiar to that branch but nonetheless
of ancient origin.
Much more research needs to be done before the discussion of the
manuscript tradition can be said to have been thoroughgoing. There is
a need to investigate ve.rsions of the Mahiibhiirata in scripts other than those
used to date. Where only a small number ofm anuscripts have been used in
the C.E. to represent a venion (e.g., Nepili, Maithili, Sarada), there need
to be further searches made of manuscripts even ifthese are found to be of
a date later than the ones so far used. The depth and variety oft he regional
character of the Mahiibhiirata should be surveyed. The fact that such
demands can now be made is not a criticism of the C.E. . It is an indication
of the progress that its completion marks.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE MAHABHARATA: STYLISTIC STUDY, COMPUTER
ANALYSIS, AND CONCORDANCE
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS, JR.•
Preface
Much of the following material is taken from papers read before annual
sessions of the American Oriental Society in 1974, 1976, and 1980.
Section 4 is unchanged from the form in which Daniel Ingalls, Jr., read it
in 1980 both before the AOS and before a panel of computer program
mers at the Palo Alto Research Center of Xerox Corporation. Two
reasons persuade me to consign this material to print now instead of
waiting, as I first intended, until the research is complete. The first: we
now have working models of the primary tools which I propose to use in
dealing with the subject. Second, the conclusions which I hope to
achieve lie, even with good luck, three or four years in the future. It may
be well for others to know of these tools and of our aims so that if
accident or bad luck should overtake us, some other scholar may some
day without us duplicate the one and achieve the other.
of
1. On the genesis Sanskrit oral-epic style
I.I. Meter
About ninety-five percent of the MahiibhiiraJa is composed in Jloka meter.
The Indian method of describing the regular or pathyii variety of this
meter is to require a specific quantitative pattern for the cadence of each
eight-syllabic line (piida) and to prohibit certain combinations in the
openings of the lines. The scheme may be represented diagrammatically
as in Inset A.
A. Metrical schmu of the epic sloka:
line a: x x, x, x u - - u
1
b: ii
X X2 X2 ~ U - U
x x, x, x, u - - ii
~
d:x~x2~U-UU
• Stttions I, 2, 3, and 5 ere by Daniel H.H. Ingalls; section 4 is by Daniel H.H.
Ingalls, Jr.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
20
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS, JR.
On the final syllable of each line line there was a pause, which
prolonged the syllable even if it was short by nature. Actually, in the
majority of instances it is truly long; but the statistics of this syllaha anceps
(syllable of ambiguous length, represented in the inset by ii) will not
concern me here.
In the inset, u represents a short syllable,- a long syllable, and x a
syllable that may be either long or short so long as certain combinations
of contiguous syllables are avoided. The x's that I have marked with
subscript I may never form with each other a tribrach (u u u) or an
anapest (u u -). The x's that I have marked with a subscript 2, in
addition to these prohibitions, may never form an amphimacer (- u -).
Actually one can find other combinations that are avoided in Mahab
harata ilokas, combinations that are not mentioned by Pingala and the
other metricians, but I do not plan to discuss them here.
What I have said is enough to describe rougly the longs and shorts of
the regular Jloka. The metricians go on to describe flokas that are
irregular by their departing from the regular cadence of the ac (first and
third) lines. These irregularities bear the following names:
of
B. Irregular cadtncts ac:
bha-vipulii: - u u u
ra-vipulii: - u - u
-
na-vipulii: u u u u
ta-vipulii: - - u u
Now at first sight this metrical scheme seems to be a loose-fitting
garment. That is because we have not considered the matter of word
break; and on that subject the Indian metricians are no help. Super
ficially it looks as though, while certain long words might fit into only a
certain part of the line, short words at least could be fitted in pretty
much anywhere.
It is obvious, of course, that if you have two warriors fighting and you
want to call them mahiibalau, "men of great strength", you will do well to
put that word at the end of line b and d. In fact, the only other possible
position would be at the beginning of a or c. It cannot fit in the cadence
of ac and the amphimacer prohibition (the ra-pralifedha) rules it out of
the opening of bd. In actual fact, as every Sanskritist is aware, the
Mahabharata regularly puts it at the end of b or d. If the poet wants to say
the same thing in one of the other lines, he will use a synonym or
equivalent of different metrical shape. In the cadence of ache might use
mahiitmiinau.
But let us consider some short words. Let us take the spondee (- - ) .
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
21
STYLISTIC STUDY, COMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONOORDANCE
Spondaic words arc fairly common in Sanskrit. More than half the two
-a
syllabled feminines of the declension arc spondaic in the singular
nominative, accusative, vocative, and in the dual and plural nominative
and accusative. Several of these cases are spondaic in the -i declension
also. More than half the two-syllabled masculines and neuters of the
commonest declension, in -a, arc spondaic in the singular nominative
and accusative when these forms arc followed by a consonant or fall at
the end of a line. Such nouns arc always spondaic in the singular ablative
and locative and in the dual and plural nominative and accusative. The
ani/ continuatives ("gerunds") in ktva are all spondaic; so also several
common third singular presents and third singulars of other tenses.
C. CMIUMll types of sp®dait words:
kanya devi devalJ+x Jrutva ii.sit
kanyam devlm devam+x viddhva briilt
vat
kanyt dtvyau de uktva ii.sit
kanya/J devyaJJ+ X dtvt
devau
deva/J
de van
Let us sec where such words can be fitted into the Jloka. We might
begin by considering a half-Jloka to contain fourteen dissyllabic slots, as
indicated in Inset D.
D. Tiu fouruen wutrical slots for diss;tllab/M:
cQYC[O)cQ)
I I
a
ac. 1
COY
c[J) cQ)
11 a
bd. 1
Herc I have outlined slot 1-2 with a square, slot 2-3 with a circle, and so
on. We can then take various runs of i/okas and see how many of these
slots arc filled by spondaic units and how many are filled by spondaic
words. The number of words, of course, will be smaller, as one can see
from Inset E, where I show a line from the Bhagavadglta: vifidanlam idan;i
vakyam.
of
E. Discrepancy spondaic units and spondaie words:
0
~
u u u
I I
vi- fi- aan1-1am ia- an:i va- kyam
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
22
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS, JR.
Here you have three spondaic units (enclosed by circles) but only one
spondaic word (enclosed by a square).
Inset F gives statistics for a run of twenty-five ilolcas from a battle scene
in the Mahabhiirata (7.13.19-43).
per
F . .Numbers of spondaic units and spondaic W<trds slot:
.Number of Number of
Slot spondaic units spondaic words
ac: 1-2 16 5
2-3 12 2
3-4 24 I
4-5 3 0
5- 6 0 0
6- 7 43 0
7-8 4£ 23
bd: 1-2 15 7
2- 3 18 2
3- 4 21 3
4-5 0 0
5-6 0 0
6-7 0 0
7-8 0 0
-
Total 198 43
The first two syllables of an ac line are both long in sixteen instances,
syllables 2- 3 are both long in twelve instances, and so on reading down
column one. Column two gives the total number of spondaic words, slot
by slot, that occur in the passage. There are five spondaic words that fill
slot ac 1- 2, two that fill slot ac 2-3, and so on.
Inset G gives statistics from another battle passage of twenty-five ilolcas
(6.44.1- 25) where the incidence of compounds is higher and the total
number of spondaic words therefore less.
G. Table similar lo the preceding, for MBh. 6.44.1-25:
ac: 1-2 10 8
2-3 20 3
3-4 17 0
4- 5 I 0
5- 6 I 0
6- 7 50 I
7-8 50 14
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
23
STYLISTIC STUDY, COMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONCORDANCE
bd: 1-2 18 2
2- 3 16 0
3-4 12 0
Others 0 0
Total 195 28
In both tables you will immediately be struck by the discrepancies
between columns one and two. Thus, in Inset F, slot ac 6- 7 forms a
spondaic unit in forty-three instances (in fact, in all the regular Jlokas of
the passage), but in no instance is this slot filled by a spondaic word. Slot
ac 3-4 shows twenty-four spondaic units but only one spondaic word. On
the other hand, in slot ac 7-8 there is harmony between the two columns.
In both columns this slot shows the highest figure. Why?
Let us go back to our basic metrical scheme and fill in as many long
syllables as the rules will permit.
of
H. M spondaic units:
aximi~ation
ac: - u - - -
bd:--- - u-u -
1 have not found a iloka where all four lines fit this pattern. The
following, though, exhibits the pattern in both lines b and c (MBh.
7.13.41):
a. •
• • •
b. Hai</imbA/amb14av ubhau
c. cakrau 'tyadbhutam yuddham
d. • . . .
HaiQimba and were giants and perhaps the meter has been
Alambu~
slowed up to produce the effect of these two massive creatures in slow
motion warfare. But tum your eyes back to the diagram of Inset H. It
would seem at first that spondaic words might begin on ac 1, 2, 3, 6, 7
and bd I, 2, and 3. But that is because we have not yet considered the
word breaks.
1.2. Word breaks
The problem of word breaks is the most complicated problem in Sanskrit
metrics. In this summary I shall overlook word breaks within a com
pound.
In the MahQ.bhQ.raJa Jloka a line (pa.da) normally has from one to three
word breaks. Where there are two breaks, the two may be of equal
strength and complementary, as is usually the case with the ac breaks
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
24
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS, JR.
after syllabics 3 and 6; or one break may be subordinate to the other, as
the rare break after the first syllable, which is always subordinate. There
arc lines over which one may argue as to whether a given break is
subordinate or not. Accordingly, the safest statistics arc those which
count all breaks, even breaks before enclitics. I think, though, that the
major breaks have a stronger influence than the others on the polariza
tion and freezing of word-types.
Inset I gives the breaks in the passage that was measured metrically in
Inset F above.
I. Word breaks in MBh. 7.13.19-43, /isltd by syllabic position, in order off rtqueng:
Total numbtr
Po.sition of breaks Major breaks
bd4 23 23
ac3 23 17
ac6 23 15
ac4 21 19
bd'l 15 9
bd3 12 11
bd5 I I 9
ac2 I I 3
all others 31 14
Total 170 120
Thus there occur in the Jlokas of this passage twenty-three word breaks,
all of them major, after syllable bd4; twenty-three breaks, seventeen of
them major, after syllable ac3; and so on.
J
Inset marks the common positions of word breaks on our metrical
chart of the maximally spondaic line (see Inset H above):
J. u
- t - • - . •
, -. u , u
'
A period is here used to designate the four commonest positions of word
break, a comma to designate four less common positions. Word breaks in
other positions are rare.
It now becomes clear why spondaic words do not occur in slot ac 6- 7.
For such a word to occur, there, one would have to have word breaks
after ac5 and ac 7. The break after ac5 is rare (only 7 instances in the
exemplar passage), while a break after ac7 is almost non-existent; it
occurs once in the passage in question, before the enclitic ca. It will also
be clear why spondaic words seldom begin on syllable 2: the break after
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
25
STYLISTIC STUDY, OOMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONCORDANCE
syllable 1 is too rare. The most natural positions for spondaic word turns
out to be ac 1-2, hd 1-2, and especially ac 7-8, for wherever one has the
very common break after adi, a spondaic word must occur in ac 7- 8.
1.3. Polarization and Freezing
Other passages in non-battle scenes will furnish somewhat different
statistics. The Nala story shows a certain fondness for spondaic words in
ac 3- 4. It begins with one, as most Sanskritists know. But even the Nala
story shows only five such spondees to thirty-five in the polarized
positions in the first twenty-five slokas.
Word-types, it turns out may be more than polarized; they may be
completely frozen. A tribrach, for example, can fit into only one slot in a
regular Sioka verse, namely hd 3-4-5, as in
drotµJ/J paRciila-riijiina'!I viddhvii da.Jahhir iiJugail},
Droi:ia, having pierced the Paiicala king with ten swift arrows,
Had the poet been unable to save that slot, he would have had to use the
na-vipulii or, more likely, he would have made Dror;ia shoot five or seven
arrows instead of ten.
What I have described so far is no more than what many Sanskritists
might come close to guessing by instinct. But in order to advance in a
theory it is necessary to begin measuring instead of relying on instinct.
Incidentally, we can often use the new Pratika index to the Mahiihhiirata
to do our measuring for us. On the subject of spondees, for example, you
can there find that the line "tac chrutvii vacana'!I ta.rya", with the ani/
continuative in slot ac 2- 3, occurs only five times in the critical text of
the Mahiihhiirata whereas the line "ta.rya tad vacana'!I Jrutvii", with the
continuative polarized to the end, occurs forty-five times.
Now the case of the continuatives will show that not only do
individual words belong to metrical types; in a highly inflected language
like Sanskrit, whole morphological categories belong to specific metrical
types.
I shall give a sample of the polarization and freezing of morphological
types. I take the sample from a listing of all forms of the perfect tense in a
run of 500 Jlokas of battle description in Book 6. Battle descriptions are
always rich in perfect forms, but I realize that the run should be longer
to arrive at fully reliable results.
One result that I believe has not been noticed before emerges with
great clarity. The epic poets disliked metrical ambiguity. Theoretically,
for example, a form 1ikejaghnatus might appear as a dactyl when followed
by a vowel, or as an amphimacer when followed by a consonant or by
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
26
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGAJ..LS, JR.
line boundary. In actual fact this type of perfect appears almost always
as an amphimacer. Similarly, forms of the typejaghnus appear regularly
as spondees rather than as trochees. Exceptions in the run that I tested
come to less than five percent.
I furnish below a few laws of usage and position of these perfects.
A. contract perfects, third person plural active always carry verbal
prefix or na.
Al. Where this combination forms a bacchius (u -) it always
comes first in the pada:
param ii.luraJ,
viMdu~
viMdur bhinnamannii.JJo
purufaTfabhQJ/
vWd~
nipetur vimalii. faktyo
nipetui ta
gatasava~
samfyus te didrkfayii.
na fekus calilum lcecil
A2. Where the combination forms a molossus ( - ) it comes either
first or last:
sampetur bhujagopamaJ,
vidarfayan~ sampel~
•
B. Strong perfects if amphibrachic ( u u) normally come first:
babhiiva ralhanirghofas
babhiiva
ghof~
nanada sumahii.niidam
uvii.ca rii.jii. durdharfam
uvii.ca vii.ca durdharfam
jagii.ma pii.1µ/upu1rii.1)4m
Bl. Exception one: amphibrachic perfects may begin on syllable 2 if a
monosyllabic pronoun object precedes:
lam uvii.ca mahi.prii.jifc
lam uvii.ca
tat~
B2. Exception 2: amphibrachic perfects may begin on syllable 5 if they
are followed by the particles ha or vai:
Pu Iha to 'nujagii.ma ha
ii.have 'bhiJagii.ma vai
C. Periphrastic perfects are invariably polarized: 85°/o come first, 15%
come last.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
27
STYLISTIC STUDY, OOMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONOORDANCE
D. Perfects third person plural middle which contain three short
syllabics must begin on the third syllable, or an irregular cadence
must be used:
p11.114r jahr1ire mtuJa
firii1TUY iidadire vlrii}j
tval!I Jtlywlhire taJra
1.4. Formulas
The basic criterion for the orality of poetry in the works of Milman
Parry, Albert Lord, and their followers is the formula. And yet I have
postponed mention of formulas to this point because I wanted first to
make clear the phenomena of polarization and freezing. The Sanskrit
oral epic, I think, cannot be meaningfully analysed without an under
standing of those phenomena. Without them the formulas would be
entirely different from what they are.
A formula is a framework for expressing any general incident or
description that is likely to be needed by the oral performer. One or
more words of the formula will remain the same in many occurrences
and will always occupy the same metrical slot. In the remainder of the
span covered by the formula the syntax will usually remain the same
even if the words furnishing the syntax exhibit variation. One or more
words of the formula must be varied whenever the reciter needs to
express a particular rather than a general fact, and the formula is so built
that it can easily be adapted to these particular cases without slowing up
the performer in his recitation. For the oral performer, as is abundantly
clear from living examples of the profession, improvises as he recites; he
docs not memorize a text. What he memorizes arc the incidents of his
tale, the names and epithets of his characters, and the formulas needed
for his narration and description. No two recitations of an epic tale by an
oral performer are identical. Each performance is a new creation.
A Mahiibhiirata formula for the onset of battle is:
tata}j pravavrte ywldhOl!I t11.11111.la'll lomaharfa1]1Jm
Then began a battle, noisy and hair-raising.
Notice the frozen verb-type, with three short syllables beginning in slot
ac3, the one slot where this succession can begin in a regular line, and the
polarized spondce ywldJia'!I. The reciter may alter the opening adverb to
the pronoun tayo}j or ltfiim "of them'', dual or plural as the particular
case may demand. Linc h can be varied by synonyms, as glwrariipam
or it can give needed particular information: "of the Kurus",
h~,
"of the Kurus with the sons of Pa1;u;lu", or of some individual warrior.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
28
DANIEL H.H. INCALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INCALLS,JR.
Thus:
talalJ praoavru yuddluup. tumu«Jtp lomaharf111J4111
uram pravavrt1 yuddluup. tumula1p /omaharf111J0111
tatai> praoavru yuddluup. ghorariipam bliayaoaliam
talalJ praoaorte yuddluup. kauravOl}Qm bliayaoaliam
talalJ
praoaorte yuddluup. laoa Ufiifrr ca bhii.TaJa
talalJ praoaorte yuddham tatra tatra mahiitmaniim
talalJ samabliavad yuddliarrr tumulatp lomaliarftll}Qm
tayoi> samahliaoad yudd/iatp tumu«J1p /omaharftll}Qm
uiam samahliaoad yuddlw.1p tumu«Jtp lomaliarfatµml
tayoi> samahliavad yuddliatp ortra-viisavayor iva
The short verb iisit may be substituted in slot ac 3- 4. An adjective must
then be added to fill up the line:
tatriisit sumaliad yuddlia111 taoa Ufam ca sarrrkulam
tadasit sumaliad yuddluup. kurii1}4rrr paTJliavaii> salia
tadiisit tumularrr yuddliarrr bliagadatta.rya, marifa
I find one instance where the verb is pulled pack to the beginning of the
line, thus emphasizing that the battle at long last began. As three short
syllables cannot occur at the beginning of the line, the perfect pravaorte is
changed to the imperfect pravartata:
pravartata tato yuddliarrr tumula111 /omaliarfarµJm
Most formulas in the Mahabharata occur in at least two forms, one to fit
a and c lines with their cadence of u - and an alternate to fit
the b and d lines with their cadence of u - u - . I might point out
that the development of alternate formulas to fit different exigencies of
form is characteristic of formulaic structure in most languages. That is
why our old poem of Beowulf has so many expressions for king and
warrior and ship and sea. A different expression is needed for each
alliterative series, for old Germanic poetry was based on a pattern of
alliteration. The old English reciters placed the need of form even above
the need of sense. King Hrothgar varies from being king of the North
Danes to being king of the South-Danes or West-Danes as the alliteration
of the lines shifts from n to s to w. The Sanskrit reciters on their part were
not above changing a number, whether of arrows shot or of warriors
slain in order to fit a cadence.
I furnish below a collection of instances, as complete as I have been
able to make it, of the Mahabharata formulas for licking the lips or flicking
the tongue. The first situation occurs when a warrior is taking aim at his
enemy. Often he has just been wounded. Usually he is filled with fury,
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
29
STYLISTIC STUDY, COMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONCORDANCE
frowning. The ac formulas are often followed by a simile. The ac formula
I and the bd formula I are built around the word srkkitii, "the two
comers of the lips". The first four instances may be translated:
The hero, licking the comers of his lips like a wolf
in the flock.
the hero, licking and licking the corners of his lips,
his eyes red with anger.
licking around the comers of his lips, 0 king,
breathing hard and with eyes red with anger.
the hero, licking the corners of his lips like a
proud tiger.
+ +
ac formula I: srkkir}i vi-/sam-/le-lihan nom./voc.
srkki,,; vitihan vlra/J / pa.Jumadhye m;ko yat!ia (6.60.27)
I
srkkiT}i lelihan viral} krodhasarpraktalocanai} (7. I 09. 7)
srkki,,r sarritihan rajan / krodharaktt/qa'JalJ ivasan (9.54.19)
srkki,,; vitihan viralJ / sardiila iva tiarpitalJ (6.92.21)
srkkiTJi lelihanasya / bQ.jpam utsrjato muhulJ (5.50.29)
ac formula 2: lelih {participle) + metaphor/ sainya
lelihanairi yalM sarJ>af!I {g arjanJairi vuabhairi yatha (8.57 .27)
I
teti!ianairi iva vibho nagakanyairi mahavitam (9.9.38)
lelihyamanarrz sainytfu / pravrddham iva pavakam (6.98.28)
lelihyamanarri sainyarri me/ havi~mantam ivanalam (6.46.5)
Conflation of ac formulas I and 2:
lelihan srkkiTJi viro / mrgarQ4 iva kanane (6.98.28),
bd formula I: srkkiTJi + parile-/ parisam- + lihan / / sam-/le- + lihan +
muhu/J
sa ca krodhasamavif/a4 / srkkiTJi parilelihan (6.80.12)
sairida.fya daianair Of/harrz / srkkirJi parisarrzlihan (6.87 .29)
sa gadhaviddho vyathita/J / srkkiTJi parisarrzlihan (6.90.5)
uviica bhimarrz samare/ srkkil}i parilelihan (6.104.42)
so' tividdho mahtfvasal} / srkkiTJi sarrzlihan muhulJ (6.107. I I)
so 'tividdho mahefvasal} / srkkiTJi parisarrzlihan (6.5 7. 22)
so 'tividdho mahtfvasa/J / srkki,,1 parisarrilihan (7.137.38)
sa cchinnadhanva sarrikruddhalJ / srkki'}I parisarrzlihan (6.114.26)
I
vayuputralJ prahuto 'bhiit srkkiTJi parilelihan (7. I 09.18)
trifikham bhriikutim krtva / srkkil}i parilelihan (9.13.38)
tatalJ kruddho ra1Jt partha4 / srkkitJi parisarrzlihan (7. 78.26)
etac chrutva tadvacanarri / srkkitJi parisarrzlihan (7 .121.30)
smayamano mahaltjQ4 { srkkitJi sarrzlihan muhulJ ( 12.8.2)
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
30
DANIEL H.H. INCALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INCALLS, JR.
+
bd formula 2: leliMna- noun/adverb
blzujagii iva sarrikruddhi. / lelihanii ursolbaMJ, (6.114.58)
jvalanllm agnival sarrikfzye / leliMnii'!I samantalal] (5.188.5)
triisayaipS ciiyam iiyiiti / lelihano ma/ziruhan ( 1.221. 4)
tfa hi jvalamiino 'gnir / leliMno ma/ziruhan ( 1.224.16)
saptajilzvo 'nala4 lqiimo / leliMnopasarpati ( 1.223.5; irregular)
The paired formulas I refer specifically to a warrior's licking his lips and
are characteristic of Books 6 and 7. One would of course not expect to
find them outside a context of battle, but it is strange and I think
significant that they are missing from the battle scenes of Book 8.
Formulas 2 refer rather to the flickering motion of the tongue of a snake
or of fire, a different context, which may occur outside the battle scenes.
The Malzjjb!ziirata shows instances other than these listed above of
intensive (yaiivat) forms of lilz, which seem to me to be not formulaic,
e.g.:
lelilzyamiinas trfila/] / (3.170.39)
pucchasp/zo14natatpar~
lelilzyase samantiit ( T riflublz 6.33.30 = Gltii 11.30)
grasamii~
Many formulas permit of poetic expansion or variation. It is here that
one may observe the genesis of kiivya style. To give a single example, the
formula of attack at its simplest is no more than two names and a verb:
dulµiisanas tu nakula'!I pratyudyiiya ma/zijrat/zam
Dul;lWana advanced against Nakula of the great chariot.
This may be expanded by adding an adjective or epithet to either
warrior's name, by noting his weapon in the instrumental case, or by
adding a simile.
yudlzi{lfziras tu sa'!lkruddlza4 saubala111 niSitai4
larai~
vyadiirayata SO'!Jgriime mag/zaviin iva diinavam
in fury pierced Saubala with sharp arrows in the battle,
Yudhi~fhira
as Indra did the demon.
Or, as the performer works himself up to a fine rhetoric:
riikfasa111 krUrakarmiirµJf11 kriirakarmii glza{otkaca4
alambUfam pratyudiyiit vala111 !okra i/ziihave
Against the cruel demon Ghalotkaca the cruel advanced
Alambu~a,
in battle as Indra against Vala.
Here we have inversion, the alliterative repetition of kriira, irregular
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
31
STYLISTIC STUDY, COMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONCORDANCE
cadence, and simile. The narrative has finally become poetically interest-
.
1ng.
Even in its simplest, unadorned form an oral formula may be
beautiful. john Finlay in his inspired teaching of Homer to Harvard
undergraduates used to say that the formulas of the Iliad were like
pebbles on the beach. They have been worn down by the thousands of
performers who have used them to a perfect smoothness, to the most
beautiful possible shape. To show that formula criticism is not without its
csthetic rewards I shall give one example from the Mahiibharata. It is a
formula that makes a contrast between joy and tears and it has almost
frozen into a clichc. It occurs first when Yudhi$Jhira makes the most
terrible of his wagers. He stakes his wife Draupadi on the dice:
KarQa rejoiced beyond measure together with Dubsasana and his brothers.
But from the eyes of other courtiers fell tears.
In the Sanskrit see how slowly and sadly the last line ends:
jaharfa kal7}o 'tibhrfam saha
dul]Jiisanadibhi~
ilartfQrp tu sabhyiinii'P rutrebhyal) priipataj jalam (2.58.42)
When Draupadi in exile remembers the dishonor shown to YudhiM
hira by the the same formula recurs, with the change of
Dhartar~Jras,
just one word but with the formula split between two lines.
itarefOrci tu sarveiOrri kurii1}iitri kurunandana
du}Jkheniibhipariliinii'P rulrebhyal) priipataj jalam (3.28.9)
The formula occurs a third time, again with just one word changed, at
another tragic moment of the epic. The youthful Abhimanyu, who had
learned how to break through the enemy line but had not yet learned the
technique of retreat, is cornered by six older warriors and kiUcd after
being forced to leap from his chariot:
iisil paramako hartas liivakiiniif!I viiii'!I pale
itaretiilfl tu viriil}iilfl ntlrtbhyal) priipataj jalam (7 .48.19)
Great was the joy of your warriors, 0 lord of the clans,
but from the eyes of other men fell tears.
The compiling of metrical and formulaic statistics would be a boring
task ifit were not for the flashes of eternal beauty that burst from time to
time from the material one is studying.
1.5. CliclUs
I find it useful to distinguish cliches from formulas although both are
members of the same genus and arise out of metrical building blocks in
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
32
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS,JR.
the same way. A clichc is a formula that is frozen; it exhibits no
variations. An example is the half! loka that occurs 108 times (I can hear
the numerologists panting!) in the Mahabhii.rata:
atlrapy udiiharanlimairz iti!rasairz puratanam
One may ask how this differs from such a half !loka as
tatal] pravarn;le yudd/iairz lumulairz lomalzar<IUJam
which occurs in frozen form eight times. The answer is that the
components of the former half f/oka arc never varied; those of the latter
sometimes are. It is useful to distinguish the two types because the clichc
is not peculiar to oral poetry whereas the formula is. Clichcs continue to
be used throughout written Sanskrit, just as quotations from the Bible or
from Shakespeare continue to be used throughout written English.
nary
2. Computer A sis of Test Runs
2.1. The Need of Computer Aid
Even as I was forming the theories of polarization and freezing described
in the preceding section I was aware of the paucity of my data. The
longest run in which I had counted all perfect tense forms was 500 !lokas.
I had guessed at laws of the polarization of spondees from even shorter
runs. Furthermore, all these runs had been selected from a single type of
epic poetry, the battle scenes of Mahabhii.rata Books 6 and 7. How could
one obtain a broader base without spending a lifetime to obtain i1?
Naturally I thought of turning to a computer. Barend A.A. van Nooten
in California had made use of a computer to analyse the prose sections of
the Adiparva.' Then Mary Caroll Smith had used a computer to
produce a metrical printout of the Mahii.bharata's tri</ubh verses.2 So when
a ha.If-year sabbatical fell to my lot in the spring of 1975 I determined to
use my free time experimenting with computer-aided analysis.
As I had had no training in computer science, I enlisted the aid of my
son, Daniel H.H. Ingalls, Jr., a computer programmer and inventor,
who was then working in the Palo Alto Research Center of Xerox
Corporation. Without his help my analysis of the Mahabharata would
have come to a halt long ago. Our cooperation has taken place in two
' "Mahabharau Text Analysis with the Aid of a Digital Computer", University of
California, Berkeley, Ph.D. disscrtation, 1963.
' "The Core of India's Great Epic", Harvard Ph.D. dissertation, 1972.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
STYLISTIC STUDY, OOMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONOORDANCE 33
stages. The first stage, which I shall describe here under Section 2 of the
present paper, consisted in my typing out portions of the Mahabhiirata so
that they could be fed into a computer memory and of my son's writing
programs by which the computer could elicit data of meter and word
break together with a concordance which would designate the metrical
position of every word it contained. The second stage, which will be
described in Sections 3 and 4, consisted of my son's inventing a
recognition program which enables a computer to read directly the
Devanagari text, thus dispensing with the laborious typing out of the text
in transliteration. In the second stage my contribution has been limited
to the editing of the computer-printed text.
2.2 Tiu Trial Runs from Typed Tape
In the spring of 1975 I rented a Telex machine by which transcriptions
of Mahiihhiirata text could be typed onto eight-hole Ascii tape. I did this
typing in my home in Virginia, sending the completed tapes by mail
weekly to my son three thousand miles away in California, where he fed
them into a Xerox computer. In order to fit the Mahiihhiirata text to the
limitations of the Telex machine, I had to devise a transliteration
that made use of no signs other than those of the English alphabet, the
one-digit numerals, the period and the plus sign. Inset K exhibits
Mahabhiirata 7 .36.5- 7 in this transcription.
K. dron2o draun2ih2 lcr2pah2 lcarn2ah2
kr2tavarmaa ca sauhalah2
hr2hadhalo madra.raajo
hhuurir hhuurishravaah2 shalah2
pauravo vr2s2asenash ca
visr2jantah2 shitaan.J sharaan
suhhadram2 shara.vars2en2a
mahataa samavaalcirat
sam211Whayitvaa tam atha
duryodlumam atMcayan
aasyaad graasam iva +aalcs2iptam2
mamr2s2e na +arjuna.aatmajah2
It will be seen that I used the period to indicate word boundary in
compounds and that I resolved all cases of tkariipa-sandhi between words,
using the plus sign to indicate word-scam. As the machine had no
diacritical marks in its type, I used numerals in their place. For example,
retroftex n was represented by n2, palatal n by n3, gutteral n by n4.
Long vowels were indicated by doubling the vowel.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
34 DANIEL H.H. INGAJ.l.S AND DANIEL H.H. INGAJ.l.S, JR.
My son wrote a program by which the computer translated my
transcription into a second transcription which used a one-to-one
representation, that is to say, a single type to represent a single phoneme.
This second transcription will look odd to a Sanskritist.
L. dro}/o drONiH lcRpaH lcarNaH
lcRtavarmA ca sObalaH
bRhadba/o madra.rAjo
BUrir BUriSravAH SalaH
pOravo vR.i;asenaS ca
uisRjantaH SiJAw SarAn
suBadraM Sara.varzeNa
mahatA samavAlcirat
saMmo/uvitvA lam a Ta
duryoDanam amocayan
A.syAd gr Asam iva + Alcz.iptaM
mamR.i;t na +arjuna.AtmajaH
I next furnished my son with definitions of syllable, line (piida), ilolca,
metrical length, and word, on the basis of which he wrote further
programs: a program for giving the metrical length of each syllable and a
program for stating the position of all word breaks. He also programmed
a translation of our second transcription into the standard transcription
used by Sanskritists so that the printout would be easier to use. The
result appeared as below.
M.5. dro1µ1 drau11i'1 krpaQ lcar,,a'1 ----u--- 2 4 6
krtavarmii ca saubala'1 uu--u-u- 4 5
brhadbalo madra.riijo u-u-- u-- 4 (6)
bhurir bhuriiraviiQ sala'1 --- -u- u- 2 6
6. pauravo uuasmaJ ca -u-uu- -- 3 7
visrJanlaQ fitiill fariin uu-- u- u- 4 6
subhadra111 fara.vartnµJ u--uu- -- 3 (5)
mahatii samavii/cirat uu- uu- u- 3
7. SOf11mohayitvii tam atha --u--uu- 5 6
duryodhanam amocayan - - uuu- u- 4
iisyiid griisam iva + ii/ctipta111 --- uu--- 2 4
mamrft na +arjuna.iitmajaQ uu-- u- u- 3 (6)
The text here is printed in standard transcription on the left-hand side of
the page; the metrical form is given line by line on the right-hand side.
The final syllable of each line is designated as long no matter whether it
is long or short by nature. Word breaks are indicated by the number of
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
35
STYLISTIC STUDY, OOMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONCORDANCE
the syllabic after which the break occurs. Word break within compound
is indicated by a numeral enclosed in brackets.
In this manner we typed and computerized the following material:
Battle scenes MBh.6.104-112
7 .35- 50 total number of lines: 4,016
Narrative passages MBh.1.71- 80
3.50- 64 (Nala)
5.112- 121 4,002
Religious passages MBh.6.23- 40 (Gita)
12.203- 210
12.298- 300
12.302-304 3,998
Control Runs
Karna: presumably
early MBh. 5.142-144 278
Karna: presumably
late MBh. 5.138- 141 616
Buddhacarita All Jlokas in the poem. 1,184
Total 14,094
The rationale of the selection is this. I wanted equal numbers of Jlokas
from battle, narrative, and didactic passages to sec if there were
significant differences of meter and word break among these three types
of MaJiiibharata poetry. Hence the three major runs. Of what I have
called the control runs the purpose of the Buddhacarita Jlokas will be
obvious. They arc clearly non-oral poetry and should, therefore, show a
contrast with such sections of the MaJiiibharata as arc oral. A fault here is
that the Buddhacarita run is too short; there arc only 296 Jlolcas in the
extant portion of that poem. The two Karr;ia passages suffer from the
same fault, although the results they furnished arc interesting. As readers
of the MaJiiibharala will remember, we have in MaJiiibharaJa 5.138-144
two conversations with Kan:ia that seem to belong to different versions of
the epic. In 138-141 Kor;ia attempts to persuade Karr;ia to join the
Pii.QQavas. In 142- 144 Kan:ia's mother, Draupadi, attempts the same
purpose. In both conversations Karr;ia refuses. Decades ago, when I first
read these conversations, I had written in my notebook of the scene with
Draupadi:
This is grand. How much more manly Ka1"9a is than Hamlet.
He tells his mother straight out what her crime has been intead of hinting.
And despite it he is not only polite to her, but even kind. And she blesses
him as they part.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
36
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS,JR.
On the other hand, I had written of 5.139:
In terms of'the epic narrative and the epic character of Kaiva this passage
is ridiculous. Kaiva is supposed not to know of his divine birth (cf. 3.285
and 4.143-144), yet here he knows far more than Kiwa tclb him. He
knows of his own death (unknown to him in Book 8) and of events even
after that. The picture of Kaiva delighting in listening to Dharma5istras is
especially out of character and the connection of brahmin rccitcn with the
Mahabharata is surely later than the oral epic. Kaiva has here become
what Bali is in the brahmin-Va i$Qava tradition, a wonderfully generous
semi-demon bhalcta of KnQa. All these facts arc fairly obvious. But I should
like to prove linguistically that 5.138-141 arc later than 5.142-144.
It was in pursuit of this wish that I included these two brief runs.
2.3 Metrical Statistics
Drawing on the computer's memory of the text and meter, my son
elicited metrical statistics, of which I give a sample below. The sample
furnishes statistics for the b-run, the selections from the battle scenes.
N. METERSTATS 16 -Nov-75 12:08:31
Statistics for b run:
1st 4 a o/o b
Ofo
uuuu 0 0.0 l 0.04
uuu- I 0.04 0 0.0
uu-u 74 3.68 90 4.48
uu-- 179 8.91 191 9.51
u-uu 119 5.92 108 5.37
u-u- 196 9.76 I 0.04
u--u 120 5.97 157 7 .81
u--- 159 7.91 184 9.16
- uuu 0 0.0 0 0.0
-uu- I 0.04 3 0.14
- u- u 185 9.21 261 12.99
-u-- 316 15. 73 397 19.7 7
--uu 157 7.81 200 9.96
--u- 188 9.36 0 0.0
---u 140 6.97 185 9.21
- --- 173 8.61 230 11.45
2nd 4 a % b OI
lo
uuuu 0 0.0 0 0.0
uuu- 78 3.88 0 0.0
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
37
STYLISTIC STUDY, COMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONCORDANCE
uu-u 0 0.0 0 0.0
uu-- I 0.04 0 0.0
u- uu 0 0.0 0 0.0
u- u- 3 0.14 2006 99.90
u- -u 0 0.0 0 0.0
u--- 1775 88.39 0 0.0
-uuu 0 0.0 0 0.0
- uu- 74 3.68 0 0.0
- u- u 0 0.0 0 0.0
-u-- 18 0.89 0 0.0
--uu 0 0.0 0 0.0
--u- 0 0.0 2 0.09
--- u 0 0.0 0 0.0
----
59 2.93 0 0.0
A few words will explain how these statistics are to be read. The
designation "1st 4" means "the first four syllables of all the lines in the
run". Column a gives the number of occurrences of each possible
metrical pattern in the first four syllables of the odd paaas (the ac lines).
The next column to the right gives the percentage which these occurren
ces bear to the total in each case. Column b gives the statistics for the
even piida$ (the bd lines). The lower half of the table gives the statistics for
the last four syllables of the lines. For example, if you run down the right
hand column you will come to the percentage figure 99.90, that is,
practically IOOo/ This is the double iambic close of the even padas. For
0 •
purposes of these tables the computer has regarded the eighth syllabic as
always long. Accordingly, the patterns with short eighths produce nulls.
The question of the final syllable will be handled in a separate study.
Similar statistics were compiled for the story run, the religious run, the
two short Kan;ia passages, and the Buddhacarita. I shall point out a few
items of interest in these statistics.
The double spondce opening is rare in the battle run: 8.61°/ of ac
0
lines, 11.45% of bd lines. It becomes more frequent in the story run
( 11.64% and I 2.44o/ and distinctly more frequent in the religious run
)
0
(16.22% and 17.28%) and Buddhacarita run (14.35°/o and 14.18%).
The Kan;ia run hypothesized are early agrees fairly well with the story
run (12.94% and 10.79°/ The Kan;ia run hypothesized as late shows
) .
0
an increase (15.03°/ and 16.99%).
0
The double trochee opening exhibits an opposite tendency. It is
commonest in the battle run: 9.21 % ofa c lines; I 2.99o/ of bd lines. In this
0
run it is more frequent than the double spondee. In the story run the
double trochee decreases to 7.53% and 10.59%; in the religious run to
7.91% and 9.96o/ in the Buddhacarita to 6.92% and 7.09%. In the
0 ,
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
38
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. 1.NGALLS, JR.
Buddhacarita the double trochee is thus less than half as common as the
double spondee. The Kan;ia passage hypothesized as early shows the
highest percentage of double trochees of any run (10.79'}' and 13.66%).
0
The Kan;ia passage hypothesized as late falls between the religious run
and the buddhacarita in its percentages (6.53°/o and 9.57%). .
The opening - - u -, which can occur by rule only in an ac line (see
Section I. I above) shows no significant variation of incidence in the
main runs but shows a marked decrease in the Buddhacarita (2.19%).
It was the opinion of E.W. Hopkins (Tiu GreaJ Epic of India [1901], p.
233) that "there is no "epic usage" in respect to the proportion of vipuliis
to palliyiis". This may well be true if we take the uipuliis as a group. But
for the runs here tested, at least, the na-uipulii (a c cadence u u u - ) is
rarest in the battle run and commonest in the story run and Budd
hacarita. The bha-uipulii (ac cadence - u u -) is rarest in the Buddhacarita
and (except for the Kan;ia passage hypothesized as early) is commonest
in the battle run.
The runs here covered are of less extent than the material metrically
analyzed by Hopkins by hand many yean ago. They are based on a
better text than was available to Hopkins and they present a clearer
contrast between battle, story, and religious runs, but they do not add
greatly to his conclusions. To do so it will be necessary not only to have
data for the whole of the Mahiibharata but to contrast specific sections
which differ also by other criteria. The statistics of our story run, I now
think, would have differed considerably if I had omitted, or substituted
something else in place of, the last half of the Nala story. The religious
run might have yielded different results if I had distinguished the Gita
from the passages in Book 12.
2.4. Word Break Statistics
Statjstics on the position of word breaks in the lines of our trial runs were
compiled in the form given below. Only full word breaks are counted,
not breaks within compound. A drawback of these breakstat charts is
that they do not distinguish ac lines from bd lines. On the other hand, the
data which they do give arc exhibited very conveniently.
0. Break patterns from b run (4016 lines total):
5 5 5 5
6 6 6 6
7 7 7 7
---- 210 21 143 2 251 9 23 0
---4 559 28 227 I 111 I 12 0
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
39
STYLISTIC STUDY, OOMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONCORDANCE
- -3- 363 47 339 2 138 4 12 0
- -34 117 11 47 0 5 0 2 0
- 2- - 125 12 181 1 173 2 16 2
- 2--4 235 8 80 1 31 4 3 0
- 23- 30 7 80 I 21 2 2 0
-234 5 0 5 0 1 0 0 0
1--- 8 1 14 0 32 I 3 0
1--4 27 3 22 0 0 0 0 0
1- 3- 37 7 51 2 16 2 I 0
1- 34 3 0 2 0 1 0 0 0
12-- 7 0 6 0 5 0 3 0
12--4 18 0 13 0 0 0 0 0
123- 7 0 7 0 2 0 I 0
1234 I 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Break totals:
I 303
2 1098
3 1381
4 1584
5 892
6 1307
7 182
The three upper lines refer to syllables 5, 6, and 7 of a line. Thus the
left-hand column of these upper lines represents pijJas with no break in
the second half. The column to the right represents lines where there is
only one break in the second half, namely after the seventh syllabic. And
so on to the extreme right, which represents those freakish lines where
there is a word break after every syllable of the second half. Now by
looking at the lower portion of the diagram one can correlate the
cadences with the openings. At the bottom of the diagram arc given the
total number of word breaks that occur after each syllable of the line in
this battle run. Similar statistics were compiled for the other runs. I give
below the comparative figures for the three major runs and the Budd
hacarita. The Buddhacarita figures arc simulated figures (hence placed
within parentheses), being the actual figures multiplied by a factor of
3.38 so as to give results from this run of 1184 lines comparable to those
of the 4-000 line runs.
p
b s r be
No. break: 210 208 256 (325}
break after I: 303 445 451 (416)
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
4-0 DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS,JR.
after 2: 1098 1392 1369 ( 1190)
3: 1381 1573 1471 (1470)
4: 1584 14-09 1338 ( 1322)
5: 892 1023 1077 (1011)
6: 1307 1325 1222 (1315)
7: 182 368 317 (341)
There arc notable variations in these figures, but I doubt that much
significance can be placed on them without combining them with other
factors. One may note that in the battle run only 303 out of 4.016 lines
show a break after the first syllable and only 1,098 show a break after the
second. The corresponding figures for the story and religious runs are
50% higher for the break after first syllable and 30% higher for the
break after second. The Buddhacarita run agrees with the s and r runs in
frequency of break after first syllabic but not in frequency of break after
second. The figure most likely to prove significant, I think, is the figure
for break after 4. This is commonest in the battle run. If we take the
more special case of lines where the sole break comes after 4, the contrast
is still stronger: b 559, s 332, r 299, be (308). These are the evenly broken
lines, which I think may prove to be archaic. But the matter is far from
proved. The figures for the two KarQa runs show no significant dif
ferences in the position of word breaks so far as I can perceive.
'2.5. Metrical /ntkx
Three indices were prepared from the computerized material: a metrical
index, a concordance, and an index of final words. In the metrical index
each instance of each word of the runs was listed and identified by book,
adhyiiya, iloka, line, and syllabic. These words were then arranged
according to metrical type, beginning with words consisting of a single
short syllable (e.g., ca, tu, hi) and ending with the various metrical
patterns of the longest words. This index formed the primary tool for
examining the phenomena of polarization. My hypothesis of the
polarization of spondecs is clearly borne out. In the indexed lines of the
Mahiibhiirata the word te1iim, for example, occurs forty-two times. In 82°/
0
of the cases it falls in initial or final position. The word batµJis ("with
arrows") and its sandhi equivalents biilJair, biilJaif, biilJail} occurs forty-eight
times almost exclusively in the battle run. Of the occurrences 92'}' are
0
polarized, usually at the end. The word niryam occurs forty-one times; in
95°/ of the cases it is polarized. lncidently, I might point out that the
0
word niryam is always spondaic, that is, is always followed by a consonant
or is in final position. Niytam as a trochee docs not exist, at least in these
runs.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
S1YLISTIC STUDY, COMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONCORDANCE 41
The anit continuatives (e.g., drf(llii, irulvii, hatvQ) prove to be polarized
as I had suspected from a much shorter sample (sec I. I and 1.3 above).
The Mahiihhiirata runs furnish 399 examples. A comparison of the ratio of
this polarization is highly interesting. In the battle run 83% of anil
continuativcs arc polarized, in the story run in the religious run
68~0,
62%. The facts, however, arc more complicated than I had realized. The
very common continuativc uktva forms an exception to its morphological
category. Out of thirty-five occurrences only ten arc polarized; its
commonest position is in syllabics 3-4. The reason for this anomoly, it
seems to me, is that uktvii is commonly used in the phrases evam uktvii
(thirteen times in these runs), tatlrety uktva (eight times), ity uktva (five
times), which were treated by the oral poet as single words. In these
instances he did not "feel" a continuativc as beginning in mid-verse; be
felt a four-syllable or three-syllabic word as beginning in slot one.
In studying the continuatives of these runs I was surprised to observe
the extreme rarity of the set formations (e.g. viditva, arcitvii, cintatyitvQ).
They occur in only twenty-six instances against 399 instances of the anil
forms. Again, where many of the ani/ forms figure in common epic
formulas (e.g., viddlwii pancabhir / navabhir / daJabhir or clicbes
iiiugai~)
(e.g., evam uktval, none of the st/ forms so far as I can sec is so used. One
may also note that in several instances the Pii;ll.nian st/ form is replaced in
the Mahiihhiirata by a form in /yap, e.g., grhya for grhltvii, put.JO for pJ4ayitvii.
The conclusion seems almost inescapable that the oral epic style
developed at a time before set lctvii came into use and remained chary of
this use down to the time when the Mahabhiirata was recorded.
I suggested the writing of a program to furnish polarization ratios for
each run separately, for it proved a tedious business to compile ratios by
hand as I have done for the continuatives. But at just this time my son
had made his first breakthrough in the invention of a recognition
program (see Section 4), and it seemed more valuable to have him spend
his time on that. Ultimately, when we have a complete concordance of
the Mahiihhiirata, we will certainly make these comparisons, not only
between battle, narrative, and didactic passages but between the
individual books and episodes of the poem.
2.6. The Concordance
Our concordance lists every occurrence of every word of the runs,
identifying each word by book, adhyiiya, s/olca, and line. It does not give a
figure for the metrical slot because that information appears clearly in
the printout: the full line is printed out for the occurrence of each word.
The two sample pages which I give below have been subjected to
considerable editorial positioning in order to bring inflected forms of the
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
42
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS,JR.
same stem together. Thus, without positioning, the items contauung
flMlram would precede those containing f1Mtras and items containing flMlre
would precede those containing putre1}1J. The labor of writing a program
to effect such positioning would probably be greater than that of
positioning by hand, a task which is facilitated by the use of an electronic
beam. One need only point to a line on a television screen and guide it to
a new position. We are still undecided whether to print our complete
concordance (see Section 3) in this fashion or to leave it in strictly
alphabetical order. lfwe do position by hand, the result in any case will
be a compromise. To arrange all instances of all verbal forms under their
root would require an immense amount of labor. They will surely be
listed in the concordance alphabetically. What I envisage is an appendix
volume listing all verbal forms (not all instances) under the respective
roots. This would cut· the labor by more than half and would not delay
the publication of the concordance.
In any event the individual word forms will be arranged in metrical
sequence as they arc on the sample pages, the occurrences beginning in
slot one coming first, those beginning in slot two next, and so on
throughout the line. Such an arrangement can easily be programmed
and requires no manual positioning.
2. 7. Sample of Concordance of Test Runs
putra-
putras/-a.S/a4/o/a ( + vocalic): see also
rsi.f1Mtras, kunJi.putras, kratha.putras,
dr01Jll.J1Mlras, miidn.putras' raja.putras,
vaiiya.putras.
putras lava duradarfe (6.104.12d)
putras lava vifam pate (6.106.36b, 6.106.44b, 6.107.13b)
putras tu lava 1a111 du/va (6. l I0.20a)
putro dulJJasanas lava (7 .38.26b)
putro bala.ravi.prabha4 (5. l 16.20b)
pulro yas Iva + anuvarlala ( i.80.2Ia)
putro raja jayadralhal} (7.41.6b)
(7.44.30d)
putr~ fara.sala.ardita~
sa putro gUl}IJ.sampanrw ( l.80.22a)
sa putr~ putravad ya.S ca ( I.80.18b)
kasya putras ca Ja111Sa me (I. 76.12d)
lava putro nyavarayal (6.106.77d)
putro vira/asya (5. l 39.27c)
!ankh~
na sa fala111 ( l.80. l 7d)
putr~ ma~
parµJo4putro 'si dharmata4 (5.138.9b, 5.139.2b, 5.139.4b)
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SlYLISTIC STUDY, OOMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONOORDANCE 43
latha jajviila putras te (6. l 12.9'k)
+
pi4itas ca eva putras le (6.106.43a)
vijitas lava putro 'pi (6. I 12.97a)
gurv.pulrasya putro vai (I. 72 .9a)
jato diina.patil} putras (5.l I 7.21a)
yo me dadyiid vayal, putras (I. 78.39c)
pUro loam me priyo putras (I. 79.24a)
vayo dasyati It putro (l.78.41a)
dvidh4 ciccluda le putral, (6.112.'k}
putram: see also kunti.putram, kula.putram,
kriitha.putram, guru.putram, drorµz.putram,
dharma.putram, miidri.putram, miidhavi.putram,
riija.putram, siitvati.putram.
putram ekam pralardanam (5.J 15.15d)
/JUlrllf!l.iJtllha111 varif/ha111 ca (1.79.lc)
pulrllf!I le navabhil} farai~ (5.106.37d)
putra711 dvija gata711 margam (5 . l l 6. I 2c)
putra711 ia{Jlasya miininam ( 7.4 4. I 4b)
putra711 saqiid brhaspate~ (I. 7 l. l 7b)
priya711 putram apaiyatim (7 .49.8d)
dro'J(J~ putram ab~ata (6.108.3d)
lava putram ayodhayat (6.112. lb)
lava putram aritrz.dama (7 .38.27b)
pUrv111 putram uviica ha ( 1.80.Sd)
pUrv111 putra711 kanryasam ( l.80. l 2b)
yadi pulrllf!I na pa.fyiimi (7.50.27.c, 7.50.32e)
.iJellha'1' putram brhaspate~ (I. 71. IOd)
lava putra711 viiiitrz palt (6.l 12.28b)
uviica putram 4fliua (5. l 44.23c)
vimu/chikrrya putra111 te (6.108.53c)
lava satrzd/i4rayan putram (6.105.23e)
faiM,Jo 'pi guro~ putram (6.112.IOa)
miigadhasya punal, putram (7. 4 7. I)
kunry~ prathamaJam putram (5.139.21)
bhriitiira711 pitaratrz putram (3.62. l le)
putrt'J(J: see also drvpada.putrt'J(J, drorµz./JUlrt7Ja
piiilciila.putrt'J(J, saha.putrma
putrt'J(J lava dhimatii (6.106.34b)
lava /JUlrt'J(J tfhjmatii (6.107.33b)
putriiya: see also drvpada.putriiya
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
44 DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS, JR.
putrasya: sec also gurv.putrasya, pat,4u.putrasya
Jalya.putrasya
putrasya lava paJyaJalJ (6.106.5d)
putrasya ·lava valiini (6.107.55b)
putrasya hila-kr:t laM (7.39.22d)
lal!aputrasya dlumuinaJJ (6.112.90b, 6.112.107b)
lal!a putrasya pauTfliam (6.I 12.89b)
lal!a putrasya marifa (7.38. IOb)
lal!a putrasya valiinim (6 .I0 4. 2 7d )
mama putrasyayal sainyam (7.38.lc)
putre: see also siila.putre
mama putre 'k#pan Jariin ( 7. 50.50d)
priye putre nipatite (7.45.18b)
bhraJuJ] putrt malia.ralht (7.49.3d)
2.8. lnde1e of Last Words
It was thought useful to compile an index of the last words of the lines.
Where the last word is a compound, it is alphabetized under its final
component, which is followed by a comma, which is followed in turn by
the prior component. This information can of course be elicited from the
concordance, but it proves useful to have the finals brought together
because it is in this position that freezing and formulaic structure are
most prominent. The sample page will show the frequency of rlJl}t and
maliaratha/J in final position; maliaratha/J actually occurs in no other
position in the runs.
yofitam, gopa bc0.4.14.d rakfan bc0.6.3.c
yauvanam s I. 79.9. b rakfasam, r6.32.23.b
yak~a­
sl.79.16.b raJr#l!i, caritra kc5. l 42.22.d
sl. 79.26.b rakfitam b7.37.2.d
yauvanam, sva sl.80.10.b rawta s3.61.41.d
yauvana, prap1a sl.77.8.b raiigam s3.54.8.a
yauvaniim, prapla s3.51.7.b raiigam, mahii- s.3.54.3.c
yauvaniim, sarripriipla sl.71.23.b raja/J rl2.207.12.d
yauvane s I. 79.2.d rl2.207.22.b
sl. 79.24.f raj .a sam, Jania- r6.28.27.c
.
yauvane, 'prapla b7 .48.32.b ra1asas, rl2.210.28.c
ui-
yauvanailJ sl. 79.6.b ra1omayam rl2.207.14.b
s3.55.13.b ra11um s3.53.4.c
ra~alt
ra1fl}iasai}, upama b7.42.2.d ral!aiJ b7.38.3.d
ralphobhir, anila- b7.36.2 l.a ral/l!.m b7 .39.8.d
raktam rl2.207.16.a ra,,at b7.43.6.d
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
S1YLISTIC STUDY, COMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONCORDANCE 45
rQlliit, maliii- kl5.141.45b rl2.299.12.b
rtJlle b6.104.57.c ratir, a- rl2.205.23.c
b6.104.58.c ralliaiJ, ma/r4- b6.104.6.b
b6.105.12.d b6.104.12.d
b6.107.46.f b6.104.20.b
b6.109.39.b b6.106.4.b
b6.ll0.12.b b6.106.24.b
b6.ll0.22.d b6.107.51.b
b6.l 10.35.b b6.108.2.d
b6. l l l. l l.b b6.108.4.b
b6. l l l.14.d b6.108.19.b
b6.l l l.34.d b6.109.14.b
b6.l 12.47.d b6.109.l 7.d
b6. l 12.61.b b6.109.34.b
b7 .37 .3. b b6. l l 0.22.b
b7.38.28.d b6.l I0.25.b
b7.39.7.b b6.l I0.29.b
b7.39.21.b b6.l 12.4.d
b7.39.25.b b6.l 12.14.b
b7.40.16.b b6. l 12.15.b
b7.41.3.f b6.l 12.46.b
b7.46.17.d b6.l 12.64.d
b7.46.24.b b6.l 12.75.b
b7.47.22.b b6.l 12.77.b
b7.49.5.b b6.l 12.86.b
b7.50.66.d b6. l 12.95.b
kl5.139.33.d s3.61.41.b
maliii- b6.107.41.b rli.23.4.d
ra~,
b6.109.41.b rli.23.17.b
b6.l 12.43.b kl5.138.23.b
b6.l 12.57.d k15.139.24.b
b6.l 12.108.d kl5.139.26.d
kl5.141.33.b kl5.139.27.b
ratal} k 15.139. 7. d k 15.141.36. b
ratam b7.50.36.b ratham b7.42.3.b
sl. 75.3.d b7 .43. 7.b
rataJ} rli.27 .25.d b 7. 50.3.b
rli.34.4.d kl5.138.19.c
2.9. Sytlistic differences between different Books
To me the most interesting evidence revealed by our trial run of the
Mahabharata is that which concerns the stylistic differences between
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
46
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS, JR.
different books. I shall here describe some differences between the battle
passages of Book 6 and 7. The evidence here is strong from our
concordance and I have strengthened it further, where I could, from the
Pratik.a index and from manual collection.
The battle scenes of Books 6 and 7 deal with the same epic characten
and the same type of incident. On the whole our two runs from these
books show a strong stylistic similarity in meter, polarization, and
frequency of formulas and cliches. But there are individual differences
between these books that are impossible to explain if they were taken
down from the same oral performer or if they were composed by the
same author. The battle chapten of Book 6 make heavy use of certain
frozen words and formulas that occur very rarely or not at all in Book 7.
The opposite also occun; that is, certain characteristics of Book 7 do not
occur in Book 6. I proceed to give some examples.
The word samare frozen at the end of an a or c line occun twenty-two
times in our 2,088 computerized lines of Book 6. It never occun in the
same number of computerized lines of Book 7. I have since found it twice
in Book 7 outside the section that was computerized, but it occun very
rarely in that book whereas it is common throughout Book 6. What is
more, the Book 6 occurrences are almost all formulaic, as shown in the
inset below. The formulas are particularly striking as they form irregular
metrical lines, the so-called na-vipulii and blra-vipulii varieties where a
tribrach or dactyl is substituted for the normal bacchius ( u - - ) of
syllables 5- 7 of an ac line.
Q samare in final position in piida: 22 times in 1,000 AC piidas
of Book 6.
0 times in 1,000 padas of
Book 7.
Of the 22 occurrences in Book 6, all the na-vipuliis
are formulaic.
+
Na-vipulii, formula No. I. periphrastic perfect samare
samare (6.106.41)
pre~ayiimiisa
tiil/ayiimiisa samare (6.107. 7)
tiil/ayiimiisa samare (6.109.24)
chiidayiimiisa samare (6.110.1)
Na-vipulii, formula No. 2. proper name ± ca/tuj'pi + samare
tu samare (6.107.19)
sudak~
priigjyot4am ca samare (6.110.2)
jayalsmas tu samare (6.110.31)
bhlmasmas tu samare (6.111. 19)
aJvatthiimii tu samare (6.112.11)
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
STYLISTIC STUDY, COMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONCORDANCE 47
cel/iriijo tu samaTe (6.112.23)
dlirf/aketwp tu samare (6.112.26)
maJreirlaraf ca samare (6.112.39)
liJcJial}4inarp ca samare (6.112. 77)
dtJJJiisanma samare (6.112.92)
Bha-uipuli.s are mostly formulaic
le vidyamiiniil} samare (6.104.21)
uviica hlaimarp samare (6.104.42)
agacchatas tiin samare (6.106.23)
sii vidyamiinii samare (6.107.55)
apit/ayetiim samare (6.110.8)
piirt/uJJJ samantiil samare (6.110.24)
na kaicid enmri samare (6.112.77)
The rare aorist iinarclatit occun fourteen times in our computerized run
of Book 6 and once in the story run from Book 3. Eleven of the
occurrences arc in a formula for arrow shooting. Neither the verb form
nor the formula appean in our computerized run from Book 7, and so far
as I can see the formula is not used in that book.
R. Arrow attack: iinarchat
+ +
ac formula No. I: farail}, etc. numeral (instr.) iinarchat
hiiJdikas tu tato riijan dlirf/aktlllm amarfat}Qm /
farair ha/auh/air iinarchat siqi/um4dam at/aiinadat (6.43.36)
irutakarmii tata/J kruddhal} kiimhojiiniim ma/aiiratham /
iarair ha/auh/air iinarchat diirayann iva sarvaia/a (6.43.65)
tata!J ialyo ma/aiiriija svasn)au ratlainiirp varau /
farair ha/auhlair iinarchat kftapratikrtaifil}IJu (6.58.28)
siiryakis tu talas liiTl}IJ'CI hlaifmam iisiidya sarpyuge /
iarair ha/auhlair iinarchat pitararp It janefvara (6.68.25)
apariijito ma/aiiriijan pariiji.ftlur ma/aiirathal} /
farair ha/auhlair iinarchad hlaimasenmrz ma/aiihalam (6.84.18)
draupadeyii ra,,e krwld/aii duryodharam aviirayan /
ekailcas trih/air iinarchat putrarp lava uifiirp pate (6. 74.26)
d#rmarfal}IJrp ca riijeruira avanljlau ca ma/aiirathau /
ekaikau trihlair iinarchat (6.110.3- 4)
viddlivii navablair iinarchat (6.45.10)
piiikliaiyarp triblair iinarchat (6.45.31)
+ +
ac formula No. 2 nom./ adv acc. iinarchat
kiriti hlaimiam iinarchat (6.113.49)
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
-
-· , -·, ·· -: -· ·- · ·- . .. . -- ..... . .
.. • • ·.--: -. - - ·- _. -:..=. - .... ·~ .'"1.-
-.-.-r .... .L.
...- ... -. - - .·. .. - :._,.: - - •
considerat.~·. ~...-- ~ ~·-,,- &#t. __ _.
- --- - - ·· - - ..... """'-&...- - -~ - - - - --· - ...., w ...
figul"t' ~·rn ·c· -~;.,_ runs very
- ;j :--r---•-:-.. L· .-.l· • - · : - · ----·-· - · ·...- - :"_ ........... _
--~·---· ··--~--'·
slowly. but it .:::•--= :"' :-:-•:-:-.~ ~= h:=...r:--: _:.-....- ::.::&... ~e6 on the order
of a p~e pr-r- = -:~
--
- . .
.. ·-. . .. .
.. ...
) ~! ..~ . .~.e .,,,~-
In 1980 mv i.:r: i:-... : ! .i::_:-.: ):r .l ri..: · :: :::~ ~.i::·:·::J..i Endo,.mcnt for
--
the Human.:c- •· .-;_- ,-~.·:-~ -·,- -- - ;_- - .· ;- :. . :.. ... --.-.···.~·- -- Th• grant was
... ..... ...
~ - · ---- -~·"-""·
J··--
O n rr.' '-.·· ·- - • - . ·-.. ·• - •r.o1 that w·hiJ·
_ 1:. ___ _._ --:-~.-:
..... 1U,KU • ··- -- - 4 =· · - -.- - ·. · ·6 .;: ·---- ----.:. - .-·_·_·.."_..·. ·. .... .~ L. 'lo.
the Fo.-.1.. ·.- L:·..•.. .- .:1._-- -· ,.., • • ·- --=- _.. _ -_____ _ .. w..... Comput•r
~'' ~. £;: ........ 'lo.
::.C\·
Pand had r.Ji..~ ;.:,,:-.;.: :.': ~:: :-::: . .~ ~-·=--~ ::.~ beliC\·cd on the
basis of Pl"t'' ~,,·..:.; " : :-i :.:.:-.·.:: ~ ...... :::. ·• ·.::: ;..:: :: -CR i.:-a::: :l~r that the degree
of rrror ..., ,t.:l . ~.. ..~. . _· .. ._ - . -_ · ·!--·~· · ··- · - ·• -• - · · - ~. :·• - -• · - - ·-" T--.,. -u·matcd 25 to 4-0
J ~ .. '\..:
:.-'--.:-...l.."T
prrcrnt. Fun!\(':-::-.,·~- ::.: .. ._ .;: ::-.: ::.·: 4.Dd softwal"t' being
.. ... . . . ... . .. . i. ... :. .. . -.. ._. :. . .. ..- ·nd ourselves in a
~~ ~
buttaucratii... ~"\'!'1::::e:--..: :.L ':-. 7"·i :-:-.·~ :-:. ;.:__.;_~.: 5".-..i::ner ._.e "'·ere using was
not con1nt('l'\'i.11·•,, ., ··· .:..· • .,.. ·-·, · -" ·· ·.-·· ~-·b"·hina the software
.. ...... .l~ .... . '\..... ~·. · - .. - -· .,,, ... ~ ~
r\'rntually hut ,•i:\ .i:·::~ "'~ :::~.: ~-: - .: .:::-i 1-~r concordance. NEH
wantrd thr nt.tt(':-:.ii r.,''" i::: :·~=-=---~ I ::-::.;;t stat(' that in aU other
:.::x-:-.i:
ttSp<'\' IS Xrl'\\:ot ".i;. ('-.;:~:~::-:, I: ~.i,·r ;;s ~computer time, free
ffi('mOr.\' Sh'r.1.. :('. ::-C-.- .i• :-::::.·-..:;. -~ :·:: ::.e :l'>,'<ii!ird OCR scanner, we
ha\'( S('('I\ it J'l'\>.iu,·(' ;'-\~("$ ::::.i: .l~ ,,;. :0 .: .i.·curate. C~ ooi samrii/
rA .1. '.( 1•1llfl< .l "1 .1~ • • • "' "": • . -'\. ,· .: • .• .•• . . .._• -' • ·- • -• - - -:( . .· .- ...• .• . -•· ·• " :"IA- b"L"-'-v-u.:, "• "• ""'- I•! ' Nii
--~ WI? ~
Jtlt11r1i/ ,._,,,,,.. ..., .:.. • •-· • ~ • • ·, -' • ..:
• , .. ... ,• • •• • ... .. .1. ... • • •• '
Final!\', I.1st \t",1r :~l:'..'. ,•:: :e.i:-:·.:~. .: ,,:·plans at the University of
·rrx:1s h• i11i1i.1t(' pn•~r.1:1: ,·:· ~.•::;.i..:-:1 ;ext '~'n.-ordanccs, I and my son
.1
ha\'r ~i\'rn .Ill ••1ir n1.11rn.1l~ ,,, ('~ t.' :~c Ccnt('r for Asian Studies at that
l111i,·rrsil\' l\,r t1:>.r i11 tl1t"1r :';..,,'-..~ .1:1:.
'
GOL1gle
On911 i'll from
0101t1zed by
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
KARJ.{ABHARA: THE TRIAL OF KAR~A
A one-act play attributed to Bhisa,
based on episodes from the M ahiblriiraJa
Tran.slated by Barbara Stol" Mill"
Translator's Note
The KanJabhiira is one of the thirteen plays discovered in 1906 by T.
Ganapati Sastri, then curator of manuscripts in the royal library at
Travancore. The plays were contained in several palm-leaf manuscripts
of Sanskrit nii/aA:as, written in Malayalam script. Between 1912 and 1918,
Sastri published these plays as the works of Bhasa. 1 Although none of the
plays or manuscript colophons referred to the authorship of Bhasa, the
presence in the collection of two plays associated with the name Bhasa
in Sanskrit literary criticism, Svapnaviisavadalta and Pratijfliiyaugan
dhara.J4114, 2 encouraged Sastri to argue for the attribution of all thirteen
to the author.•
That a Bhiisa was a dramatist of some reputation in classical India is
attested by the prologue ofKalidasa's Malavikagnimitra, where the assistant
questions the director about the appropriateness of presenting Kalidasa's
play: "Why ignore works of celebrated poets like Bhasa, Saumilla, and
Kaviputra to bestow honor on a modern writer"?< The dramatist named
Bhlisa whom Kalidiisa cites may well have authored Svapnaviisavadatta and
Pratijfliiyaugandhariiya1]a, as well as the fragmentary Carudatta• The date
and authorship of the remaining plays seem far more controversial.
The group of nine plays based on epic and puranic episodes fits well
within the KiiJiyanam tradition ofKerala and it is not unlikely that these
1 All were published in the Trivandrum Sanskrit Seri,,.; my comments and translation
are based on the more critical edjtion of the plays entitled Pla7s Ascril1td llJ Bh4sa, by C.R.
Dcvadhar (Poona: Oriental Book Agency, 1962).
' See A.O. Pusallter, Blri.sa-A Stud) (Ddhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1968), chapter 2.
' T . Ganapati Sastri, Bh4sa's Pla7s: A Critical Stud7 (Trivandrum: Sridhara Power Press,
1925); cf. A.K. Pisharoty, Bh4sa's Works (Trivandrum: N. Kesava Pillai, 1925).
of
• Trans. Edwin Gerow in Theater of Mnncry: Tl1t Pla7s Kiilidii.sa, ed. Barbara Stoler
Miller (New York.: Columbia University Press, 1984), p. 255. Textual comparison of the
SPOjllttu>ii.saD<U/4114 and the MOUiuikiignimitra shows many similarities of plot and structure.
' A good summary of the arguments is given by S.K. De in S.N. Dasgupta and S.K.
Ot, A HiJtory of S-/criJ Liler41vre (Calcutta: Univenity of Calcutta, 1947), pp. 101-117; see
aho A.K. Warder, /"llllUal Ktl11)<J literat•re, vol. 2 (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1974),
262-333.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
48 DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS, JR.
bahudM bhi.frraam anarchat (6.113.44}
rii.Vlll}O riimam anarchat (3.269.11}
bd formula?
giiilgeyas "' ratµ pii.rtham anarclum NllHlbhili iarail} (6.48.41)
Irregular:
lribhis tribhiJJ iarair glwrair bhimam anarcluu aifjasii. (6.50.99)
anarchatulJ Jarair glwrair parasparam (6.43.12)
~u
The clichc apii.yiij jalHlnllir aivaiJJ, "he fled with his swift horses", occurs
six times, in Book 6, never in Book 7, once in Book 8. On the other hand,
the clichc IJl!YOnyam abhijaghNlhlh, "the two struck at one another", occurs
nine times in Book 7, never in Book 6, once in Book 8. Or take the words
for elephant. In 4,000 ilokas of Books 6 and 7 (2,000 of them indexed by
hand) words for elephant occur 3 I 6 times. Eleven different words for
elephant are used, usually in about the same ratio of frequency in each
book. But the word dantin (''tusker"} is an exception. It occurs ten times
in passages scattered through Book 6 and never in the indexed verses of
Book 7.
These examples, I trust, will make it seem probable that the battle
episodes of Books 6 and 7 were recorded from two different reciters of
epic poetry, probably contemporary with one another, both trained in
basically the same tradition, but each having his individual style, his own
favorite formulas and cliches, just as the modern Serbian reciters each
have theirs. If we could go on to show that not only these two sections of
the battle narrative go back to separate oral presentations but that the
majority of the Mahii.bhii.rata derives from similar individual recitations,
we should have arrived at what seems to me an important historical
discovery. We would have arrived in fact at the conclusion that the
compilation of the Mahii.bhii.rata was truly the work of a Vyasa, an
"arranger" or "editor" as that word means. If we could show further
that some sections of the Mahii.bhii.rata are not oral at all, we would be
well on the road to describing the growth of the poem into the form in
which we now have it.
Having expressed so far-reaching a it becomes me to qualify it
ho~,
with some degree of modesty. There are enough examples of scholars
who have ridden a theory of the Mahii.bhii.rata into Cloud Cuckoo
~t
Land to serve as warning. Several of the traits which I have mentioned
may prove not to be chronologically significant. The double spondee
for instance, fits naturally with the serious, reflective context of
o~ning,
the Gitii., whereas a quicker, lighter metric is demanded by the very
context of battle narrative. The most that our technique can to
ho~
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
S1YLISTIC STUDY, COMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONCORDANCE 49
distinguish is between oral and non-oral. Surely there existed an oral
religious poetry as well as an oral battle poetry. But there arc traits of
oral poetry that arc present in all oral contexts and absent in all literary
contexts. To discover these traits and to analyze the Mahahhiirata in the
light of that discovery seems to me a necessary preliminary not only to
the historical study of the poem but to its esthctic appreciation.
3. A Computer Program for Compiling a Concordance
The programming of a computer to compile a concordance of the
Mahiihhiirata is entirely the work of my son. I can claim no credit for it
unless it be the good karma of some former life that has born fruit in his
help to me in this. Much the most difficult problem-and its solution is
also the most valuable part of our project for the future-was the
problem of recognition. After typing in transliteration and proofreading
14,000 lines on the Telex machine, I realized that boredom would kill
me before I could type out the whole work. Then my son suggested that
if a computer could be taught to recognize the alqaras, the work of
producing a computer-stored text could be done with no typing at all.
He will describe in Section 4 in general terms-the specific software is
under patent control by Xerox Corporation- the technique he has
invented. As even the general description may be unintelligible to
Sanskritists, I shall describe it here in layman's terms. You program the
computer to find the first a/qara of text on the page, to divide a rectangle
enclosing it into approximately 100 squares, then on the basis of white
and black in the squares to assign a value to the akfara. We can now
reduce errors of recognition to an average of one akfara in twelve Jlokas.
Further refinement would give diminishing gains, for there will always
be a residue of error due to broken type or smeared ink. This residue
must be edited out by hand and the occasional errors of recognition, as
between p and retroflex s can be edited out at the same time.
In the first stage of the project, then, the machine will memorize the
Critical Text of the Mahahhiirata and will display whatever section of the
text that is called for on a video screen in the standard transliteration of
the AOS-RAS. It would be possible of course to have it display the text
in Devanagari and to store its memory in Devanagari as well. We have
chosen not to do so because it is easier to show word breaks and sand/ii
resolution in transliteration and because a greater number of legible lines
can be printed on a single page in transcription. The total concordance
will contain over a million lines. In transliteration we hope to get this
onto 8,000 pages. In Devanagari it would take about 11,000.
The second operation of the project will be to produce a corrected and
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
50
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS, JR.
broken text. The process will be clearer if I explain just what this
operation docs to the text. It docs three things:
I. It corrects all cases of misrccognition.
2. It shows all word breaks. Take the simplest case: tadeva. This is
printed together in Nagari. By pointing an electronic beam at the t of eva
on the screen, we move it one space to the right. The result appears as tad
tva. Take the case of taryeva. Our electronic beam is connected to a
control device cal.led a mouse. By pressing a button on the mouse as we
point the beam at the e of tarytva, the whole complex is dissolved into
+
tarya iva. When we sec kanyeva on the screen, we press a button on the
left side of the mouse. This lengthens the left-hand component so that the
+
result appears as kanya iva. If we see saroa.ryeivara, we press the
right hand button and so lengthen the right-hand component, giving
+
sarvarya iivara. If the coalcscd vowcls arc both long, press both
buttons. Fortunately, no case of vowel or diphthong permits of more
than four possible resolutions.
3. Our broken text will show all word breaks in compounds. By
the same device that I have described we can resolve the text of
tkviisuramahayuddham into deva . asura. mah4 .yuddham using dots instead of
periods to show the boundaries of components.
The second-stage operation, after you get used to performing it, goes
fairly quickly; I would say normally at about one third the speed at
which you would simply read the Sanskrit text. But one must allow extra
time for problems, places where the Critical Text is corrupt, as it often is
in Book 12, or those rare places where one might actually break a set of
syllables in two ways. Allowing for this, I think a single, trained
Sanskritist can form a corrected, broken text of the Mahabharata in a little
over a year's time.
In the third stage of the project we shall tell the computer to bring out
every word in the Mahabharata in an alphabetical list. Under each word
will be a cross-reference to every compound in which the word occurs as
a non-initial component. There will then follow a printout of every line
(pada) in which the word occurs. Identical lines can be abbreviated by
giving one printout followed by numerical references. The arrangement
of printouts will be by position in the line. Instances where the word in
question begins a line will come first, instances where it ends a line last.
This will facilitate metrical analysis. Within each positional set, order
will be by the alphabetic position of the initial of the next following word
in the line. Whether we position the entries manually as suggested in
Section 2.6 above is still undecided. If any readers of this article have
strong feelings on the subject I would appreciate hearing from them.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
STYLISTIC STUDY, OOMPUTER ANALYSIS AND OONCORDANCE 51
4. Optical CkaracUI" Recognition of Devanagari Text
4.1. Hardware Organization
An optical scanner is connected to a computer in such a way that light
and dark areas on a printed page can be transferred to the memory of
the computer as a pattern of O's and I's. For our application, we use a
modified TC200 telccopier to perform the scanning. This scanner
provides a resolution of240 dots per inch. Thus each dot is roughly twice
the thickness of a human hair. The scanner is connected to an ALT O
minicomputer which provides memory, processing capability, and the
ability to display graphical objects (including text) on a TV screen.
of
4.2. Particulars the Text
Each text to be scanned has its own particular page layout conventions,
and these must be taken into consideration prior to the recognition
process. Such details include page headings, marginal annotations,
footnotes, multiple column layout, chapter breaks, and so forth. In
addition there are details which relate to the font set used for setting the
type. For instance, most Devanagari text makes heavy use of ligatures,
combinations of several letters in a single type slug. One has the choice of
attempting to separate the components of such compound images or to
augment the alphabet to include such polyliteral forms. The present
system uses the latter augmentation approach.
4.3. !AJCating tlu Characters
One primitive operation is used extensively to locate and recognize the
characters. It simply returns the number of black dots in any given
rectangle of the image. Location of characters proceeds in successive
refinement by first locating the horizontal lines of text, then locating the
words within a line, and finally the characters within each word.
To find the lines, we first apply whatever rules apply to the layout of
text on the page, and then scan down the page counting the number of
black dots in each horizontal slice through the image. This results in a
profile with large numbers corresponding to the location of each line of
text and zeros between the lines. The plot at the left of Figure 1 shows the
values of the profile corresponding to the text shown. Once a line has
been isolated, we scan a vertical slice rectangle horizontally along the
line, resulting in a profile with large numbers at the words, and zeroes
between. In this way the individual word segments may be identified.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
52 DA.NILL H.H. INGALLS AND DAN1£L H.H. INGAIL'>,JR
~<ii ij mrr.i llrot ~Nfu
~~ ¥1(1ij1~~·1H1mf~F~q
rn~:q~~~
qmr ~ ~ oqrqfq ~
<f ~ mm: oftq: ~
Fig.I. Show:in«ihorizontalprofil. . lloedtoioola1c1in5ltlinnofti..,ttx1.
Each segment of Devanligari text is printed with com1onanu descend·
ing from a horizontal bar, and vowels arc usually indicated either above
that bar or below the cornsonanu. Within a word, therefore, another
slicingproccssisuscd1oloca1e1hebar~1hehorizontalsliceofgrea1cst
blackness. finally, the are~ above and below -the bar can be sliced to
locate the COl\$0nant and vowel characters themselves. Figure 2 shows
theprofilesandinferredcharacterlocationsforthefirstscgmentofthe
..
~'ig. 2 Within asqimcnl. profilnocn;t 10 ioola<t indi•-idual cha,.,.cttn.
"""'" •Google
53
STYLISTIC STUDY, OOMPUTER ANALYSIS AND CONCORDANCE
4. 4. Recogni{.ing the Characters
Recognition of a character depends on having some representation for
what that character "should" look like. The technique we use is to store
two examples of every character, called the skin and the bones. The skin
has black in any place that the character could possibly be black. The
bones has black only in the places where every example of the character
should have black.
To "learn" a given font with this representation is very simple--<>nc
simply identifies several examples of each of the characters by hand.
These examples are then superimposed by the computer to obtain skin
and bones images of the characters. This process is similar to superimpos
ing several pieces of paper with the examples on them and holding them
up to the light to sec where the characters overlap. In the computer, the
process is done using logical AND and OR functions on the black dots.
Figure 4 illustrates the merging process at work on the character ta.
To "recognize" an unknown character, it is compared against all the
characters learned from the font (actually many can be immediately
ruled out by simple checks on size). The comparison consists of counting
all the dots which are black in the unknown but not in the skin, and aJI
the dots which are not black in the unknown but are in the bones. A high
count indicates a poor match; the lowest count is considered the correct
, -
"
Fig. 3. In merging or comparing, charactCI'$ arc shifted horizontally and vertically to
achieve best match. The fewest dots here indicate preferred alignment.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
54 DANIEL H-H-INC:ALLS AND DA..,'IEL H.H. INC: ALLS, JR.
fig.+. Eachn..,..•umplt(kftcolumn)ofak"°"'ncharactcris-rgcdwithlhcd;t.
al>d._s(rightcolumno}duringthclcamingprocca
identification. ByesiablUhinga threshold, an indica1ionoffailun:can be
given when no scon: rear.hes the threshold. Figure 5 illustrates the
recognition process at work on an unknown example of la.
Some additional can: muSI be taken, in both learning and recognition,
1hatany1wocharacterstobemergedorcomparcdmus1firstbealigncd
D EJ
D rJ
[;] [;]
D ll
DD
Fi og i. m i~l-ar A knn o wun n k cn ho a"' rn a cc th ea nr .a c T1u h • ( fc ... ,n ..at tu ) t ti rs o c rn dm op ua r (rd i .w htit )h 1dti> t< t tN ti hn e a pn rd d "b co mn :da ( mLc of tl c) hf or
"""'" •Google
STYLISTIC STUDY, OOMPUTI:R f\NALYSIS AND CONCORDANCf: 55
as well as possible. The ttthnique we U5e for alignment is 10 slide 1he two
around, one step at a time, until they differ in the fewest number of dou
(see Fig. 3). This is done simply in the compu1er by coun1ing the number
of dots rauhing from an exclusive OR function on the dou of the two
charac1en.
4.5. Tra'lllliltratWn
After the characten have ~n identified, some further work is still
required 10 produce a proper transcription. For one thing, printed
Devanagari includes many ligatum, or compound glyphs, which
represent 5everal characten. Then the vowel and oonsonam areas must
bemergedintheproperscquencefor1hesyllablabeingconstructed.U5e
must be made here of the relative loc;i.tion of the glyphs in each area.
There are also rules for combining the vowels, as some sounds ..re
represented by 5everal glyphs in combinuion, Figure 6 shows the
transliteration proces.s applied to our s;i.mple 5egment of1ext.
4.6. Ptrfonrw.iu:t
The current implementation is a proof of concept written in a very
simple manner. It has an accuracy of roughly 99.5%. I fed that it can do
IIi 0 rHil ~!:::'."
Ill Ii tl tD lCijljj
ID ] O
~ }.illi1
J::.~t:J:~!
FiJ:. 6. Af1u individual chnic"'n have been r«ognittd, they a"' merged into tho
ronnpondinglinnrtcxt
"""'" •Google
56 DANIEL H.H. INGALLS AND DANIEL H.H. INGALLS,JR.
considerably better, but most Devanagari type is poorly set, and the
figure given is probably realistic. The recognition process runs very
slowly, but it could be rewritten to achieve practical speeds on the order
of a page per minute.
of
5. Present State the Concordance Project
In 1980 my son and I applied for a grant to the National Endowment for
the Humanities to finance our Mahii.bharata concordance. The grant was
refused. On my inquiring why, I was informed in June 1981 that while
the Foreign Literatures Panel had been enthusiastic, the Computer
Panel had raised several objections. Among them, they believed on the
basis of previous work undertaken with an OCR scanner that the degree
of error would be far higher than we stated. They estimated 25 to 4-0
percent. Furthermore, they wanted the hardware and software being
used to be commonly available. Herc we found ourselves in a
bureaucratic-commercial bind. The modified scanner we were using was
not commercially available. Xerox agreed to our publishing the software
eventually but only after we had completed the concordance. NEH
wanted the material now. In fairness I must state that in all other
respects Xerox was extremely liberal. It gave us free computer time, free
memory storage, free printouts. As for the modified OCR scanner, we
have seen it produce pages that are 99.5°/o accurate. vai samrii/
Ca/q~ii
pa.fyantam iihur adriilcfir iti, sa iiha iti, tat saryal!I bhavati, ca/qur vai,
adr~am
samriil, parama711 brahma (B.A. Up. 4.1.4).
Finally, last year (1988), on learning of plans at the University of
Texas to initiate a program of Sanskrit text concordances, I and my son
have given all our materials over to the Center for Asian Studies at that
university for use in their program.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
KAR.N. ABHiiRA: THE TRIAL OF KARN. A
A one-act play attributed to Bhasa,
based on episodes from the Mahii.bharala
Translated by Barbara Stoler Miller
Translator's Note
The Ka,.,,abhara is one of the thirteen plays discovered in 1906 by T .
Ganapati Sastri, then curator of manuscripts in the royal library at
Travancore. The plays were contained in several palm-leaf manuscripts
of Sanskrit ni/akas, written in Malayalam script. Between 1912 and 1918,
Sastri published these plays as the works ofBhasa.1 Although none of the
plays or manuscript colophons referred to the authorship of Bhasa, the
presence in the collection of two plays associated with the name Bhasa
in Sanskrit literary criticism, SvapnavasavadaJta and Pratijfliiyaugan
dharii.ya1}1J, 2 encouraged Sastri to argue for the attribution of all thirteen
to the author.•
That a Bhasa was a dramatist of some reputation in classical India is
attested by the prologue ofKalidasa's Mii.lavilcagnimitra, where the assistant
questions the director about the appropriateness of presenting Kalidasa's
play: "Why ignore works of celebrated poets like Bhasa, Saumilla, and
Kaviputra to bestow honor on a modern writer"?' The dramatist named
Bhasa whom Kalidasa cites may well have authored Svapnavii.savadatta and
PraJijfliiyaugandharii.yatµ1, as well as the fragmentary Ciirudatta• The date
and authorship of the remaining plays seem far more controversial.
The group of nine plays based on epic and puranic episodes fits well
within the tradition ofKerala and it is not unlikely that these
Ku~ya11am
1 All were publish«! in the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series; my commenu and translation
are based on the more critical edition of the play> entitl<d Plays Ascribed la Bhii.s4, by C.R.
Dcvadhar (Poona; Oriental Book Agency, 1962).
1 See A.D. Pusalker, Blr4s~A Si.dy (Delhi: ll-funshiram Manoharlal, 1968), chapter 2.
1 T. Ganapati Sastri, Blr4sa's Plays: A Critital Shuly (Trivandrum: Sridhara Power Press,
a.
1925); A.K. Pisharoty, Bhii.stJ's Works (Trivandrum: N. Kesava Pillai, 1925).
' Trans. Edwin Gerow in Tlualer of Memory: The Plays of Ka/idasa, ed. Barbara Stoler
Miller (New York: Columbia University Press, 1984), p. 255. Textual comparison of the
s..,...as6"""a11a and the Ma/avikiignimitra shows many similarities of plot and structur<.
' A good summary of the arguments is given by S.K. De in S.N. Dasgupta and S.K.
De, A Hislaryof Sanskril Likraltue (Calcutta: Univrrsity of Calcutta, 1947), pp. 101-117; see
alao A.K. Warder, /iu/Uvt Kavya LiJeralttrt, vol. 2 (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1974),
262-333.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
58
BARBARA STOLER MILLER
plays were composed in more recent time and preserved by the cakyars,
the hereditary actors whose repetoire still includes some of them.' The
Mahiibharata is the source ofs ix of these plays: Madliyama'O.}iiyoga, Diitavalcya,
DiitaghaEotkiua, Paffcariitra, Orubhairga, and Ka17J1Jbhara. The plays share a
simplicity ofl anguage and compressed dramatic structure that mark them
stylistically. Although the content and dramatic action of several of the
plays do not conform exactly to the genre 'O.}iiyoga, as delineated in the
Dafariipalca by Dhanarhjaya,1 they all basically belong to this category.
A 'O.}iiyoga is a one-act dramatization of a heroic conflict in which women
play no role (astnnimiltasamgriima), the dominant rasa is the heroic
(uirarasa), and the main characters are renowned men of violent natures
(khyiitoddhatanara). With the exception of Pamariitra, all of the Mahiihharata
plays are in one act, and the action is concentrated into a brief time of
less than a single day. Each dramatizes an incident of personal conflict
for the hero, based on epic scenes that are reshaped to emphasize aspects
of character and action that are not developed in the Mahabharata itself.
The Kar1}abhara is based on episodes related in the first, third, fifth,
eighth, and twelfth books of the Mahabharata.8 The story of Kan:ia forms
the basis of some of the most poignant epic scenes. Kan:ia is the son of
the sungod, Surya, and the Pa1;u;lava queen KuntI. KuntI, daughter of
King Siirasena, was raised in childhood by King Kuntibhoja; it was in
his house that she served the divine sage Durvasas with extraordinary
hospitality and was rewarded with a mantra by which she could invoke
any god she named. She used this magic power to invoke the sun while
she was still a virgin living in her father's house; the sun embraced her
and promised that in bearing his son her virginity would remain pure.
The child was born wearing divine solar ornaments: earrings of immor
tality that made his cars splendid (thus he was called Karl)a) and
protective armor. From the sun he also inherited a character of natural
generosity that finally cost him his immortality. Afraid to expose her affair
with the sun-god, Kunti placed Kan:ia in a box at birth and abandoned
him to the river, where he was found by the charioteer Adhiratha, who
brought the infant home to his childless wife (1.104; 111.287-293). Kan:ia,
brought up by a humble charioteer, earned royal rank by his skill at
• See Kapila Vauyayan, Traditional Indian Thea/rt: M.Jtiplt Streams (Delhi: National
J.L.
Book Trust, 1980), pp. 17- 31; also Masson and D.D. Kosambi, Acimiiraka: lovt's
En<luuiud World (Delhi: Motilal, 1970), note 20, pp. 21-24.
' DR 3.60, 61, ed. T. Venkatacharya, Tht Dalariipaka ef Dhanamja,10 (Madras: Adyar
Library, 1969), pp. 161-162.
• All references arc to the Poona Critical Edition of the Mahiihhiirata; the major episodes
involving Kari;ia's legend arc: 1.43, 104, 126; 111.28~294; V.143-144; Vlll.26, 29, 50-62;
Xll.2, 3. Subsequent references arc cited in the text.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
59
KAR,JfABHARA: THE TRIAL OF KARN.A
arms, learned from the Par,11;\avas' teacher Dror,ia and from Para5urama,
Jamadagni's son, who cursed him for pretending to be a brahman
(l.122.47; Vlll.29). He was made King of Ailga by his cousin, the Kuru
chief Duryodhana, and unknowingly became the sworn rival of his own
brother Arjuna (1.126). Only as the war was about to begin did he learn
from Kunti about his true origins. She petitioned him to join his brothen,
a plea that was approved by the sun, but he remained loyal to
Duryodhana, who had conferred kingship on him. In response to Kunti's
words he promised not to kill any ofh is brothen but Arjuna (V. 143-144).
Karr,ia's character is throughout the epic challenged by the storm-god
Indra, chief of the gods and advenary of the sun-god. Indra's son by
Kun ti is Arjuna, the warrior whom Karr,ia had to face at the time of his
death, when the cunc of Para.5urama rendered his divine weapons useless
and the cunc of another brahman made the wheel of his chariot sink
into the mire of the battlefield (Vlll.29; Xll.2-3).
These epic incidents are reordered in the play to reveal, through the
figure of Karr,ia, the heightened mood of heroism (v lrarasa), developed
through exposition of subordinate moods of fear (bkayiinalcarasa) and
compassion (A:arul}llrasa). By transferring to the battlefield the scene of
Karr,ia's gift of his earrings and armor of immortality, which occun in
the epic at the beginning of the thirteenth year of the Par,icjavas' exile
(111.284-294), the encounter with Indra intensifies the drama ofKarr,ia's
vision of his own death. In the play, his charioteer $alya is a foil for
Karr,ia's dramatic monologue and a sympathetic observer, unlike his
haughty role in the epic. At the beginning of the play, Karr,ia is overcome
by an uncanny fear in the face of battle. Obsessed by what he has learned
of his birth from Kunti (vcncs 7-8) and by his memory of Para.5urama's
cunc (venes 9-10), he finds omens of death in the stumbling of his hones
and in the putrid smell of the elephants' ichor, as well as in the dread
silence of the war drums and conches. It is at this point in the drama
that Karr,ia recites a venc (vcne 12) that is a variant of Knr,ia's crucial
words to Arjuna in the second section of the Bkagavadglta (2.37):
If you arc slain, you win heaven
if you triumph, you enjoy carth
so stand up, son of Kunti,
and resolve to fight the war.
Karr,ia says to $alya:
If a man is slain, he wins heaven,
if he triumphs, he wins fame-
both ends are prized in the world,
so war is not without reward.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
60
BARBARA STOLER MILLER
The rcpon of the battlefield and Kan;ia's depression also recall the
opening of the Gita. The vocabulary of duty, action, and sacrifice that is
central to the Gita penneatca the play and is relevant to understanding
Kan;ia's response to the realization of his own imminent death. But in a
significant variation of the <TUii verse, Kan;ia sets the contrast not between
heaven and earth, but between heaven and heroic fame, which arc the
rewards of war. This is consonant with Kan;ia's character in the epic,
where he tells Siirya that he will win fame as a hero by giving the earrings
and annor of his immortality to Indra (111.284.20- 35).9
The play's exposition of the relationship between sacrifice, monality,
and heroism dramatizes the Indian idea that one must heroically confront
death in order to enjoy the freedom that comes by transcending the
barrier between mortality and immortality. The immortality conferred
by Kan;ia's divine paternity is for him less important than his act ofh eroic
sacrifice and generosity, even when he suspects that the demanding
brahman has come to deceive him. Karva's identity is defined by his
earrings and annor, but his nature is determined by his great generosity,
which sets up an inevitable conflict between his immortality and ability
for self-sacrifice. It is these very ornaments and armor of immortality that
arc, ironically, his burden- an irony implied in the title of the play, which
may also mean "the burden to the cars [ofKarva]". The mythology of
the sun is at the basis of this conflict: in ancient Vedic myth the sun,
called Mana1:l(ja, is the first born of Aditi and is considered the first
mortal. There is an intentional parallelism between the sons of Aditi and
the sons of Kun ti. Karva, being the first born son of Kun ti, must also be
the first to die, dcapite his divine birth. The play thus brings to the fore
the epic hero who epitomizes the paradox of Indian epic heroism, which
is expressed as extraordinary personal integrity and effort limited by the
inevitabilities of destiny, duty, kanna, curses, and divine intervention.
The magical weapon that Indra grants to Kan:ia out of guilt for taking
his immortality-a spear that can be used once to kill one of the
Pai;l(javas-is symbolic of the heroic sacrifice. Upon being granted the
weapon, Kan:ia, mounts his chariot and again hears the sounds of the
war conches that his fear had silenced; he directs Salya to drive him to
meet Arjuna.
' IIl.284-20- 35. Kan;ia may be compared here with Achilles, whOS<: sacrifice of long
life for the immortality of fame is crucial to the meaning of the Iliad. Sec Seth L. Schein,
Tiu Mortal Htro: An lntrodwtion to Hom4''S Iliad (Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1984), ch. 3 "War, Death, and Heroism".
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
KA/l#ABHJFU: THE TRIAL OF KARNA 61
CHARACTERS
KARJllA- King of Anga, Kuru general.
SALVA-The king who is Kal't)a's charioteer.
INDRA-Chief of the gods, in disguise as a priest.
SOLDIER/DIVINE MESSENGER.
All the characters speak Sanskrit, with the exception of Indra when he speaks
in disguise; then his language is Ardhamagadhi Prakrit. When he speaks in his
own voice, he uses Sanskrit, appropriate to a god.
PROLOGUE
DIRECTOR: Teeming with women and men,
with demons and gods,
this world and the netherworld reel
at the sight of his man-lion form;
the breast of the demon king
is cut by his axe-blade nails;
he destroys all foes of the gods
may the glory of V~Qu,
Sn,
Lord of Goddess shine for you! ( 1)
Noblemen and gentlemen, I shall announce .. . (Making a round of the stag•,
Ii.riming.) What's this? I thought I heard a noise as I began to announce the
play. Wait, I'll see.
VOICE OFFSTAGE: Report it! Report it to Karr;ia, King of Ar\ga!
DIRECTOR: Now it is clear.
As the din of battle rises
an agitated messenger
bowing to Karr;ia
reports the royal command. (2)
(Ht t:tits and tht prologiu mds; then a SOLDIER mws.)
SOLDIER: Report it! Report it to Karr;ia, Kind of Ar\ga! It is time
for battle.
Jubilant lion kings
assembled before Arjuna's flag
with elephants, horses, and chariots
raise the cry of war
and hearing their unbearable roar,
quickly our Kuru king,
intent on battle,
advances under his serpent banner. (3)
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
62
BARBARA STOLER MILLER
of
(Making a round tire 1tagt, looking.) Yes! This is the King of Miga, armed for
battle, coming from his camp with King Salya. But why docs this mighty hero
who leads our festivals of war show unprecedented mental anguish?
Dazzling in his fierce light,
first to be counted in battle
and in valor, with sorrow
now the wise hero approaches
Kan,ta shines like the sun,
his natural brilliance
obscured by thick clouds
when the hot season comes. (4 )
I'll withdraw. (He txists; tlren KAR~A mlers, OJ described, wit/J SALVA.)
Kings who became targets in the path
of my arrows have never survived-
[ shall repay the Kurus' love
if I sec Arjuna at the battlefront. (5)
King Salya, drive my chariot to where Arjuna is!
SALVA: So be it! (He mimt.r driving.)
This is futile!
In great battles
where avenging weapons severed
the limbs of warriors,
horses, elephants, and chariots,
my power was equal
to cruel death-
but this time war strikes
desperate fear in my heart. (6)
What misery!
Long ago I was born of Kunti,
but I am called the son of Radha
and the other Piil)<;lavas
Yudh~1hira
are my younger brothers by blood. (7)
It is time to attack and seize glory,
the day to win great merit is here,
but the magic of my weapons is useless
and my mother's words inhibit me. (8)
King Sal ya, hear the story of how I learned the magic of these weapons.
SALVA: I am curious to hear it.
Long ago, I approachedjamadagni's son, the sworn enemy
KAR~A:
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
KAR}.IABH1JU: THE TRIAL OF KAR~A 63
of all warrion ...
I approached, bowed, waited humbly
near the glory of the Bhrgu clan,
the stern ascetic
who embodied death for warrion,
his matted hair piled hlgh.
like tawny vines of lightning,
the axe he wielded
circled by ftlUhing light. (9)
Then, blessing me, Jarnadagni's son lUked me, "Who arc you and what is your
purpose in coming here"? I said, "Ma5ter, I want to learn all the magic of
weapons". The sage said, "I give instruction to priests, not to warrion".
SALVA: It is true, the sage has an ancient feud with the warrior
clans. Then?
Then I said, "I am not a warrior", and I began to take
instruction. Some time later, I followed my teacher when
he went to gather fruits and roots and fuel and gnus and
flowcn.
When fate made an insect
with thunderbolt jaws bite my thighs,
I calmly endured the pain
from fear of breaking my ma5tcr's sleep.
Awaking bathed in my blood
he suddenly bunt into fiery rage-
he knew who I was and cuncd me,
'The weapons will fail at death's time"! ( 10)
SALVA: The story you tell is dreadful.
Let us test my weapons' magic. (Doing so.) These weapons
KAR~A:
seem powerless now. And . . .
These helpless stumbling horses,
their eyes blinded by misery,
and elephants wh0$e ichor smells like weeds
arc omens to tum me from battle. ( 11)
The conches and drums are silent!
SALVA: This is dreadful!
King Salya, stop! There is no need to despair!
KAR~A:
If a man is slain, he wins heaven,
if he triumphs, he wins fame-
both ends are prized in the world,
so war is not without reward. ( 12)
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
64
BARBARA STOL£R MILLER
Abandoning any hope for future wan,
my hones will gallop like soaring eagles-
these powerful pure-bred stallions
will save me if I can be saved ... (13)
Let heaven receive priests and cows! Let heaven receive faithful wives!Lct heaven
receive warrion who don't retreat in battles! Let heaven receive me now that it
is time for me to die! Good, I am calm now.
Breaching the vanguard
of the Plir;ic;lava army,
capturing the eldest brother,
whose virtues are famed,
and shooting down Arjuna
with my speeding arrows,
I can easily enter, like a forest
when the lions are slain. (14)
Lord Salya, let us mount the chariot now!
SALY A: So be it! (They both miwu 1M1111ting tJu chariot.)
KARNA: King Salya, drive the chariot to where Arjuna is.
VOICE OFFSTAGE: Hey KarQa! I beg a great boon!
(Listening.) What a strong sound!
~A:
This man is not only a high priest,
but a person of enormous power;
hearing his deep resonant voice
my charging hones suddenly stand
like figures painted in picture-
can erect, glances fixed,
necks turned, faces etched,
and tense limbs taut. ( 15)
Summon the priest! No, no. I shall summon him myself. Sir, come here! (Then
INDRA mln's disl"istd as a Jtritsl.)
INDRA: Clouds, retreat with the sun! (Approaching KARNA.) Hey,
Karr;ia! I beg a great boon!
KARNA: I am honored sir!
Today I count myself among men
in the world whose goals arc won
my lotus feet were reddened
by the jewels of great kings' crowns,
by the dust of kingly priest's feet.
Know me as Karr;ia, honored sir;
I pay homage to you. ( 16)
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
65
KARJfAJJH1JU: THE TRIAL OF KARN.A
INDRA: (To him.self.) What should I say? lfl say "Long life"! he will
have long life. If I do not speak, he will think me a fool.
What can I say to avoid either way? Good, I know.
(Aloiui.) Hey, Kama! Like the sun, like the moon, like the
Himalayas, like the ocean, may your fame endure!
Master, why won't you greet me with "Long life"! Even so,
this is auspicious.
A man should exert effort to do his duty-
a king's fortunes flicker like a serpent's tongue,
but when his mind is bent on guarding his subjects,
his virtues endure when the body is sllun. (17)
Master, what do you want? What shall I give to you?
INORA: I beg a great boon!
KARN.A: I shall give a great boon. Hear of my wealth!
I give you a thousand cows with gold-tipped horns!
Streams of milk pouring like rich nectar
when the calves have nursed will please you, pricst
they are young, pure, able to satisfy any demand. ( 18)
A thousand cows? I hardly drink milk! I don't want them,
INDRA:
Kan;ia! I don't want them!
KARN.A: What do you want, sir? Listen to this!
I give you thousands of horses!
Equal to horses of the sun assuring royal foriune,
pure-bred stallions prized by all kings,
they race at the wind's speed in battle. ( 19)
INDRA: Horses? I hardly ride! I don't want them Kan;ia! I don't
want them!
Why don't you want them, sir? Listen to another boon!
I give you this great herd of elephants!
lchor streams from temples that bees swarm to taste-
they roar like a mountain range with thunderclouds,
their nails and tusks ofi vory crush the foe in war. (20)
INORA: Elephants? I hardly ride! I don't want them, Kan;ia! 1
don't want it!
KARN. A ·. Why don't you want them, sir? Listen to another boon. I
shall give you countless gold!
INORA: I'll take it and go. No, I don't want it, Kari;ia! I don't
want it!
Then I shall conquer the earth and give it to you!
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
66 BARBARA STOLER MILLER
INDRA: What would I do with the earth?
KARNA: Then I give you the fruit of the great fire sacrifice!
INDRA: What use is the fruit of the fire sacrifice to me?
KARNA: Then I give you my head!
INDRA: Enough! Enough!
Don't be afraid! Don't be afraid! Forgive me, sir. Listen
~A:
to another boon!
If it would please you, master, with pleasure
would I give this magic armor with my carrings
it was born on my limbs to protect my body,
making it invulnerable to weapons of gods and
demons. (21)
INDRA: (Joyously.) Give it! Give it!
KARNA: (To himself.) So this is what he desires! Could this be some
trick of Kn1.1a's? He is always contriving new deceits.
Even so, let it be! It is ignoble to lament so! There is no
doubt. (Awiui.) Take it!
SALVA: Don't give it!
Salya, don't try to stop me!
~A:
Knowledge declines in passing time,
well-rooted trees fall down,
water collected in tanks dries up
sacrifice and charity endure. (22)
Take it then! (Cutting off his annqr and earrings, Ju givtS tlinn.)
INDRA: (Speaking lo lttmse/f.) Now I have them! I have assured the
victory of Arjuna that the gods decreed long ago. I shall
mount my elephant now and watch the combat between
Arjuna and KaTQa. (He exits.)
SALVA: King of Ailga, you were cheated!
KARNA: By whom?
SALVA: By Indra!
No, Indra is really cheated by me.
Though priests offer sacrificial oblations
and his crown glows as he crushes demon hosts,
his fingers hard from riding his elephant,
through me alone can mighty Indra win his goal. (23)
DIVINE MESSENGER: (Enuring in tht guise of a priest.) KarQa, Indra favors you!
He feels remorse for taking your armor, and a weapon
named "The Infallible" is granted to you to kill one man
among the PliQ<;lavas.
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
67
KAR.JYABH1RA: THE TRIAL Ot" KAR~A
KARNA: No! I shall not accept repayment for what I have
given!
DIVINE MESSENGER: Take it as the request of a priest.
KARNA: I have never violated the request of a priest. When shall
I get it?
DIVINE MESSENGER: When you invoke it, you will get it.
Good, I am grateful. You may return. (Tiu ""'ssengtl" txiu.)
King Salya, let us mount the chariot! ( Tluy mi""' mounling
the chariot.) Ah, I hear a sound now. What is it?
The sound of a conch,
like the ocean falling into time;
unless is blowing,
K~r;ia
it must be Arjuna-
angcrcd in spirit by his cider brother's defeat,
Arjuna will battle me
with all his strength. (24)
King Salya, drive the chariot to where Arjuna is!
EPILOGUE
May fortune triumph everywhere!
May misforrune perish!
May our k.ing with his virtues
Rule over the earth! (25)
{The two txit and tlu play ends.)
Google Onginal fron1
01g1tlz•dby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
fJRUBHANGA: THE BREAKING OF THE THIGHS
A one·act play attributed to Bhisa,
b<Ued on episodes from the M ahi.blr4rata
Translated by Edwin Gerow
(At the end of the nindi, the SOTllADHARA tnltTs.)
SOTRADHARA: May Lord Knr;i.a be the raft that carries you over the ftood
Of your enemies- just as Arjuna crossed his ftood, the river
ofw ar,
Whose sands were arrows and spears, banks were B~ma and
Dror;ia,
Water Jayadratha, the King of Gandhara a whirlpool, Karo.a
the waves,
Afvatthiman a crocodile, Kl'Jl8 the shark, and Duryodhana the
torrent! (I)
It's time to greet the ladies and gentlemen of the audience.
Eh!
What noise is this that interrupts my greeting? Aha! I see ...
OFFSTAGE: We're here! We're here!
SOTRADHARA: Ah! I understand!
PARIP.l.R$VIKA: (&wing.) Your honour, why do these
Men roam about testing each other's valor
Their bodies marked by tusks of wild elephants?
And limbs scarred by sword and axe? Is it for heaven
That they pour out their bodies' libation on the altar of
war? (2)
SOTRADH.l.RA: Well, sir! Don't you know? On the field ofSamantapaiicaka,
Strewn with royal corpses, two sides still face one another:
Duryodhana alone on one, for has lost the
Dhrtar~1ra
eyesight of his hundred sons; the five Pa1;11;lavas and Knr;ia on
the other, for these alone remain of Yudhi$lhira's clan!
The battlefield is heaped with dead horses, elephants,
kings and men
Like a wormy manuscript whose characters are corrupt.
And now the battle of Duryodhana and Bhima will
begin:
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
69
ORUBH&GA: TH£ BREAKING OF THE THIGHS
The few yet alive propose to enter the hero's last
abode. (3)
( Tluy exit. Tlw.s tnds IM prologue.)
(&In tlrrtt soldiers.)
ALL THREE: Herc we arc, sirs! Herc we arc!
FIRST: We have
Reached the battleground! that final royal hermitage
Where life itself is sacrificed, and kings find their peace
in heaven!
0 solemn place of hate! home of anger; test of strength;
Where heavenly nymphs gather to choose heroic
mates! (4)
SECOND: Well spoken!
The earth bears its burden of dead elephants, scattered
like rocks;
Canion vultures perch; war chariots have lost their
charioteers.
The lords of earth have found their heaven, their drums
arc still;
Unflinching, they did their duty: in war, their duty
is death! (5)
THIRD: Yes,
The battle-sacrifice proceeds- arrows strewn
instead of darbha-grass-
An elephant's raised trunk for its sacrificial post: his
stricken hulk the altar;
The altar fire is hate; the Vedic chant, a lion's roar!
O'er all, wide canopies of flags; below, the victim:
man! (6)
FIRST: And friends, see this:
Birds, their beaks wet with flesh,
Pluck jewels from two heroes' corpses
Where they fell in the quick fight,
Slain by each other's arrows. ( 7)
SECOND: An elephant in full battle dress falls to an iron arrow's
chance,
His chest shattered: one king's armory of arrows and
bows is lost! (8)
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
70
EDWIN GEROW
THIRD: And this, friends:
A charioteer lies lifeless from a single lucky arrow;
On his brow a crown of flowen fallen from the banner
staff.
And happy jackals drag him from the chariot's step
Like maids-of-honor welcoming the son-in-law. (9)
ALL: How terrifying is Samantapaiicaka! I ts furrows flow with the
blood of hones, men and elephants who fell where they were
slain! The earth is heaped high with abandoned shields and
breastplates, umbrellas and whisks, iron and wooden arrows,
swords, javelins and headless torsos! And littered everywhere
with pikes, darts, axes, daggen and stakes, pestles and
hammen, shafts, bars, hooks and grim maces!
FIRST: Here now
Flow streams of blood, oozing from the hulks of
elephants;
Hones pull chariots whose driven fell and no king
commands;
The headless corpses twitch from the habit of life;
And, heeding no goad, wild elephants run amok. ( 10)
SECOND: Look, friends, at these
Vultures wheeling in the sky, ruddy eyes bulging like
buds
Of the arrack tree: beaks as sharp as the demon king's
Hooked elephant goads! The.ir wide-stretched wings
speckled
With bits of flesh resemble palm-leaf fans inlaid with
coral! (II)
THIRD: The daystar's blazing rays reveal fields strewn
With hones and elephants, kings and soldien;
And scattered shining ornaments: sword, shield and
axe,
Have made the earth a sky of fallen stars! ( 12)
FIRST: Even in disaster, the beauty of the k$atriya does not abandon
them. I see
The.ir fearless, upturned faces, like a silent lotus-lake
Made to bloom by the sun of valor shining in the sky of
war!
For stalks, I see swords bearing buds of diadems; for
filaments,
Frowns; for petals, lips; for bees, those sightless
eyes! (13)
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ORUBHIJIGA: THE BREAKING OF THE THIGHS 71
SECOND: When such as lhcsc are overwhelmed by Death, what man in
peril may ever trust his own powers?
THIRD: Only Death overwhelms the qatriya!
FIRST: Who can doubt it?
SECOND: Not so! Not quite so! Didn't mortal
Arjuna also dispatch many haughty kings to beckoning
Death
In the heat of battle, with arrows left from his war with
~iva?
When he but touched his bowstring, black with Khio<;lava
forest smoke
The Nivatakavacas offered up their vital breaths;
the SariUaptakas were routed;
and the plaints of heaven were stilled! ( 14)
ALL: Ai! A crash! Is it
The thundering clouds? Or bolts of lightning shattering
the peaks?
Do quakes rend the earth with incessant echoing fury?
Or is the sea crashing in caves deep in Mount Mandara?
The wind-toucd, wave-throbbing sea-surf roaring in
shock! (15)
Let's sec what it is! (Tlrly in oariow directimu.)
llllWt
FIRST: Ai! The great mace fight begins! In the presence of the manes of
the Kuru and the Yadu clans, before Vyisa and Ba1arama,
before Krwa and Vidura- it is Duryodhana and Bhima, the
middle son of Pao<;lu, who fight, one angry at the murder of his
hundred brothers, the other incensed that Draupadi was drag
ged away by the hair!
SECOND: Great Bhima's breast- broad as a plate of yellow gold-is
split!
Broken are Duryodhana's broad shoulders, rough as
elephant hide!
From the fearsome blows of their two maces came that
awesome sound
Striking at once on their two wide chests!
TIURD: Now, King Duryodhana,
Angry eyes aflame, crown shaking on his trembling brow,
Tenses his body to spring; in his outstretched hand
The mace glistens, besmeared with enemy blood
Like Indra's sparkling lightning atop Kailisa peak. (17)
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
72
EDWIN GEROW
FIRST: Regard the Piitu;lava, body wet with blood from the blow:
Shoulders broken; blood gushing from the cut on
his brow;
More yet anoints his chest, wet from hammer wounds;
Wounds deep and moist from bloody mace blows:
He glistens like Mount Meru with storm-drenched
ruddy cliffs! ( 18)
SECOND: The fearsome mace he hurls; trembling, he roars;
He meets the quick arm and breaks its blow;
He feints and strikes, strikes and feints;
Duryodhana is smart, but Bhima strong! ( 19)
THIRD: Wolf-belly Bhima
Like himself, unequalled in war,
Vi~IJU
Limbs moist with the gore of his head's deep gash,
Sinks to earth, like the golden mountain
Releasing its essence after the storm. (20)
FIRST: Seeing Bhlmasena fall, body slack from these heavy blows
Vyiisa stands amazed, hand on his chin, staring.
SECOND: Yudhinhira is sad; Vidura's eyes are full of tears.
THIRD: Arjuna reaches for his bow; Kor;ia looks up at the sky.
ALL: But Balariima brandishes his axe, pleased with his
pupil. (21)
FIRST: The great King Duryodhana
Splendid, proud, politely arrogant,
Crown shimmering with jewels of many hues,
Speaks mockingly to Bhima- "Be not afraid!
No conquering hero slays such piteous foe"! (22)
SECOND: But Kor;ia, seeing Bh'imasena mocked, slaps his thigh and
sends some kind of signal!
THIRD: And Bhima is revived by the signal!
Frowning, he wipes the sweat from his brow's wound,
And seizes in his menacing arms the heavy, marvellous
mace;
His father, Wind, had seen his son's despair, and now
restores his strength;
Bhima rises from the earth, eyes flashing like a lion,
and roars! (23)
FIRST: Look! the mace fight begins anew:
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
73
ORUBHANCA: THE BREAKING Of THE THIGHS
Rubbing both hands in the dirt, Bhima cleans his arms
of blood
By force of valor, and roars his anger through swollen
lips:
No longer friend to tender duty, heeding naught but
Koi;ia 's sign,
Pii;i4u's son cracks his mace against the thighs of
Gindhliri's son! (24)
0 woe! The Great King falls!
ALL:
THIRD: Seeing the King of the Kurus fall, his body decorated with
drops of blood, Vyasa leaps up--
Balarima hides his face behind a garland of flowers
Too shocked to gaze upon this outrage to
Duryodhana-
The Pii;i4avas, bewildered, hurried on by Vyasa, cast a
net of hands
Under Bhima, who moves away, clinging to Koi;ia's
arm. (25)
FIRST: Eyes wide open now in consternation, Balarlima watches the
departure of Bhima, and begins to approach-
His eyes arc red with rage; in haste, he pushes his
garland aside
With its swarm of stinging bees; the crown on his brow
shakes;
He sinks to earth; drags his dark garment behind
Revealing a body pale as the moon in a wrack of
cloud. (26)
SECOND: Then let us go, so that we may be near the Great King.
THE OTHER TWO: y cs. A good idea.
( T"9 all kave. Titus ends tlu mtr'a cu.)
(BAI.AR.I.MA mlers.)
BALARAMA: Hear, hear! 0 kings! It is not right that
He should bring his mace down on the thighs of
Duryodhana,
Crushing with one blow the family's honor and
prosperity!
He disregards my plow, a weapon well-timed to the
foe's strength-
Ignores both me and his own battle-winning treachery'
(27)
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
74
EDWIN GERO\\'
Duryodhana! Stay with us yet a bit
While I sink my handy plow in Bhrma's broad chest
To plough a field-path in the mire of his sweat and
blood!
My plow still soiled with the ruins of Saubha!
Still directing the coune of the Kilindi!
Its hook sharp as the turTCts of the demon king's palace!
And ever consecrated by offerings of enemies' lives! (28)
VOICE OFFSTAGE: Forgive them! 0 plow-armed Rima! Forgive them!
BAl.ARAMA: Ai! Even in this condition, the suffering Duryodhana follows
me!
This splendid prince, crawling in the dirt, is made to
play the child:
Amu dusty, skin smeared with blood- the sandal paste
of war!
He lies Ii.kc Visuki in the primal sea, exhausted,
shedding his skin
After churning the ambrosia: of no use to god or
demon! (29)
{DURYODHANA mlers, both thighs broken.)
DURYODHANA: It is I
Dragging my half-exhausted body
Through the mire, on my two arms;
My thighs broken by the mace
Of Bhima, who breaks the rules of war! ( 30)
Forgive them! 0 plow-armed Rima! Forgive them!
This forehead of me who fell to earth
Touches your feet: relent your anger!
Let the smoke of the funeral fire ascend!
The Kurus have lost-our hate, our cause consumed! (31)
BALARAMA: Brave Duryodhana! Stay with us yet awhile!
DURYOOHANA: What do you intend to do?
BALARAMA: Listen:
I will give you the sons of Pa1.1c;lu as companions to
heaven,
Along with their elephants and hones and chariots;
I will sever their shoulden with blows of my club;
Plough deep their bodies with the edge of my plow! (32)
DURYODHANA: Ah no! No, no!
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
0RUBHA}iGA: THE BREAKING OF THE THIGHS 75
Bhima's vow is done; my hundred brothcn arc dead;
And now I die: what will more war decide! (33)
BALARAMA: But you were tricked before my very eyes! My anger is
aroused!
DURYODHANA: Do you think I was tricked?
BAI.ARA MA: Who doubts it?
DURYODHANA: Not so, friend! They paid dearly for my life!
If Bhima, who saved by wit alone his kinsmen from the
blazing house of lac--
If Bhima, by whose strength great rocks were split
asunder in Kubera's war--
If Bhima, who levied the penalty of death on the
demon king Hiqimba-
lf this Bhima, you think, must trick me to win: then I
cannot be slain! (34)
BALARAMA: But Bhimascna, who tricked you in battle, survives!
DURYODHANA: Have I then been tricked by Bhima?
BALARAMA: Who else brought you to this state!
Listen:
DURYODHANA:
It was Hari himself, alien to deceit, who entered the
mace
To win me over to the realm of Death. Beloved Hari
Who stoic the coral tree from Lord Indra, along with
his pride;
Who sleeps a thousand years, at will, on the timeless
sea. (35)
A CHILD'S
VOICE OFFSTAGE: Make way, sin! Make way!
BALARAMA: (looking.) Ah! It is Dhrtar~1ra and Gandhari who come,
with little Durjaya showing them the way. And also the wives
of Duryodhana. Dhrtar~1ra's heart grieves, and his pace is
unsteady:
The gods, fearing for the safety of their heaven,
Made him sightless with a gift of the hostile dark;
Yc t he found eyes among his hundred sons
And grew in pride. His arms shone like golden
posts! (36)
(Enler DHiTARAsTRA, GANDHART, DURJAYA, and THE TWO QUEENS.)
DHiTARASTRA: Where is my son?
GANDHART: My boy, where arc you!
BOTH QUEENS: Prince, where arc you?
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
76 EDWIN GEROW
DHll.TARAsTRA: 0, woe!
My son, they say, has been slain, tricked by a rwc of
war;
My eyes cannot cry their tcan; my blindness is
complete. (37)
Glndhlril Arc you bearing up?
GANDHARl: I live: such is my misfortune!
BOTH QUEENS: 0 King! 0 Great King!
DURYODHANA: Alas! Even my wives cry!
I did not know the true pain
Of the mace, until now:
My wives enter the field of battle
Their hair disheveled. (38)
DHll.T AR.\sTRA: Gandhlli, have you seen Duryodhana, our family's pride!
GANDHART: 0 King! I do not see him!
DH(l.TAR.\sTRA: Why not! I am indeed blind if I cannot find my son when I
have need of him! Death, you are unforgiving-
Should not Dhrtaranra partake just once
Of a funerary meal offered by his son?
He who bcgat one hundred bold and haughty
Heroes that now lie broken on the earth! (39)
GANDHARI: Duryodhana, my son! Make some response! Con.sole your
father distraught at the death of his hundred sons!
BALARAMA: Ai! Gandhari, who once
Looked indifferently on the faces of her sons and
grandsons,
Is now unsteadied by grief at her last son's loss;
The mask she wean in solemn vow to look on naught
But what her husband secs, is damp with tean. (4-0)
DH(I. T AR.\sTRA: Duryodhana, my son! Great King and Commander of an
Imperial Army! Where arc you!
DURYODHANA: Today I am a Great King!
DH(I. T AR,\STRA: Come, eldest of the hundred! Give me a response!
DURYODHANA: I have responded; I am ashamed of what has happened.
DH(l.TAR.\sTRA: Come, my son! Welcome me!
DURYODHANA: I am coming, I am coming ... (He attempu to rise, but
collapses.) 0 woe! This is my second wound! 0 most
unfortunate!
Bhima deprived me not only of my thighs
When he seized my hair and struck with his mace:
He robbed me also of my father's welcome! (41)
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
77
ORUBHAJIGA: THE BREAKING OF THE THJGHS
GhNDHAlll: Girl, come here!
BOTH QUEENS: My lady, we are here.
GhNDHARl: Go look for your husband!
BOTH QUEENS: We go, both most miserable.
DHJ!.TARASTRA: Who tugs at my garment to show me the way?
DURJAYA: It is I, grandpa-Durjaya.
DHJ!.TARA.$TRA: Durjaya! Son of my son! Go seek your father!
DURJAYA: Grandpa, I'm tired!
DHJ!.TARA.$TRA: Go anyway; find rest on your father's lap.
DURJAYA: All right, grandpa, I'll go. (Ht approat:lus
DURYODHANA.) Grandpa! Grandpa! Where arc you?
DURYODHANA: Has he too come? My son! Love for him stays close to my
heart always and consumes me!
How can this child, who sleeps on my lap
And knows no sorrow, now look on me
And call me "unconquered"? (42)
DURJAYA: The king is here and lies on the ground!
DURYODHANA: Why have you come here, my son?
DURJAYA: You took too long!
DURYODHANA: Affection for him consumes my heart, even in my misery!
DURJAYA: Papa! I want to sit in your lap! (Ht climbs [onto
DURYODHANA's lap.]
DURYODHANA: [Restraining him.] Durjaya! Durjaya, my boy! Be careful!
This young moon of my heart's joy
Who has so often delighted my sight
Assumes, in my misfortune, the strange
Shape of a scorching fire! {4 3)
DURJAYA: \Vhy won't you let me sit in your lap?
DURYODHANA: Sit somewhere else!
This too familiar place
Henceforth is not for you! (44)
DURJAYA: Arc you going away, 0 King?
DURYODHANA: Following my hundred brothers!
DURJAYA: Take me too!
DURYODHANA: Go, my boy! Just ask Bhima!
DURJAYA: King! They're looking for you!
DURYODHANA: Who, my boy?
DURJAYA: Grandma and all the harem ladies.
DURYODHANA: Go, my son! I can't come with you!
DURJAYA: I will take you.
DURYODHANA: You arc just a child, my son!
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
78
EDWIN GEROW
DURJAYA: (Mouillg aboUl /Ju stage.) Ladies! Here i.s the king!
BOTH QUEENS: Woe! Woe! The Great King!
OHl(lTARA$TRA: Where is the king?
GANDHART: Where i.s my boy?
DURJAYA: The king is sitting on the ground.
DHl(lTA RA$TRA: 0 woe! Is this the king who
Once was the one overlord of Earth?
In height as tall as a tower of gold?
Wretched now, fallen onto Earth
His size supine like a great door-bolt! (45)
GANDHARJ: Duryodhana, my son! You look exhaUJtcd!
DURYODHANA: Am I then your son?
OHl(lTARA$TRA: Remember who she i.s, my boy!
GANOHART: King! I am the mother of many fearless sons!
DURYODHANA: Then I am born again today. Well, father! Why this distress?
DHl(lTARA$TRA: Son! Why would I not be di.str~!
Your hundred brothers are dead-
All heroes sacrificed in the rite of war;
Now that you the last are slain,
There are no more. (46) (Ht falls.)
OURYODHANA: Help! He has fallen! Father! Calm my mother!
DHl(lTA RA$TRA: What can I say to her?
OURYODHANA: That I was slain facing the foe! Father, it would please me if
you contained your sorrow:
The crown I wore did never bow
But at your feet; I fear not even
The fires of Hell! The pride that blossomed
At my birth, goes whole to Heaven! (47)
My eyes have been sightless since birth;
DHl(lTARA~TRA:
I am grown old; life is indifferent to me;
Yet this overwhelming grief for my son
Betrays my composure, defeats me utterly. (48)
BALARAMA: Sir! Alas!
I find no words to introduce myself
To this grieving father, blind from birth! (49)
DURYODHANA: I have something to tell you, mother
GANDH.liRT: Speak, son!
DURYODHANA: If I have done good works, and honored you,
May I, in the next birth, be again your son! (50)
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
79
0RUBH,tj{GA: THE BREAKING OF THE THIGHS
GANDHA.Rl: Such is my wish also!
DURYODHANA; Milavi! Hear this:
My brow is broken from mace blows beating to the time
of war;
On my breast, bloody bruises make better ornaments
than pearls.
Look! These two arms a.re pretty enough, with wounds
for bangles!
Why then weep? Thy warrior-husband fell handsome
facing the foe! (51)
Q.UEEN [MALAVT): I cry, for I share your sorrow!
·DURYODHANA: Pauravi! Hear thU:
By many Vedic rites I sacrificed; my family did not
want;
To foes I showed a hundred favon, my friends I never
duped;
The princes of my enemies' hosts repent of all their
wan:
Witness of such dignity, no woman of mine shall
weep! (52)
PAURAVl: I do not weep, for I am determined to go along with you.
DURYODHANA: Durjaya! Hear this:
Gandhiri! What will he say?
DH~TARA$TRA:
GANDHARl: I also wonder ...
DURYODHANA: You must obey the Pi.Q<;lavas as though they were myself;
heed the instructions of the noble Kunti; take both Draupadi
and Abhimanyu's mother as your own two mothers--for you
too
Must not grieve for a father who fell facing his equal!
Duryodhana's heart is inflamed with pride! His glory
lives!
Taking the linen-clad arm of mighty
Yudh~thira,
Offer, with the sons of PiiQ<;lu, my funeral libation! (53)
BALARAMA: What! Has his hate become remorse? Hey! What sound is
this
That frightens all the birds in heaven?
Whose bowstring bends on this banlefield
Bereft of drum and armor, guard or charioteer
Strcwn with arrows and shields, umbrellas and
whisks? (54)
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
80
EDWIN GEROW
A VOICE OFFSTAGE: I enter again the sacrificial bat!.le-ground,
Where once Duryodhana trod-bow drawn
Full thick with warriors and with tumult;
But empty now, a sacrifice without a priest. (55)
BALARAMA: Ai! It is our teacher's son, A.ivatthiman, who comes:
Eyes wide and bright as full-blown lotus petals,
Arms long and lambent lilr.e posts of radiant gold;
In violent haste, he bends his huge and fiery bow
Like Meru with the bow of Indra on its peak! (56)
(ASVAT'THAMAN mters.)
ASVATTHAMAN: (He repeals vn-st (i5].) 0 Great Kings! 0 heroes! ls it !rue
that once you made war here, your swords thrashing like
crocodiles in violent whirlpools of bat!.le? Now you look like
whimpering dogs, with lit!.le life left! Listen to me, Great
Kings!
I am not the Kuru Lord, thighs cnuhed in combat foul!
I am not !he charioteer's son, ofs lack and useless sword!
It is I, the one son ofDror;ia, who stand here, impatient,
With sword uplifted, gazing on the field of victory! (5 7)
Of what use 10 me is the glory of war wi1hou1 the profit of
victory! (He moues about [tlit stage].) No, indeed! It was while I
was away performing my father's obsequies that the King of
the Kurus-the jewel of the dynasty- was tricked! Who
would believe ii? True,
heart was found by Rama's arrow! and my
Bh~ma's
father too--
But Duryodhana?- that peerless warrior whom once
The cager faces of eleven armies circled- arms lifted
in
sa.lut~
And all their armories!-even he surprised by
Death! (58)
Now where has the son of Giindhiiri gone? (Ht moves about,
searching.) Ah! There he is, King of1he Kurus, arrived on the
further shore of the war, in the midst of a camp liuered with
the wreckage of chariots, elephants, horses and men-
Here he gleams, limbs wet with the blood
Of many blows; rays of his royal diadem shimmer
Amids! the dishevelled locks: the sun of evening
Touches the stony crest of the sunset mountain. (59)
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ORUBHANGA: THE BREAKING OF THE THIGHS 81
(Aptwoadiing.) Hail, King of the Kurus! What is this?
DURYODHANA: The just deserts of a dissatisfied man, 0 son of my teacher!
ASVATTlfAMAN: 0 King of the Kurus! I will restore you to a place of honor!
What will you do?
DURYODHANA:
ASVATIHAM.AN: Listen-
With a wave of my sword I will rid you of Kntia,
And all the sons of Pi1;uju; I will throw them away
Like a manuscript of blotted characters! Proud
Kni;ia-
Atop Garuo;la, four arms bearing discus and bow! (60)
DURYODHANA: No! No! Desist, friend-
Gone is this clan of kings, clasped in Earth's embrace!
Gone is Kari;ia to heaven; gone Bhr,ma, his body felled!
Gone all my brothers, ever brave facing battle!
And now you see my fate! 0 friend! Lay down your
bow! (61)
ASVATIHAMAN: Hey, King of the Kurus-
It seems that Bhima destroyed not only your thighs
With the blow of his mace-but your pride! (62)
DURYODHANA: No! No! A king who's lost his pride is not a king! It is pride
that urges me to desist! Look, son of my teacher--
Little have the sons of Pai;io;lu done to diminish my
pride!
It was I who wagered Draupadi be dragged away by
her hair!
At my behest was young Abhimanyu slain, in fierce
battle!
I tricked the Pai;io;lavas at dice to flee and live with
animals! (63)
ASVATIHAMAN: I have made my vow:
I swear by your honor, and by mine, and all the heroes,
That tonight in battle I'll bum all the Plii;io;lavas alive!
(64)
BAI.AR.AMA: What he says will happen!
ASVA TIHAMAN: As your weapon is the plow!
DHJilTAJlASTRA: The trickery was evident to all!
ASVATIHAMAN: Durjaya! Come here!
With no ceremony but a brahmin's words
May you be made king in this kingdom
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
82
EDWIN GEROW
Won by your father's strength,
Legacy of your father's valor! (65)
DURYODHANA: At last! My heart is given leave! My life departs! Here come
my fathers and grandfathers, Sarittanu and the rest! Ka111a
comes, at the head of my hundred brothers! And young
Abhimanyu, steadied by Indra's arm, speaks to me from
atop Indra's elephant, and he is angry with me! Urvl!Si and
the Apsarases welcome me! Great oceans form before my
eyes! The holy Ganges and the Rivers! Death sends the
heroes' chariot for me, drawn by a thousand swans: I come!
I come! (Ht aJcnufs to luoven.)
DHJ!.TARA$TRA: (PM/ling tlu cvrtmn a.ride.)
I go to a forest retreat where hermits prosper.
Worthless is this kingdom, barren without sons!
ASVATTHAMAN: I go, arrow in hand, on a night attack!
BALARAMA: (Sptalcit1g tlu bharatavikya.)
May the King protect the Earth, his enemies
appeased! (66)
(All leave. Thus ends the drama Orubhaitga.)
The translation is based on the text of C.R. Dcvadhar, Plays Ascribed To BMsa (Poona
Oriental Series, No. !>4; Poona, 1962), as revised, 1965 (Poona Oriental Series, No. 72). I
discuss the poetic form of the Orvblwiga in an article published in the special volume of
the Jwmal of tlu Amm.01t OrimW SO<Uty honoring Daniel H.H. Ingalls [ 105.3, pp. 4-05-
12).
Verse 2/3: hundred sons; by poetic license: the text reads ""'4yalalo, "JOO offspring".
The one daughter, Du))$ala, is apparently ignored. Or perhaps our translation is what
the author intended in the first place! (Sec below note to Verse 15-16).
Verse 11: arrack; Skt. wuul!n.ka (Madhuca indica), Anglo-Indian maluoa, the flowers of
which tree, after fermenting, are a source of the country-liquor arrack. See H. Santapau,
COINM• Trees (New Delhi, 1966), pp. 83-86.
Verse 14: Niviitakavacas; a class of Demons associated with Hiran,yakaiipu. Sarh$ap
takas; "Jes conjures", a group of conspirators led by Trigarta who had sworn to kill
Arjuna.
Verse 15: Mandara; the fabled mountain with which, as their churning stick, the Gods
churned the primeval ocean in an orgy of creative energy.
Verse 15/16: middle son of Pii.r;ii;lu; a puzzling reference. Bhima is usually counted the
second of the five Pii.i;ii;lavas, Arjuna being the third, and thus, strictly speaking, the
"middle Pln,i;lava". If the reading is correct, we must suspect either a variant genealogy,
or accept a broader interpretation of "middle". Indeed, in one sense, 2, 3, and 4 are in
the middle of a group of five!
Verse 15/16: hundred brothers; the reference is of coune loose: if Dhrtariinra had 100
sons, Duryodhana had only 99 brothers. The references to Dhrtar1J1ra's "100 offspring"
(as 2/3 S11.pra) are also loose tot.he extent that 0u))$alii, the one daughter, and IOlst child,
is considered. We presume that Dul;iWii survived Duryodhana.
Verse 15/16: by the hair; the culprit was of course Dul;isiisana, not Ouryodhana.
Verse 18: Meru; the mountain fabled to anchor the universe; the Ganges falls from
heaven on iu summit and divides into four streams. It is the abode of Brahma and (as
here) is brilliant with minerals and gems.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
83
ORUBHA.irGA: THE BREAKING OF THE THIGHS
canm golim
Verse 19: feints, Fatarati: the reference is probably to a specific dance step.
Verse 19: Bhima; the verse-a common conceit-plays on the meaning of Bliimo,
namely ''fearsome''; its fint and last words arc thw the ''same''.
Verse 21: Balarlma; K11iµ's cider brother, who was the teacher of mace-fighting 10
both Duryodhana and Bhima. More or less a neutral in the war, he is here depicted as
proud of Duryodhana's prowess, and much incensed at BhTma's failure 10 fight by the
rules (infra).
Vc rse 24/25: leaps up; Slr.t. kliam utf14li1411: "jumps up /4 tlu sky".
Verse 27: treachery; reading atistuM/iim. The sarhdhi might however be resolved:
rOlfllbta-rnalisamJltim, "a decision (relating to) opinions formed in (or about) battle".
V crse 29: Visuki; the serpent used by the gods as rope when churning the primeval
ocean. The verse also alludes to the serpent's earlier function of supporting the ocean
before creation: both functions being fulfilled, the serpent is "wdcss".
Verse 35: alien to deceit; reading 11i17!J(ljaJfU141tapriya-. Devadhar's earlier text is in error
here.
Verse 35/36: Dhrtarq(ra, et al.; after his teacher, Balarima, Duryodhana is visited by
his immediate family: father, mother, young son, and his two wives.
Verse 39: funerary meal: the pilµ/IJ offering to the dccc.ased; an important duty of the
ddest son. Failure of the pilJl/.a was thought to guarantee swift passage to hell. Hence the
social pressure on the wife 10 produce a son.
Vene 42/43: misery; lit. "in this condition".
Verse 44/45: hundred brothers; see above, note to 15-16.
Verse 45/46: born again today; he means that be basks in his mother's renewed
affection, for she deigns to overlook his defeat.
Verse 50/51: MilavT; in the V.,,Uamlt4r<t, Duryodhana's wife's name is BhAnumali.
Verse 51/52: share your sorrow; saluu/Mrmaeari11i, implying that she is the dutiful wife,
sharing her husband's every mood. Pauravi; see preceding note.
Verse 55/56: ASvatthlman; the son of Dn>Qa, archery teacher 10 the warriors of both
sides. One of the last three Kauravas 10 survive the battle, he symbolizes intractable
hostility to the Paoi;tavas. In the MoMbhilrata version of our story, it is ASvatthiman who
sneaks into the Pioi;lava camp at night and slays the five young sons of the Pll)Qavas,
bringing their heads to the dying Duryodhana. A brahmin, bis life is spared by the
judicious Yudhinhira.
Verse 56: bow of Indra; lrulra'4pa, the rainbow; often compared as here, to a warrior's
drawn bow, bedecked with ornament.
Verse 57: chariot.,.,r's son; KarQa, half-brother to the Pl1;1i;lavas, who, though son of
the Sun, was brought up by Siita, the charioteer of Dhrtarq(ra. The reference is to
Karoa's supposedly invincible javelin, gift of Indra, which nevertheless was insufficient in
battle against Arjuna, who killed him.
Verse 60: characters; compare Vene 3.
Verse 63: Abhimanyu; Arjuna's son, who had killed Duryodhana's son Laqrna1;1a
earlier in the battle. On the dragging ofDraupadi by the hair, sec note to 15/16, above.
Verse 65: brahmin's words; ASvatthiman of course refen to himself and this verse.
Verse 66. bharatavlkya; a benediction; the traditional dosing verse of a Sanskrit
drama, here incorporated into a larger verse.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
EPIC PARTHENOGENESIS
MARY CARROLL SMITH
The Mahiihk4rata recounts several stories of the miraculous birth of great
warrior (k.fatriya) saviors. The birth of the epic heroes or saviors is
frequently accomplished by a single parent. Conception without a
conjunction of sexual gametes is called parthenogenesis, and the births
resulting from such conception are usually marked by signs and wonders.
Female parthenogenesis, in which the absent or shadow male is often a god,
is best illustrated in the Mahiihk4rata by the story ofK un ti's magical power.
Kunti was given a spell that would allow her to conceive by simply calling
on the god. The birth of the great hero Arjuna Pa1;1Qava comes as the result
of her calling on Indra, who responds only after a period of intense
asceticism on her part (Mak4bk4rata 1.114) .1 KuntI's parthenogcnic
privilege seems only to result in the birth ofs ons destined to be great leaders
and heroes. One wonders what would have happened if she called on the
goddess.
The focus of the female parthenogenic myths is seldom on the mother,
but rather on the semi-divine son who sometimes manages to avoid the
birth canal entirely in his earthly appearance. Both Gotama Buddha and
Jesus Christ are said to have been born thus. 2 In /!.g Veda 4.18.1-3 Indra
actually debates with his mother about his intention to avoid the canal and
pass through her side. He desists when she is dying from the trauma. The
birth ofh eroic saviors, whether gods or men, causes the natural world great
alterations. Another remarkable pattern ofm ono-gender conception in the
Great Epic is presented in three separate accounts ofm ale parthenogenesis.
The births of two military saviors and a Warrior God occur without any
human mother at all. The focus in these stories is on male prowess, mental,
physical and spiritual.
Male parthenogenic births in the Mak46k4rata occur without mothers as
bearers or holders of the seed. Such births arc called ayonija or "non-womb
birth." Ayonija should perhaps be translated as "born without the need of
a female source," but even that translation fails to signify the full
• Citations to the MaltDh1t4raJa att from the critical text edited at Poona, the Atijpanxm, ed.
Vishnu S. Sukthankar (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1933).
' A!vaghota, BwJJJuuaril4, tr. E.H. Johnston ( 1936; rpt. Delhi: Motilal Bananidass,
1972), verses 9-11, p. 3.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
85
EPIC PARTHENOGENESIS
deprivation entailed in the parthcnogcnic births oft he epic heroes. "In the
medical texts, it is clear that women can procreate unilaterally but men
cannot; in the myths, the situation is reversed, and men, but not women,
arc capable of unilateral procreation (albeit men do it into a 'female'
receptacle of some sort-any container at all)."' It is true that several
"female" jan or containcn arc mentioned in connection with both Vedic
seen and epic heroes, but the literal details of such references seem to
belong to later text traditions. The Vedic seen Agastya and V arc
as~iha
reputed to have male parthenogcnic origins, but the /!.g Veda contains only
elliptical references to their non-womb births.
The birth and Agastya (/!.g Veda 7.33.9-13) is recounted by
ofVas~iha
Indra in the context ofp raising the Vaiuhas for bringing him to their soma
.pressing and thereby engaging him as the champion for Sudas in the battle
with the Ten Kings. The inter-relation of cultic activity, both in the
pressing of soma and in the composing of hymns, with the increase of
warrior furor has yet to be investigated. It is the epic that provides actual
mythic narratives which illuminate the inherent political and spiritual
claims attendant on miraculous birth:
Fint, one must note the primacy of the Vedic ritual as a model for sexual
creation ... what happens next is that when an actual birth model is finally
constructed, beginning sketchily in the Upanishads, the model is an almost
literal application of the ritual metaphon. ... A second characteristic of the
Vedic world view is implicit in the frequent examples of unilateral or
competitive procreation that occur in the texts. There arc, of coune, many
examples of more conventional sexual cooperation as well ... it is the
unexpected metaphor that proves ultimately illum.inating for the peculiar
Indian viewpoint.•
It is the unexpected metaphor of the "un-womb born" as it is developed in
the three myths of the Maliabharata that helps to illuminate the ideology
behind the myth of parthenogenesis.
Non-womb births characterize Krpa (Maliabharala 1.120), Droi;ia
(Maliabharala 1.121), and Skanda (Maliabharata 3.213-218; 9.43). All three
myths arc concerned with the conditions surrounding the physical birth of
heroes who will possess spiritual endowments that result in superhuman
military prowess. Arjuna's birth through Kuntfs ability to evoke Indra
provides some sense of the inner connection between his consummate
heroic achievements and the spiritual principal embodied in his father,
Indra. Indra's Vedic persona is of the quintessential Aryan warrior king.
' Wendy Donigtt O'Flaheny, Womm, Androgynu, and Otkr MytltiJ:aJ BtaSts (Chicago:
Univmity of Oiicago Pn:s,,, 1980), p 50.
' Ibid., pp. 31-32.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
86 MARY CARROLL SMITH
His son then can be expected to have divine capabilities. Linking of
miraculous birth with spiritual and military capability is more remarkable
in the myths ofDrol)a and K.rpa since both are recognized as mortals in the
epic. The endowment of the God's son, Skanda, with military capability
makes the fact of his non-womb birth a causal link in his eventual
generalship of the gods. The three stories could never claim to primary
influence in the present redaction of the epic, but their contexts provide
a unique vantage for the study of the meaning of parthenogenesis
mythology.
The birth stories of Krpa and Drol)a are found in successive chapters of
the ManabhMaJa Book One, Adiparvan (1.120; 1.121). The basic elements of
the two myths seem to suggest that the stories are variants, perhaps of an
archetypal male supremacy myth. The fathers ofboth Krpa and Drol)a are
Vedic seers whose spiritual practices are related to their expertise in
weaponry. Drol)a and Krpa both become students of weaponry and then
famous teachers oft he art ofw eapon attainment and usage. By considering
each myth separately, and then comparing and contrasting them and the
Skanda myth, a real pattern emerges ofa rchaic warrior spirituality imaged
in the process of male birthing. The underlying pattern tends to go
unnoticed because of the dramatic, non-ordinary conditions of male
parthenogenesis.
Both human saviors are born through the involuntary emission of their
fathers' semen (retas). Although the common English translation for retas is
"seed," the primary understanding of the term in the R,.g Veda is of the flow
or discharge oft he semen.• Citing Grassmann, Wendy O'Flaherty says: "in
this sense it [retas] has the primary connotation of a process rather than
a substance, though it is freely applied to many substances, including the
embryo engendered by the seed. "1 The untimely appearance of a radiant
female figure occurs in the denouement oft he male birthings ofDror;ia and
Krpa. The pattern for the female figure occurs in the Vedic citation on the
birth of (7.33.11 ).
Vasi~!ha
I
uta.si mailravaru!JO vasifli}a
11
urvaJyii brakman manaso 'dlzi jiita:
drapsam skannam brakma,,O diiivyma I
11'
uiive devii: tviidadamta
~kare
' Hennann Grassmann, IY011nbi<th ~"'" Rig-Vt"4 (Wiabaden: Otto Hamusowitz, 1964),
1181.
• Ibid., p. 20.
' Rig-Vt"4-Samlrila, edit..! by F. Max Miiller, V. III, Mandala, VII (Varanasi: The
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Seria Office, reprint of the 1892 ..!ition). venc 11. I have split the
vasistlroroaJ.lo.
unlawful sllliullri of
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
87
EPIC PARTHENOGENESIS
The ellipsis of the verse not withstanding, Vasi$Jha is said to be the son of
Mitra and Varui:ia, born from their thought of U rvaSi. Drapsam skannam,
the "spilled drop", could certainly be the "unexpected metaphor" that
gives rise to the later mythic statements. The placing of the "spilled drop"
in the blue lotus flower, pu$kara, could also mean in "the bowl of a spoon,"
which would make more ritual sense if the verse has metonymic meaning.
Another verse in the hymn (f!.g Veda 7.33.13) says that Vasi$fha was born in
a pot (kumbht), together with the seer Agastya, from the seed (retas) of the
two gods. There is no mention in this verse of UrvaSi, but when the later
tradition comes to mythologi:ze the reference in regard to Agastya, she
appears.
Agastya is one of the more famous seers of the /Jg Vtda, and like Vasinha
and Visvlimitra, has a rich post-vedic life. His birth was miraculous. When
the Gods Mitra and Varui:ia were sacrificing, they saw the nymph Urvasi
and promptly ejaculated. Their seed fell in ajar, from which Agastya arose;
hence his common nickname kumbhayoni: he whose womb was a jar.•
The Vedic verses give no indication that Urvasi was seen. Sorensen
identifies Agastya as VasiHha's brother and then gives the citation from the
Brhaddtvalii, in proper Victorian Latin, which shows that the tradition
interpreted the ellipsis in the statements about Vasi$Jha's birth as a seeing
of UrvaSi by the dual divinities which resulted in the birth of Agastya:
Natus erat cum fratre Vasishtbo semine Mitri et Varuni, quum nympham
Vrvac;im vidissent, amore incensorum in urceum profluente. 5.30ff.•
The conflation of the two Vedic verses is elaborated on in that the
pouring of the semen into the pitcher (urceum) is due to passionate fire of
love when Mitra and Varuna see Urvasi. Verse 11 used the term manaso,
which is "mind," "in its widest sense as the seat of intellectual operation
and of emotions. " 10 I have followed Geidner in translating the term as
"thought" because of the relation of such activity with Kun ti's ability to
think of the god and become fertile. Grassmann's reading of the citation is
of"der Geist personificirt." 11 On the other hand his reading ofu rvalj>iis is of
the substantive meaning "violent desire" or "ardent passion."11 The
' Tlot Ma/Uibharala 1hr Book of tht FortJI, vol. 2. tr. and ed. by JA.B. ,-an Bui«ncn 1Chkago:
Universit)' of Chicago Pn"SS, 1975), p. IH i.
' S. SOrensen, An Inda 101"' .•VamtS in IN .Wa!Uibliiirala (Delhi: Morilal Banarsidass. reprint of
the 1904 edition), p. 16.
•• Arthur A. Macdonell, A Prattiral Smukrit Dirtional)· r 1924; rpr. Oxford: t.:ni,·crsity Pn"'·
1974), p. 216.
11 Grassmann, pp. 994-96
" Ibid., p. 266.
Google Origiral frcn1
019111zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
88
MARY CARROLL SMITH
depiction of U rvasl as the goddess personifying passion for the love-sick
Puriiravas can be found in hymm 95 of the tenth ma1;1(jala of the /!.g Veda.
She appears in the Mahiibharata as the wife of Puriiravas and as a stimulant
to the parthenogenic birth of l.l,ya.Srl)ga.
The parthenogenesis that produces Krpa and Drol)a is also set in motion
by a divine female. T he miraculous potency of Krpa's father, Saradvat
Gautama, has a more detailed narrative build-up than is the case for
Drol)a's father. The narrative prelude highlights the military associations
of Krpa's birth. Gautama, who is called Saradvat because he was born
with arrows, excels in the study of weaponry and invites the attention of
Indra, Icing of the gods. Indra's position ofs upreme godly strength can be
challenged by the build-up of a seer's ascetic practices, which result in
tapas, heat or spiritual energy. Gautama's energy also threatens Indra
because it is coupled with extreme skill in archery dhanurvedaparatva. The
text specifically says that Gautama practiced austerities to acquire all
weapons in just the same way that Brahman scholars practice austerities
to obtain the Vedas. While Indra is frequently depicted in the epic as
threatened by the increasing spiritual power ofs eers, the Krpa birth myth
discloses a reminder of Indra's Vedic position as Divine Warrior. He is
threatened by Saradvat's knowledge ofw eaponry. One might suppose that
Indra's weapon, the vajra, is fashioned in intense spiritual heat."
In recalling aspects of Indra's Vedic position, I do not mean to imply
that the present epic text has any direct relation to the Vedic period other
than in echoes. It is distinctly possible that the stories as now constituted
represent a later, and literal, interpretation ofc omplex symbolic materials.
Vedic hymns, on the whole, are composed in an elliptical style that
demands great ingenuity on the part of the listener to recall the elided
reference. The text oft he Krpa birth myth is written in a simple descriptive
style that seems to spell out each detail; it is also written in common floka
meter with an abundance oflong compounds which suggest composition in
the Classical Sanskrit style.•• Since the celibacy ofw arriors is not stressed in
the later Hindu tradition, the connection between the diminishment oft he
skill in weaponry and erotic activity should be examined. Indra's ploy with
Gautama is to send a celestial woman, possibly a virgin (devalcanyii), to
tempt the seer." The divine female is also called an apsaras in her encounter
with Gautama. An apsaras is a class of female divinity. They reside in the
" l!g Vt<ia, 1.52.7, 8.
" Mary Carroll Smith, ''The Mabibhiraia's Con:," JAOS, vol. 95, no. 3, (1975), 479ff.
" Wendy DoniF O'Flahcny, Asuti<ism lllttl Ero/Uimr in lite Mytllo/oc of SU.. (London:
Oxflird° U"" n' i" v' e nity Prcta, 1973), pp. 42-52. While citing the J.Uyaip\ga story, O'f1aherty refers
to the as "the prostitute."
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
EPIC PARTHENOGENESIS 89
sky. "They arc very fond of bathing, can change their shapes and arc
endowed with superhuman power." They "arc usually described as the
servants of Indra, who when alarmed by the rigorous austerities of some
mighty sage, sends down one of them to disturb his penance, and her
mission is generally successful." 16
"Create an impediment to his austerities," Indra tells the apsaras, who is
called Jiilapacli. The name means literally "web-footed." "No doubt in
origin an aquatic bird."" The Vedic apsara, UrvaSi "is a water bird,
discovered by her husband among other water birds."" When Jiilapacli
goes to the hermitage in the forest she is wearing a single garment.
Gautama is described as carrying his bow and arrows. At first sight, he
stares; his bow and arrows drop; he shivers. Verse ten says that his wisdom
and his austerity enabled him to stand still, but verse eleven records that
Gautama's semen had been discharged even though he was not aware ofi t.
Gautama leaves the hermitage and the apsara. His seed then falls into a recd
bed (farastambt). Van Buitenen translates 'reed bed" as "recd stalk", but
the compound connotes the clump of reeds rather than the single stalk of
white grass or recd used to make arrows (Jara). The distinction is important
to the latter discus.!ion (cf. below p. 93) of the symbolic female presence in
the containers for the spilled seed. The seed divides into two when it falls
into the clump ofr ecd, and thus twins arc born to Saradvat Gautama. One
oft he twins is a girl, KrpI, and she is mentioned in the Drotta myth because
she is found by Drol)a as his wife when he wants "to obtain a son"
(Mahabharata 1.121.12).
"One realizes the importance of the concept of twinship on the level of
abundance, vitality, and fecundity. By common agreement among a great
number of peoples, the birth of twins is the sign and token of all these
things."" Thus, even enhanced fertility is attributed to the male conceiving
in himself alone. The account oft he birth ofG autama's children, Krpa and
Krpi, contains no details beyond the statement that they were born from
Gautama's seed which had split in two when it fell into the recd bed. The
nurture of the children is also unexplained except for the account of their
being found by the king's attendant. "Seeing bows and arrows about them,
as well as black antelope skins, he judged that they were the children of
a brahmin who was also adept at the mysteries of weaponry." The king
" V.S. Aptt, Tiit PraaWJ StwkriJ Diltimaty (Poona: Prasad Prakashan, 1957), pp. 16+-65.
" Van Buitcncn, Tiil Ma4il>Jlira1a Tiit Book of tlte &gimillg, vol. 1 (Chiago: Uni\IU1ity of
Oiicago Press, 1973), no1c on p. 459.
" O'Flah<rty, W-. p. 181.
" Georga Dumml, Arckaic R-Rtlipn, vol. I (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1970), p. 252.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
90
MARY CARROLL
S~llTH
raises the twins. Gautama identifies the children to the king; he then
teaches his son, Krpa, "the fourfold art of archery, the many different
weapons, and the secret lore in its entirety." l 'he myth ends with the
statement that Krpa became a great teacher of archery who taught
the DhlirtarliHras, the Plir;u;lavas, the Vr,;r;iis, and other nobles. The
Mahiibhiirata, as we know it, has several references to Krpa's function as
archery teacher, but it is Dror;ia who is the actual teacher of both the sons of
Piir;it;lu and in the epic stories ( Mahiibhiirnta 1.122, 123). The
Dhrtarli~fra
lead-in to Krpa's birth story indicates that the king entrusted his sons to
Krpa so that he would teach them ( 1.119\. At the end of the Bharata war.
Krpa is appointed the preceptor of Ar:juna Par;i<;lava 's grandson, Parik~it
(Mahabharata 17.1.13), but, again, there is no storv in the prcs<'nt text to
illustrate the reference.
The birth of the Kuru archery prec('ptor. Dror.ia, is abo accon1plisht>d
through male partht>nogenesis. Like Krpa, his birth is linkrd to weaponry.
knowledge of the Vedas, and the appraran<'t' of the rnystrrious ft·mak who
stimulates his father, Bharadvaja. to Thr birth ston· is told
t~jaculatc.
succinctly. The:- sloka verse is of the utmost sin1plicitv:
mahar.ris tu bhariidvajo hai:irdhi"me caran pura /
dadar.iiipsarasam siik~ad ghrtiiclm iipluliim rfi~ Ii I. I :2 I .3
Indra does not figure in the story, and tht· app<'aran<'r of thr apsara.<,
Ghrtlici, may be related to Bharad,·aja 's arti,·ity in the· soma shed;
"havirdhiina: an area of the sacrificial terrain whC're the utC'nsils for the Sorna
Sacrifice were kept."20 1'.·lacdoncll gi,·es as \'cdic meanings for hn1•irdlui11a:
"n. (receptacle of the offering), the car for con,.<',·i11g the Soma plants to b,·
pressed; light shed for housing the Sorna cars." and an Epir n1<'aning.
"place ofs acrifice.'"' If Bharad\'aja is consiclcn·d more 1han a rustodian of
sacrificial equipment and recognized as a practi1in1H·r of th!' sacrifice.
.\t1111a
then the second halfo f the sloka may br interpreted as a n1ystical statcrn<'n t
of the soma vision. n The nan1e oft he apsaras, Ghrtari. has connl'<'tions the
10
soma sacrifice as commemorated in the f!g Ved11. The sacrificial spoon or
ladle for ghee (clarified or melted butter\ is called .f.!hrliiri." In the birth
story of Dror;ia, then, the apsaras· name could carry a weightit'r snnholic
meaning than its onomastic drriYations.
~·1 \ 'an Buitcnfn. \"tll. I, 459.
" ~lanlondl. p. 376.
"7 (~f. R. Gor<i01t \\';_-t'i.'Sflfl, .~onuJ: Dil'int .\fu,h1,-111n1 •!f /,,n111•rt11/1{) · ;\c\\ ,.\)rk: ~l.trf••1tl"l. IJr,1l 1.·
& \\"orld. lnr.. 19(i8i. p. 10.
l, ~l::t('d()llt'JI. p . 89. ~faC'd(Hl('IJ r)ll(~ ('lllpha~i~ (1t) (I. IHl(l' tl1;1! th(' l111llc'r ''ha1' ttll•l<'Ci'0 ,!!_flttlf,
:
he indiratf'!' al"o 1nra.n~ "13.t ! =fl·rtility ." ( '.t: :ii!•<• (~1.1.;..:111:111, ~1. 4:?">. ''h11 (!i\'('~ 1lu· li1c·1.1l
m<·a11i11~ <•f thr t·c,mp<)Unct a:- .. d" R11lltr ::.11~1'11v,,1r/t."
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
91
Bharadvaja sees the apsaras "in person," or even "in the flesh." The
apsaras ha.<; bathed (iiplutiim), whidi van Buitenen glosses as "after the
menses." His gloss could be ('arrying a negative sense, taken from Western
Biblical tradition, ofa femak·s mandatory purification before contact with
the male. "\.Vhen a woman has a discharge, her discharge being blood from
her body, she shall remain in her impurity seven days; whoever touches her
shall be unclean until evening .. .,, The law of uncleanness, "You shall put
the Israelites on guard ag;iinst their uncleanness, lest they die through their
uncleanness by defiling .\ly 'Tabernacle which is among you," (15.31)
applies equally to ntcn who "have an emission of semen." In my opinion,
however, the bathing has a positive element ofd ivine fecundity, archetypal
in the Jungian st"nse, which may be carried along unwittingly in the myth
of male parthenogenesis. While the divine female is specifically associated
with the water in the Dror:ia myth, in the Krpa myth the association with
water is found only indirectly in Jalapadi's name. The water reference
n·<"alls ancient Goddess traditions:
The mrs1ery oflife lies in water. in oceans, deep seas, lakes or rivers. Gods
are born from water. Dionysus comes from water, as do the Bird Goddess,
Athena, or Aphrodite .... To the and philosophers of ancient Greece
~ts
water was the primordial element, able to produce life, stimulate its growth
and nunure it with damp warmth. This concept oft he genesis of the universe
frclm an elemental aqua-substance surely extends back in time to the
:-.;eolithic-Chalcolithil' era."
i ·he Vedic substratum of the epic myths also contains abundant references
to life emerging from water. '"fhough goddesses are not important to the
Rg
Veda, ·women are--important as things to be possessed, like cattle.
Fluids of all kinds are in many ways 'female;' they are the materials of
regeneration, the moist, Dionysian element, whether they flow in the veins
of men or of women. "16 There is little doubt that in the larger lndic mythic
context, rivers and other bodies of water retain the female or goddess
archetype. In the present text. however, the goddess has no specific
function except as stimulant to flharad,·aja' s creativity when her garment
liln1'' in the wind.
:t\\'<I\
I .:· . 1.~I·· l'f \ i:·!• 111•f tf11· g•ltl<f,·~ .. i:-- 1·11(.ltl~l1 t<> ~ll'<)lt~t· tll<' ~rc:a1 '<.'<.'r. ·1·hc
,., ·1 ! :1•:11: •·.:; 1: ,I ~11·· i:'!•.1 1· ~i•'l• · I~ IJ<Jrt1 i11 lt1t· \11111{1 \:lt d1u~1;·\. \\'ltt'ft'
.
.. , ' . I , ;
.
.
\ ' .\' ;.I l,fll!.111: .. 1•, ; ' • I • ~: •,.''" •,
.,- , , t1 ..
• I I, .. 11 1 •', , , ,.,.,, ,
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
92
MARY CAllROLL SMITH
his father had placed the seed:
The male substance, semen, is ritually combined with the female creative
fluid, millt, not in an explicit description of the birth process (which is never
directly discussed in the I.lg Veda) but in the metaphor oft he Soma ritual ....
Seed is equated not only with milk but with Soma; and this Soma in later
ritual is replaced by ghee, butter, which is churned out of milk just as, in the
I.lg Veda, the Soma juices are often said to be churned or milked from the
ocean ... that is, from the Soma vats metaphorically regarded as an ocean."
The Dro1,1a birth myth contaim a wealth of interpretive possibilities
compressed, Vedic style, into three ilokas. The whole soma setting for the
miraculous birth of the Great Warrior needs investigation once the epic
texts reveal the meam of relating Vedic and Epic traditions in such ways
that caste scparatiom can be surmounted. The nurture ofDro1,1a is limited
to his learning the Vedas with all their branches including weaponry, and
to his imtruction by the illustrious Agnivc$ya in the iigneya weapon. "The
word agnioe.rya meam 'related to (or born from) the fire hall', appropriate
enough for Dro1,1a himsclf."2•
Thus, the parthenogenic birth ofDro1,1a, like Krpa's, is directly related
to the possession of the secret lore ofw eaponry. The birth of the War God
Skanda is the third case ofm ale parthenogenesis in the epic. Two versions
ofSkanda's birth occur: one in Book Three, and the other in Book Nine.
Van Buitenen gives the following summary in the introduction to his
translation in Book Three:
The most striking aspect ofKumara's myth [from the point of view of his
sonhood he is Kumara, the "Boychild;" as son of Rudra he seems to be
Skanda, the "Hopper;" as son of the Pleids he is Karttikeya;] is the
(.ti'~)
devious way in which he is born. The most persistent trait is that he is, the son
of Fire, and if fatherhood is claimed for Rudra-Siva it is conceded this God
had assumed the guise ofF ire. While his father is fairly well established, he has
a surfeit of mothers. The lint "real" mother is Sviha, the personification of
a sacrificial call, sviiM!, cried at certain oblations. This word, though an
interjection, can be interpreted as a feminine noun, and its exclusive
association with the sacrificial fire apparently encouraged the idea of
a romance between Svaha and Fire .... Fire falls in love with the chaste wives
of the Seven Seen, and the lovesick Svaha assumes the shape of six of these
wives-Arundhati excepted-to coax out Fire's semen. She collects the
spilling and takes it to the mountain Sveta in the shape ofa Garuc;la bird; from
the six portions of semen Kumira takes shape, in dfect without benefit of
" Ibid., p. 24.
• Van Buitenen, vol. I, 459. On 121.5 "The lordly Agnivciya, etc.: the authenticity of this
line is rather doubtful; it to be inspired by 1.122.20, where Droo;iadeclares that his iucher
1CetnS
was Agniveiya."
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
EPIC PARTHENOGENESIS 93
mother, and thus joins latterly the procession of great men who have
assuredly fathers but hardly a mother [E.g., Dror;ta, born from a trough;
Krpa, from a reed stalk; Aga.stya, from a jar.]"
For some reason, van Buitcncn overlooked the account ofSkanda's birth
in Book Nine (9.43}. He says, "Obviously there were more stories: the
motherhood oft he Ganges, in which, according to parallel accounts of the
myth, Siva poured his seed, is not recorded in the Mahabhii.rata; nor is the
recd bed that elsewhere figures in his conception-and-birth. "50 The myth,
as it is related in Book Nine, contains the Ganga episode as well as a version
of Skanda's relation to the Krtittikis who first sec him "in a recd bed"
(Jarastambt}. While the story in Book Nine lacks the romance of the stories
in Book Three, the male parthcnogcnic clements arc highlighted and
a deeper symbolic relation of the birth of the War God to the genesis of the
warriors Dro1,1a and Krpa is made more accessible for analysis.
The story of Kumara/Skanda's birth is the prelude to the story of his
investiture as general of the army of the Gods which vanquished the
Daityas. The narration of the investiture begins with the statement that
MihcSvra's Ujas, energy/seed fell into a blazing fire which was not able
to bum it:
T tjo maJuivaram skannarn agnau prapatitam pura /
11 •
lal sarvabhakio bhagtwan Miakad dagdhum ak/ayam
ttna.sldati ujasui diptiman hal!JavavahanalJ /
na caiva dhii.rafamii.sa garbliam Ujomayam lada /I '
sa gangam abliisamgamya niyogad bralimarµJ}J prabliu: I
11
garbham aliitavan diliYam bhii.skaropam.tUtjasam
I
alha gangapi tam garbham asahanti uidhii.ral}e /
/I '
ulsasarja girau ra"!)lt liimavatyamariirciu
sa talra vaurdlit lokiiniiurtya jvalaniitmaja: /
dadt;Jur jvalaniilcaram tam garbham atlia /a:llika: /I '"
Jarastambe mahii.lmOnamanalatmajam i.fvaram I
/I
mamayam iti ta: sarva: putrarlliinyo 'bliicakramu:
(Sa/ya Parvan 9.43}
The critical edition uses the word ujas instead of relas, which does occur in
two manuscripts as the introductory word ofv erse six. However, there are
no variants for the use of ttjas in verses seven and eight. "The Pura1,1as use
ttjas, fiery energy, as a euphemism for semen.""
,. Van Buitenen, vol. 2,
20~206.
• Ibid., p. 206.
w.,,,.,.,
" O'Flahcrty, p. 55.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
94
MARY CARROLL SMITH
In verse six the tejas is described as skannam, "leaping" or "spurting."
The same word is used of the "drop" from Mitra and Varul)a in Q.g Veda
7 .33.11. Several epic texts show a reading of skandam. In the Skanda birth
story of Book Nine, there is no indication of the cause of the flow of Siva's
energy, and the absence of an apsaras is noteworthy. The Fire cannot con
tain the force within himself and throws it into the river, Ganga. She can
not contain such energy either and throws it onto the mountain Himavat
(verse nine). The text says thatjvalaniitmajah, the son oft he Fire, or perhaps
"the one who is self-begotten in the Fire," grew there. The word garbha is
used in each of the verses from seven through ten to describe the entity that
Agni and Ganga could not sustain. The same word is used for the glowing
entity that the Krittikas see on the mountain. In verse eleven it is clear that
it is a male child in the reed bed. Although the usual meaning of garbha is
womb, in the Skanda story of Book Nine it has the multiple meanings of
foetus, embryo, and new-born child. The six Krittika goddesses "who
desire a son" cry out, "He's mine," and then vie to nurse the child. Several
reactions to the new-born are recorded. The fact that the text says that
there is a mental vying among Siva, Piirvati, Ganga, and Agni as to whom
the child will honor first, indicates the presence ofP arvati, although she has
not appeared previously in this version of the myth.
As in Buddha's birth story, and some of the Christian Apocrypha, the
birth ofSkanda causes natural wonders to appear in the world. Himavat is
transformed into gold and the whole Earth appears beautiful as it holds the
Child on her lap, so to speak. Among the divine attendants at his birth:
"The Vedas assuming a fourfold form, approached the child with joined
hands. The Science of arms, with its four divisions, and all the weapons, as
also all kinds ofa rrows, came to him. "32 This reference creates the essential
link to the Dror;ia and Krpa myths. Not only is Skanda the War God, but
like Drol)a and Krpa he has immediate access from birth to the arts of
weaponry.
The three male parthenogenic myths bring together an interlocking
pattern involving: (I) ascetic austerity which creates and intensifies energy
(tejas) or heat (tapas); (2) the sexual and creative potency of that hot energy
in itself; and (3) the extraordinary prowess in military exploits that the
harnessing of that energy can produce. l'hc birth of the \.Var God from the
ascetically controlled energy of Siva which dropped into the Fire gives the
rr1otif of Fire meeting Fire. ("\\le only live, only suspirr / Consumed by
"'~ 'l'hr .\fahQhhiirata rr. u1ldc:r tht 1la1t1f of Pratap C:handra Re,1~·. v()I. ,·i. ,(:alrutta: Datta
Bost· & Co .. 1926 .. S<'<'tion XI.I\'. 39{.
Google Origiral frcn1
019111zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
95
k:PIC PARTHENOGt:Nf.SIS
either fire or fire.") 99 Confrontations between fire and fire become a source
ofe laborate play in Sanskrit kal!)'a. The adjective dvijanman "twice born" is
used ofA gni in the f!.g Veda. Agni, like Skanda is a "child ofd ouble birth." 94
Agni and Skanda arc both credited with two birth places. It is said that
Agni is first born in the fire sticks and then born in the consecration.
Skanda's birth story uses the "twice-born" motif in several variations
which may be the result of the coalescence of multiple mythic versions on
the birth of the War God.
The first instance of a "twice-born" situation is the Fire (Siva) to Fire
(Agni) transmutation. The second instance is Fire (Agni) to Water
(Ganga). "The image of fire placed in water is used throughout Indian
mythology to express the control of indestructible excess energy. Although
in Western thought water brought to fire usually results in the extinction of
fire, in India the fire almost always emerges intact from the combination,
merely controlled or transformed . ..." 3s The Skanda birth story has
a third transformation when the embryo moves from the Ganga to the
mountain Himavat. In this episode the coming oft he child to the mountain
causes it to be transformed into gold, and "it is for this reason that
mountains arc producers of gold." It is certainly within the realm of
possibility that the myth combines elements related to the fire used in the
melting ofm etals, in the forging ofw eapons, and in the spiritual build up of
tejas or the more familiar tapas needed for the "knowing" of the secret lore in
any field.
Mircea Eliade asserts that shamanic seers, warriors, and smiths form an
interrelated group because each possesses magico-religious accomplish
ments in respect to fire:
From the viewpoint of the history of religion. these different accomplish
ments show that the human condition has been abolished and that the
shaman, the smith or the warrior participate, each on his own plane, in
a higher condition. For this higher condition can be that of a God, that of
spirit, or that of an animal. The respective initiations, though following
different paths, pursue the same end- to make the novice die to thr human
condition and to resuscitate him to a new. a transhurnan exi,tenrc-. 'ia111ralh·.
in military initiations tht i11iti.tt<)r\ cl··~llh j, It·>.:- c·l•'.tfl\ ' l'l'TI ti1:111 i11 ... ~• .•, ,1.tllf'
initiations, sirlCf' the \••a l'ri1>r·s 1>rirt< i1>~1J c•r(J1-.tl l«•11,1:-1' t.>rt·t 1,,.1, 111 \ ·lli•j111:-l1·
irtg his ad\1r.rsar~-. 8t1L 11<' t·111r1gc!'t f11>111 ll1t· 1.i<i,·.11 ,.1\ 11•!11.1;' 1••1:, l1\
btcomirl~ ll<. . <1 tc<I a 1t(I <t 11;1i11 i11c 11 • t ttr I 1 « "'1·1 k•·r f111 \ ~ ~ 1t l; .r 1,,:1 1 t1.1 \ • ·, ; •• • ~ .
,.,!,.·'· /' ·" · .... ,·
1 ' 'f.S. Elic>t. "l,.otir (.l,t1ar1t'I'. l.•t1lc· ( .11l(lt1ll!:~ I 1,, ' . I
Harcourt, Bra(·c and (A1rnpa11~-. 1~1:>.! I' ! t-1.
')4 (;ras.lirnanr\, p. ()51. l!..1!. l«·,/11 I.•••• I. J ! 111 ·~: I 11'• I
:J) O'tlahrr1~-. .l1t,.tifi,,n. :!HI~ u;.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
96
MARY CARROLL SMITH
death to the human conditioru. He who obtairu magical heat vividly
demorutratcs that he belongs to a superhuman world.,.
While Eliade argues that the shaman, smith, and warrior's use of fire
causes a participation in a "higher condition" according to a hierarchy
("each on his own plane"), he nonetheless asserts a unified goal for all
three. In India, the "knowing" is the highest aspiration. "Knowing" is at
once physical, mental, and spiritual attainment in the present life. The
single goal of the shaman, the warrior, and the smith is "transhuman"
existence from which rebirth results during the initiatory process. The
burden of the doctrine of rebirth to the later Hindu tradition should be
studied in the context of the warrior cult. Since the "warrior's principal
ordeal consists precisely in vanquishing the adversary," it follows that the
rebirth signified is accomplished in this life. Thus the connection between
the Vedic Aryans concept of themselves as "twice born" and the male
parthenogenesis myths is not too difficult to discover once the male
bonding of warriorhood is called to mind.
Birth without the aid of a mother is a commonplace in male initiation
rites. Initiations at puberty, as well as the initiations for entrance into
a secret society, and the initiation requisite for obtaining a higher religious
status seem to share "a sort of structural common denominator. 7 The
"S
male dominance of religion in India is rooted in the assumptions ofs ecret
lore known only to the males. The exclusion of women from the rites of
initiation goes without saying. Male birthing can be seen as the ultimate
statement of total power in the universe. The psychological factors that
demand such a mythic statement are entwined in the spiritual and political
values of the male bands. The fact that in the days of Inda-European
expansion, the captured females were a primary source of booty cannot be
over-looked when examining the negligible role of women in Indic
religions. The absence of the mother in the male parthenogenesis myths is
an exaggerated statement of a view of women as hindrances to spiritual
attainment and as totally dispensable even in the area of mothering.
Tiu Mah4bliiirata, with all its interest in paternity, is largely indifferent to
motherhood. Rare arc the passages where the mother reveals herself as the
loving nurse or makes any demands on her sons. After having made herself
useful as a wife by becoming a mother, the woman seems to recede from
view.''
ef
,. Miroea Eliadc, Rita and Symbols /niJiab4n (New York: Harper T orchboolu, 1958), ~7.
" Ibid., p. 3.
• Van Buitcnen, vol. 2, 206.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
EPIC PARTHENOGENESIS 97
Great Warrion like Droi;ia and Krpa have absolutely no trace of contact
with the feminine either in their birth or in their nurture. It should be small
wonder that they would be celebrated as possesson ofi nvincible weaponry
that fueled the ferocity of ancient heroes.
The behaviour of the lndo-European warrior bands offers certain points of
resemblance to the secret fraternities of primitive societies. In both alike, the
memben of the group terrorize women and non-initiates and in some sort
exercise a "right ofr apine," a custom which, in diluted form, is still found in the
popular traditions of Europe and the Caucasus."
Mircea Eliade has shown the strong bonds that exist among shamans,
smiths, and warrion because of their concerns with techniques and
mystiques of fire. "The Sanskrit tenn tapas finally developed the sense of
ascetic effort in general, but its original meaning was extreme heat. "40 The
heat oft apa.s is at once both internal and external, spiritual and physical. It is
built up by restraint (yoga, discipline) which in turn releases extraordinary
power:
This sacred power, which causes both the shaman's heat and the heating oft he
warrior, can be transformed, differentiated, given various colorings, by sub
sequent efforts. The Indian word Kratu, which had begun by denoting the
"energy peculiar to the ardent force and ardor, courage,lovcofcombat," and by
extension power and majesty in general, finally came to mean the "force of the
rta
pious man, which enable him to follow the prescriptions of and to attain
happiness. "•1
Eliade's scn.se that what was originally warrior-centered effort "finally came to
mean 'the force oft he pious man'" may be close to the historical and political
reality of the loss ofs piritual ascendancy by the warriors ofa ncient India. The
MaMMiiraJa, however, affords countless examples that may hdp to reconstruct
the warrior. basis of a great portion of the Indian spiritual systems.
Asceticism is the key to the procurement ofi nvincible weapons in several
myths of the epic other than the male parthenogenesis stories. Arjuna
Pa1;u;lava's yogic concentration gives him access to Siva and the ultimate
weapon, PiifupaJa, which had been used to slay the Daityas (Malaiibharata
7.57.19). Arjuna's early visit to the realm of his father, Indra, in order to
obtain weapons is so elaborate in its classical Sanskrit style that it is only
by oblique references that we find Arjuna's capability to "see the Gods" is
caused by his austerities (tapasa: 3.37.28). Arjuna's birth is a celebrated
example of female parthenogenesis. Under a curse that prevents him on
• Eliade, p. 83.
40 Ibid., p. 86.
" Ibid.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
98
.\IARY CARROLL ~~llTH
pain of death from lying with a woman, the king practices austerities to
obtain a son through his wife's power to conceive by thinking of a
~ud.
Par;u;lu requires Kun ti to think on Indra, and in preparation she joins hi1n
in the practice of austerities. After she keeps a year-long vow and
undertakes "awesome austerities," Indra responds that he will give Par.u;lu
a son who will destroy all his enemies. At the birth ofA rjuna the sky opens,
a voice promises that he will obtain all celestial weapons, and then
a pageant ofc osmic wonders takes place. The presence ofa n actual mother
who finds favor with the god through austerities and thus produces a world
savior has many elements that contrast with the male parthenogenesis
myths. In the male myths, the presence of the female is a hindrance to
austerities and the birth of the savior takes place without human contact.
Non-womb birth may be the ultimate statement of male exclusivity and
total supremacy. Psychoanalytic criticism points out that 1he substitute
birth place such as ajar, trough, or water pot arc actually fcrnak syrnbols.
'fhe birthplace ofKrpa in the recd bed is the niost difficult to associatt' with
the cluster of goddess syn1bols. \Vhik it is 1ruc that reeds grow in a 111;irshy
place, and that water niay be the prin1al syn1bol of the goddess,''' i1 would
seem that the recd bed as the actual source of arrows was used with
intentional symbolic C'Ontent for a warrior n1y1h. 'fhe warrior connection
underlying the parthcnogenic: births of sa,·iors or seers with hun1an
mothers should also be ronsidcred. ·rhe hu111an 11101hcr may be a goddt'ss
syn1bol but the political intention oftfl(· niyth ofit'n redurfs lu·r 10 the role:
of "container."
"fhe relationship of parthe11ogc::1wsis to 1ht' birth of heroes or sa,·iors is
auested in niany ancient cuhurl's. '!'he birth of.Jesus Christ is accon1plishcd
without the conjunction of sexual gan1c1cs \Lukf 1.30-38.:. G<•tarna
Buddha's birth stoq-. as told by :\:i,·aghosa. ha~ sr\'eral panhc11oge11i<:
dc111c11ts. "'Buddhas naturally being born in a sup1T11atural way ... 1hc
Buddha "'as born fret' fron1 th<' ordinan· ddik1ncn1' of hinh."""' 'f'hc later
,
tradition ""'1ns to ha'T cxp;111ck <l 1he panhi:nogcnir tk tail,."
~vlahaya11;1
·1·11t~ rt:.11 <)f ~1l:tdC)\\' prt·:-.l'llt'l' • .J. ;1 lfLtltt'f fitaL<fC' j:, :JIJ1lc•)t aJ,, .1\ :-. g i,·1·11
... : .• :~.!I' Ill' •.. ;.,,l i11 tfll' f;·., . ,f, . . . ,,. . !,,.,, ., •.••. , j. Ill ' !~l ,. ti!I·· ,, ... ... ,,.1, .. .
•. I 1
. •. . .
". 11
.
. •
.
• .
. '.
' I
1. 1. . . . .
.
.. . .. . .. .
.. :. 1: •.• : .. , :· .. ~· .• : {,
.:c .· .... ....: :
.
. .
~ .
.. ' .. .. • . • ... . ~· 11.; ..• 1 · .. . . 1: 1' •• •• ' .;· ••• •• ,, • •• 1. ... 1• • ·' ' : ••• •
.
. .
t.:. , ... ,)' .',,
- •• '• ' ,,..._ ,; ,., I• • ' ''' ' • .- l .. . : . . : ... :., l 't , .. " .
.
. . ·..
' . . ·• . ' ....
~
. . t. . . ....
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
EPIC: PARTHENOGENESIS 99
unbearable suffering without comment. Indra is said to have been in his
n1other's womb a thousand months and many autumns (4.18.4). The
Chinese sage Lao Tzu was conceived "some sixty two years before when his
mother had admired a falling star, and after so many years in the womb, he
was able to sptak as soon as he was born."•' The parthenogenic power of
Zeus is se<>n as an altcrnati,·e to the f<>rnale cntircly:
Zeus to Dionysius:
Enter now life's Sl·cret portal, rnotherlcss niystery;
Lo, I break mine own body for thy sake: . . ..
Co1ne enter this, my male womb.••
\-Vhik miraculous birth without tht aid of a mother occurs in the
complicated Greek myths concerning the birth of Athena from Zeus, the fact
that Zeus swallowed his wife, ~tetis, who was about give birth to Athena,
creates a case of male parthenog<>nesis dependent on the female for uterine
g<>station. "A myth in which Zeus swalowed a wife enabled the Athena myth
to be rationalized, to the extent that she could be provided with a mother.
(In the earlier stage the male seed sufficed for procreation .... )"47 What is
meant by an "earlier stage" to the Hesiod commentator is the birth myth of
a Hittite weather god, Kumarbi. Like Kuntis son Kan_ia, Athena is also
traditionally said to ha,·e be<>n born fully armcd.•8 The male parthenogenir
myths of the A4ahiibhiirata provide what may be a hermeneutic key
mis.~ing
not only to the accounts of parthenogeneic birth in the l"aoist, Buddhist,
Hindu, and Chrisrian religions, but to the stories of ancient Greece and
Rome as well. Saviors are not dependent on maternal sources for their
potency. They are born with predestination to power.
"f"he underlying unity of parthenogenic myths is not easy to see even in the
epic itself. If the texr in Book Thr<>e or Puranic versions ofSkanda's birth
are used as the basis for int<>rpretiv<> analysis, there is almost no m<>ntion
of military concerns. \Vithout the warrior purpos. .. surely rooted in ancienl
cu hi<" pracli<"es. lh<' myths d<>g,.ncrate into lit<>rarv pieces. oftl'n with a type of
sporting an1i-fcn1ale <>n1phasis. Ont reason for this nlay be that ancient cu Irie
•$ Hoh1u..; \\'t·lt h. ·r,,,,;,,,, H\'"l<•n: Bc·:u·1111 1'1•·~--. l<1f)ti, l'· I.
.,. Jan(' F.llrn Harri~'"· t.pit11,r.11mt1Ja In !ht .~·111~r f!/'(;,,,k R1/i,t,i1111 fCan1l>ridctt~. i-:n~land: "Jlir
L1ni\'rr.;it)· Prr~si. p. 33.
" Ht.<iod. Thr<>gnnr. <'<I. M.L. \V..,.t <Oxford: Thr Clarrndon Pn.,... 1%61. p. -l()J. Cf. vr"'""
886-990; 924-26. ;\otrs. pp. 4111- 13. S•·r al"' lrxt <'Cl. and tr. by Hu~h l.. Evrlyn-\\"hi1t·
1(:0mbridgr. ~1a"arh11sr11<: Ha"·ard Uni\'rf'itv Pr«<.<. 19"4'. pp. H:l-45.
.e \.\1n t, p. 412, commr111af')' on line 9~4. ":\lt hc>t1gl1 tht• fi>U(J\ .. · i11~ lines c1111>l1asizf .. .\ 1h rna ·s
\\'a rlikt tC."mpc·r;1mrn1. it j,. nr•t <'Xf)licit I)· o;aic-l 1l 1a I -.ht~ \\'a:> lwln1 full\' annt'(I. S1c·i;.i«hf,r•1S is ~;tid t• 1
ha\'<' l)f'rn the- fif(;I 10 n·~'(Jfrl thi" <lc•t;\il."
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
100 MARV CAllROLL SMITH
symbols and metaphon come to be taken in a literal sense in later or
non-cultic settings:
A myth may degenerate into an epic legend, a ballad or a romance, or survive
only in the attenuated form of 'supcntitions,' customs, nostalgias, and so on; fur
all this, it loses neither its csacnce nor its significance. ... But the patterns
that have come down from the distant past never disappear; they do not
lose the possibility of being brought back to life ...
The three talcs of male parthenogenesis help to bring some of the ancient
Aryan qatriya spirituality back into view. The purpose ofr econstructing the
warrior codes is to examine the ancient texts for sources oft he distinctive world
view that the Aryans brought to India. Such a reconstruction will also help to
show the reasons for a residue of a warrior out-look in the Indian religious
tradition. As the Brahmanic tradition grew intellectually, religiously and even
politically dominant, warrior cult declined; the vitality oft he old warrior talcs
waned. Brahmanization oft he epic may be one source oft he loss oft he warrior
connection to spiritual prowess, but the epic, as presently constituted, retains
strong evidence ofa rchaic warrior motifs which go back to the V cdic soma cult
and the era of Aryan cxpamion in North India.
.. Mirtta Eliadc, Paumu in ComfNlraliDe &ligilm (New York: New American Library, 1958),
431-32.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
TWO THREE FOUR
K~$~AS, K~$~AS, K~$~AS,
MORE
~$~AS:
DARK INTERACTIONS IN THE MAHABHARATA
ALF HILTEBEITEL
In a recent essay on Arjuna and Knr:ia as the "two Knr:ias on one
chariot",1 I endeavored to update a discussion begun in my book The
Ritual ofB attle'- on the subject ofi nteractions between the different figures
in the MaMhharata who are given the name or epithet Kor:ia/Knr:ia,
"black". The essay suggests that it is in particular in his destructive
collaboration with Kor:ia on the war chariot that Arjuna is identified as
a second Knr:ia, and that further, in carrying out his destructive role, he
evokes affinities with the Siva of the pralaya. It is important now to look
back at the total configuration of heroes and heroines who bear this same
name.
For one thing, as already noted in the same article, they have
consistent theological affinites with the most august deities of the bhalcti
universe:' Knr:ia with Vi$nu, Arjuna with Siva, Draupadi with the
Goddess, and- as Bruce Sullivan has obscrved- Vyasa (Krsna
Dvaipayana, the "Island-Born Knr:ia") with Brahma.• We will not enter
here into the problems attendent upon this interpretation of the role of
Vyasa, whom the epic in some possibly late passages identifies as a
"portion of Narayar:ia" (i.e., Vi$1)U}, other than to point out that
Brahma is himself a "portion of Narayar:ia", born from the lotus that
emerges from Vi$1)u's navel.) For Vyasa, as a "portion ofNarayar:ia", to
fulfill the Brahma-like role of "grandfather" (pitiimaluz) of the main epic
1 Sec Alf Hiltebeitel, "The Two Koi;ias on One Chariot: UpaniJadic Imagery and Epic
Mrthology", His11>ryefR.ligions, 24 (1984), pp. 1-26.
Tiil Rihul/ ef &uJe: Krisluia in tJre Maliiihliiirala (Ithaca: Cornell Univenity Press, 1976),
pp. 60- 76.
' Sec Madeleine Biardeau, thuks tk "'Jtliologi< hinJo.,, Vol. I, Co!1Mg...Us ~iiliil{IUS
Ecole
(Paris: Fran~a~ d'Extrime Orient, 1981), pa.sim.
' Sec Hiltebeitel, "Two Koi;ias on One Cha.riot", pp. 5-6, 23- 26; on Vylsa and
Bra.hmi, see Bruce Sullivan, "The Seer of the Fifth Vtda: Koi;ia Dvaipiyana in the
Maliiih/iiirata", Ph.D. diss., University ofC hicago, 1984, especially pp. 160-229.
' Sullivan and I seem to have each arrived at this point independently; sec his "Seer of
the Fifth Veda", p. 229.
Google Origiral frcn1
019111zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
102 ALF HILTEBEITEL
heroes and progenitor of the forces that usher in the "dark" kali age is
not incongruous, especially when one examines how he works these
things out in collaboration with the other "dark" figures: not only
Kni:ia, Draupadi, and Arjuna, but his mother Kali [another word for
"Black'']-Satyav atI.
Our main interest in this essay will be in the symbolic lexicon of dark
interactions between these figures. In weaving their story around them,
the epic poets occasionally make it clear that the names themselves may
be employed as means to indicate especially significant rapports. It is,
however, a guarded symbolism, subtly nuanced, and never over-used.
Indeed, as is most evident in the evocations of Arjuna and as the
Kr~i:ia
"two on one chariot", one has the impression that it is reserved to
K~i:ias
highlight specific images, themes, and scenes. The intent becomes
clearest in passages where the poets refer to two or all three of the Kni:ias
at once, juxtaposing the names against each other or combining them
together to heighten the dramatic and symbolic impact. Leaving aside
Arjuna and Kni;ia as the "two Knr:ias'', a theme which we have treated
elsewhere as extensively as possible,6 let us look at some of the passages of
this type. The discussion will follow the interplay of in terms of
Kr~r:ias
the remaining possibilities of their interaction: first Draupadi and
K~i:ia,
and then the three together. Examples of the remaining lexical pairings
of Arjuna solely with Draupadi, or of any of the others with Vyasa, were
not found'-a fact of possible significance since it may be proposed that,
as is the case with Arjuna, all of the others are called (or
Kr~i:ia K~r:ia)
primarily in terms of their relation to Kn r.1a.
I. Draupar/i and !Cr~'!a
Throughout the epic, there seem to be two main contexts in which
Draupadi and Knr:ia are doubly referred to as One is
Kr~r:ia/Knr;ia.
in connection with a theological conundrum. l'he other has a specific focus
in tht narrative.
The first concerns the ironies and theological puzzles involved in the
"love" triangle between Arjuna, and Draupadi. As "'as pointed
Kr~r~a.
•· St.~c in additin11 to my ··1·"''0 Kr~r.tas" artitlt" rny ''Brothrrst Frirnds. and Chariotcl'rs:
Paralltl Er1isodC'S in rhc lri~h and l11ctiat1 Epic-~··. in t:dgar PolomC, rd., ''Homage to
G<:<>r~<'' Dumrzil. . , ] •>umnl of '11do-Eumpran Studin. ~lonograph 3 ( 1982), pp. 85-111.
' 'l'hc.· d<'tt•rmination of ll)r~(' patttrr1.s }1as brcn arri,1rd a1 simply by checking all
rf'fC-rrnc·{':" lo Draupacll a~ Kr~•.15 a11d to 1hc· lllhc·r fi(!ttr('~ as Kr~1.1as in Sort'n SorensC'n, .4n
/11,/tx 111 tftt. \"am'' in tbt .\lnbti'1Jtarnt11 r ()1·lhi: ~fo1ilal Barl:t~icias~. 196'.l;.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
DARK INTERACTIONS IN THE MAHlBHllUTA 103
of
out in The Ritual Battle, the marriage of Arjuna and Draupadi "brings
up a problem of myth and epic: if Vi.$i;iu's consort is Sri-La)qmi, what is
Kni;ia's relationship with Draupadi, Sri incarnate" ,8 once she is married
to Arjuna and his brothers? The complexity of this question is enriched
now by our recognition of Arjuna's affinities not only with Indra but
with Siva.9 It would seem that insofar as Kni;ia and Vyasa are
implicated in arranging Draupadi's marriage to Arjuna, they do so not
only with an eye to arranging a "royal" marriage between the incarna
tions of Sri and Indra,10 but with the aim of carrying forward the
destructive implications of a union between the dark and fiery (fire-born)
Draupadi as a form of the Goddess, and the yogic and ascetic prowess of
Arjuna as a multiform of Siva.
With these "background" themes in mind, let us first note that it is
certainly the problematic of the "love" triangle that is evoked when
Satyabhimi, "Kni;ia's chief wife, circumambulated Kni;ii" (tam krfl1itci
kr~ cakiiriibhipradakfitµun; 3.224.16ab11 to thank Draupadi for
)
answering how she keeps five men in tow: "Tell me, 0 Paiicili, about
your glorious knowledge of female sexuality by which, 0 KnQi, Kni;ia
may always do as I wish" (mama iicakfva pa!lcaJi yafasyam bhagmitdanam /
yena krflll bhavmni17am mama krf11'1 vafanuga/J; 3.222. 7). And it is the same
undercurrent of triangular affections that lies behind the curious scene
where Draupadi flashes anger at Kni;ia for telling Yudhinhira that
Arjuna has one faulty mark on his body-his check bones arc a little too
high-that leads him to perpetual hardship (dulJlcha) and constant travels
on the roads: "But Kni;ia Draupadi looked askance at Kni;ia, angrily
(krf'JO tu draupadl krf1l4m And the slayer of Ke8i
tiryaksii.sMyamaik~ata).
[Kni;ia] approved her show of affection (pratµiyam)" (14.89.10). These
passages thus concentrate their references to Kni:ia and Kni:ia-Draupadi
in order to heighten the theological and mythological ambiguities
implied in their separate terrestrial tics of love and marriagc.12
The second context, which presupposes the destructive themes implicit
' See Hiltebeitel, RilvlJI of &ult, p. 83.
• See Hiltebeitel, "~iva, the Goddess, and the Disguises of the Pi114avas and Oraupadi"',
His1«7of 20 (1980), pp. 153- 168; idem, "Two Knoas on One Chariot", pp. 5-6,
Rtlig~.
19- 26.
•• See Hiltebeitel, Ri"'41 of Bauh, pp. 79-85.
" All MaMblliro14 ttferences are to the Poona Critical Edition (CE).
" Cf. 4.8.17-Draupadi introduces herself to Sudqol, queen of Matsya, at the
beginning of her period ofd isguise: "I have pleased Satyabhimi the beloved chief wife of
Knoa, and Knoi, wife of the Pio4avas, the unique beauty of the Kurus" (irOJltytuii
k•'""""'"'"""'"'".;"').
s"9Gb4'imiip kr"41.J'O ~ prifan I .tr~ "' bll.i~ "°'14""°1rl
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
104
ALF HILTEBEITEL
in the first, takes us to the heart of the epic narrative. Let us recall" a
passage which perhaps more than any other demonstrates that the
coincidence of names is of dramatic significance. Just before Knr;ia sets
off on his pre-war embassy to the Kuru court, a speech by Draupadi
concludes the Pir;idavas' vascillating deliberations over how Knr;ia
should represent them. Challenging Knr;ia to vent his wrath on the
Kauravas, Draupadi grasps her "deep blue/black mass of hair" (sun
"ilam ... keiapakfom) with her left hand: "And the lotus-eyed one of
elephant gait, having approached the lotus-eyed one, her eyes filled with
tcan, Knr;ii to Knr;ia said: ... 'unless I sec Dub$isana's dark arm
[bhig'01p cut off and covered with dust, what peace will there be
~]
in my heart"'? (5.80.33-39). The Sanskrit of the central descriptive
verse is clearly composed to confront the two figures in terms of thei.r
lotus-eyes put}l/JlrikOkfo) and dark names: plll]darikak
~. pad~
som upttyo gojogiimini / oinl.pU,,,e/csonii krl71i krwim voconamobrovil (35).
Moreover, their confrontation is framed by references to Draupadi's
"dark" hair and the "dark" arm of Dul;ISisana. This is of course an
allusion to the dragging of Draupadi's hair by in the
Du~isana
Kaurava sob/iii, and a further look at additional descriptions of that scene
will show that the passage just cited is not unique in employing such a
lexicon. For instance, when Knr;ia's embassy to the Kuru court has
ended with the recognition that war is inevitable, Knr;ia meets, before
returning to the Par;i(javas, with the Pir;i(javas' mother Kunti. The latter,
amongst her messages to her sons and daughter-in-law, tells Knr;ia (her
nephew): "O Midhava, say to that auspicious and glorious Knt;1a, 0
Knr;ia" (briiyii m4dluwa ko{1iillitp krmiim krwiyoJosuinlm) that she (Kunli) is
rankled not so much at the loss of the kingdom or the defeat at dice as
the recollection of "that great dark woman" (hrhatl f)liimii) weeping and
insulted in the sob/iii (5.135.11 and l 7a). Most importantly, the key scene
in the Sobliiiporvon also employs the same thematic lexicon: "Then he
[Dul)Sisana) said to her, having violently seized Knt;1a by her black
(krwi) hair: 'Cry out for protection of Knr;ia and to Hari and
Ji~r;iu,
Nara. I will still pull you'" (2.26.26).'4
One notes how the poets repeatedly reinforce the links between the
identical names by associating them with other "black" referents:
1 Stt Hiltebeitel, 11Draupadi's Hair'', in Madeleine Biardcau, ed., Avt.our dt la dltsse
'
hintlotu, in ~rtlut, 5 (1981), p. 199.
" "'"' 'br4111tt4'p f"4Sab/uup lligrhyo
kli"fU krf11<Pt 14da krlfOm
krl'14'1' "'jippap ca /uirilfl ""'4J!I ea
tri,,oyo uilcroJa na_,.;..i Jri ll>om (2.60.26)
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
105
DARK INTERACTIONS IN THE MAHABHARATA
Draupadi's hair, her dark complexion, Dubil.sana's arm. Furthermore,
without calling him Knl)a, the last two passages also evoke Arjuna. Just
after she has told Knl)a what to say to Draupadl, Kuno tells Kn1,1a to
urge Arjuna to "follow the path of Draupadi'' (draupadfab padMiip cara;
5.135.19).1 And Dul;l.iisana taunts Draupadi to call not only on Knl)a
)
or Bari, but or Nara, the latter being names primarily associated
J~t;1u
with Arjuna. 16
Furthermore, Dul;isisana's taunt at the hair-pulling is nearly identical
with one of the two main early "interpolated" verses that describe
Draupadi's prayer to Kn1,1a to rescue her at the time of her disrobing."
There, just as Dul;isasana begins to try to undress her, "Yajiiascni
[Draupadi] cried out to Knt;1a, Hari and Nara for protection
V~t;1u,
[krPJIJl!I ca ui.p}um ca haril(I nara111 ca/ trtu,aya vikrosah]. Then Dharma,
concealed, the magnamimous, having a multitude of garments, covered
her" (2.544•, notes). One will note the nearly exact correspondences
between Dul;iSasana's provocation, which the Critical Edition includes,
and Draupadi's actual plea, which it omits. The only variation is in the
second name, where contrasts with But a fair sample of
J~QU Vi~QU.
manuscripts haveJ~t;1u instead ofV~Qu in the disrobing speech as well.18
would certainly be the lectW. difficilior, so it is quite likely that these
J~1;1u
two verses were once fundamentally identical and meant to be con
nected. Both are also in the trflubli meter, which may indicate textual
antiquity.19 Such considerations raise questions, of course, about the
excision of one such verse from the Critical Edition and the selection of
the other. One could argue that Dul;isasana's provocative words make
most sense as an anticipation of an actual "original" pica by Draupadi
for help rather than as a coincidence, or an isolated verse seized upon at
some later stage of the text's development as the prototype for an
interpolation. In any case, the close verbal correspondence between the
one verse at the hair-pulling and the other at the disrobing provides an
epic foreshadowing of the persistent doubling of themes noticed in Bhan.a
NirayaQa's VtJ}i'-satpluira: the keJii.mbarakii.rfl»JD, "the pulling of the hair
and the garments". 20
" See other citations in Hiltebeitel, "Draupad!'s Hair'", pp. 200- 201.
" OnJ~1.1u as also an epithet for Siva, stt Hil1ebci1cl, "Two Kni;ias on One Chariot", p.
19.
" See Hiltebcitcl, "Draupadl's Garmenu", /,,,J1>-/raillll JormuJJ, 22 ( 1980). pp. 98- 101.
11 See the CE notes to this passage.
•• See Mary Carroll Smith, "The Core of India's Great Epic", Ph.D. diss., Harvard
Univenity, 1973, passim.
• See Hiltebeitel, "Draupadl's Hair'", p. 183.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
106
ALF HILTEBEITEL
2. K rVJD, Arj11111l, and Draupadi
There are many scenes where the interplay of Kor;ia, Arjuna, and
Draupadi is pivotal: Draupadi's SV'!)'IJl!lvara; Knr;ia's absence from the
dice match; his promise to Draupadi in the forest that she will once again
be the queen of kings; and more generally their mutually supportive
roles. The three also combine with the fourth Kor;ia Vyasa to convince
Yudhi$thira to abandon his guilt-ridden determination to renouce his
hard-won kingship after the war and to undergo his coronation. But
there are only a few instances where the epic poets play upon this
interplay in terms oftheir "dark" names. These instances are nonetheless
instructive.
Curiously, the two most concentrated passages, the only ones using the
term krVJD to refer to all three figures in brief connected passages, occur
in exchanges between Krpa and Duryodhana. If this is more than a
coincidence, I have no explanation for it.
First, in the ViriiltJparvan, Krpa addresses Duryodhana and the
Kauravas while their cattle raid has been arrested by the eunuch
Brhannac;lii, whom the Kauravas correctly suspect to be Arjuna: "On
reflection, an encounter with Partha [Arjuna] is not to our advantage.
Singly he rescued the Kurus, singly he sated Agni, singly he bore five
years of brahmacarya, singly, having lifted up Subhadrii, he challenged
Kot;ia to a chariot duel. In this very forest Kor;ia [Arjuna) won back the
abducted Knr;ia [Daupadi)" (ekai} subhadriimiiropya dvairatht krPJ11.rMh
vayat / asminneva vane krPJo hrliilfl ku'}iimaviijayat; 4.44.5-6). The emphasis
throughout the passage is on Arjuna's autonomous prowess. But this
alleged independence is set off in contrast with the concluding words
which emphasize Arjuna's consolidarity with the other two Knt;ias,
K11r;ia and Draupadi. He is credited with playing the major role in
rescuing Draupadi from Jayadratha. And according to Krpa, he fought
off Knr;ia after abducting the latter's sister Subhadrii. Most ironically,
however, unless there is an unknown variant, this latter point ofKrpa's is
untrue. It was Knr;ia's brother Balariima who wanted to fight Arjuna for
abducting Subhadra, and it was Knr;ia who dissuaded him. The passage
thus jars its audience, if it recalls that episode, into appreciating that
Arjuna's consolidarity with the other two Kni:ias is deeper than even
Krpa describes. Indeed, it is possible that the alleged "two chariot"
(dvairatha) duel which Krpa recalls is actually an evocation and inticipa
tion of the "single chariot" (ekaratha) which Arjuna and Knr;ia will ride
together in battle, the symbol of their perfect complementarity.
The centrality of Subhadrii to this triad is still more evident in the
second of the two exchanges. This time, following upon the death of
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
107
DARK INTERACTIONS IN THE MAHABHARATA
KarQa, it is Duryodhana who speaks, answering Kfpa's counsel to make
peace with the Pa9cjavas before all is lost. How will believe
Yudhq~ra
him after the deception of the dice match? asks Duryodhana (9.4.7). And
so he continues, in a speech that is for him unusually self-searching and
self-condemning:
8. "So also was K119a Hrsikcia deceived by me when he was
serving as a messenger, delighting in the welfare of the Parthas.
That act was opposed (by Krpa and others]. How will he consider
my word, 0 brahman?
9. "Surely in as much as K119a [Draupadi] wept, having arrived
in the middle of the sabha, K119a will not forget that, nor the taking
of the kingdom.
10. "Both having a single life-breath, the two K119as [K119a and
Arjuna] are firmly united with one-another. What was once for
merly heard, that I now see, 0 revered one.
11. "Kesava [K119a) sleeps sorrowfully, having heard that his
sister's son [Subhadra's son Abhimanyu] is slain. We have com
mitted an offense [agas] against him. How would he pardon me?
12. "Since the destruction of Abhimanyu Arjuna obtains no
refuge; implored, how will he make an effort for my welfare?
(13-15. Duryodhana calls to mind Bhima's "terrible vow" to kill
him and the animosity of Nakula and Sahadeva and Draupadi's
brothers, and continues:]
16. "Then too Koga (Draupadi], wearing a single cloth and in
her period, was tormented by Dul)sli.sana in the middle of the sabha
while the whole world was looking.
17. "The Pa9cjavas now remember her, thus undressed and dis
tressed. Those foe-scorchers are unable to tum back from battle.
18. "And when K119a Draupadi, the suffering K119a, performs
fierce tapas for the sake of my destruction (Yada ca draupalli krroa
madvin4faya du/]khita ugram ttpt tapaJ, krfl141 and the success of her
husbands' aims, she always lies down on the ground [stltal}4ilt] so
long as the hostilities continue.
19. "Vli.sudeva's [Koga's) uterine sister [Subhadra], having cast
off honor and pride [nik.fipya 11141141!1 darpam ca], having assumed the
role of K119a 's servant, always acts in obedience to her [krro<iy.J4
pr1vaoad-bhUtv<i iu.friitarri kuruu sada]
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
108
ALF HILTEBEITEL
20. "Thus all is ablaze' and can never be extinguished/cooled [iii,
sal'!IOJ!I s"1rUl1fll4ddll na ninlali kathaip&ana]. On account of the death
of Abhimanyu, how can he [Yudhiffhira?] be reconciled with me"?
(9.4.8-20).
It is clear that the poets have given considerable weight to the
orchestration of the names Kni;ia/Knl)i. The central two verses (9 and
10) supply three successive lines with the names Kn\li/Kni;ia/Knuau
(the dual) as the focal end of the fint pada. And then, after describing the
individual reactions of the male heroes, Duryodhana thinks ofDraupadi
by repeatedly referring to her by the name Kni;ii, including the double
reference in vene 18. But it is not just a matter of poetic device to bring
these names together. The passage shows that the interplay of the three
Knl)as is concerned with, and ,evocative of, certain specific epic themes.
In fact, the passage singles out three such themes, ones which we find
penistently in other instances where the three Kni;ias are involved. Fint
is Draupadi's humiliation in the sa/Jlia (see venes 9 and 16- 17), the
"pulling of the hair and the garments". Second is the death of Karl)a,
the occasion of the speech itself, and more specifically the focus of
Duryodhana's most haunted remark in vene JO: now that Karl)a has
been slain, he sees what he had formerly only heard, that Karl)a would
not be able to withstand the two Knl)as united on one chariot.
The thii:d theme, however, involves the three not in pain but as a triad.
It is the death of Arjuna's son and Knua's newphew Abhimanyu (see
verses 11- 12), and the subordination of Subhadri-Arjuna's wife and
Knua's sister-to Draupadi. It is, of coune, this same theme which Krpa
mentions in the Viriilaparvan passage cited earler when he warns Duryod·
hana against fighting Arjuna·Brhannac;!i: "Singly, having lifted up
Subhadri he challenged Knr;ia to a chariot duel ..." (4.44.5). It thus
deserves some further consideration.
As Duryodhana says, Subhadri "always acts in obedience" to
Draupadi. Her subordination, however, does not begin with the death of
her son, as Duryodhana's speech might suggest. It begins when she returns
with Arjuna to Histinapura after her marriage by abduction. There,
encountering her co-wife Draupadi for the fint time, Subhadri follows
Arjuna's urgent bidding and changes from wearing red silk "into the dress/
disguise ofa cowmaid" (gopiililcavapul}; 1.213.17). As argued elsewhere, this
gopa "disguise" is reminiscent of her brother Knt;ta, who also-in full
21 Sec the commentary of Arjunamilra, glossing'"""°""""• "bound up", "swollen",
"railed up", by diplaln, "ablaze". I follow here the late nineteenth-century Roy and Dutt
translations of the MaltabMrata.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
DARK INTERACTIONS IN THE MAHilBHil/UTA 109
awareness of the epic poets-takes on his famous cowherd "disguise" as a
child and youth.22 Abhimanyu, Subhadrli and Arjuna's son, then carries
forward some of these associations. He is repeatedly described in terms
evocative ofh is maternal uncle: lotus eyes, having all ofK11Qa's virtues and
more, K11Qa's favorite ncwphew, he even bears a cakra (actually a chariot
wheel) as his final weapon before dying. 23 But most important, he is an
additional K11Qa, "black" like his father and uncle, his "face dark as the
blue lotus" (indl1111ra.(Jliimam .. . muJcluun 7.55.3), and sometimes called
KitlQi, "son of KnQa" (i.e., Arjuna) to evoke these associations. Most
significantly, this name for Abhimanyu is used almost exclusively in the
war books, specifically in the scenes building up to his death. Moreover, the
name sometimes evokes his connection with the "two KnQas" most
clearly. For instance: "Whatever weapon he received from Vasudcva and
Arjuna, that KliJ1Qi displayed no differently from the two Knr.ias"
(adarfayala lat karVJi krVJiibhyiim aui.fetayan; 7 .37 .15 ).
During the life of Abhimanyu, his mother Subhadrli's subordination to
Draupadi is that of the junior wife to the senior wife, and pcrhapa of the
cowherd theme to the qatriya theme. But with Abhimanyu's death, the
subordination has much "darker" implications. As her name, which means
"very blessed" or "very auspicious", indicates, Subhadrli is Arjuna's
auspicious wife, the bearer of his and his dynasty's "fame" (ya/as) through
the line ofs uccession that extends, miraculously (or, in othtt words; thanks
to Knr.ia), through Abhimanyu to Parilqit.24 For her to serve Draupadi
while the latter undertakes her destructive war-long tapas, as Duryodhana
describes, thus indicates the subordination of the auspicious side of the
Goddess to the side devoted to destruction, impurity (sleeping on the
ground), and death. Moreover, as Duryodhana says, it is all three Kni;ias
who arc so dedicated, and whose "dark" natures arc thus united in this
common purpose: "all is ablaze, and can never be extinguished".
n Stt abo"" all Madeleine Biardeau, "Etudes de mythologie hindoue (V) Part II, Bhalui
ct avatira'', section 2. ''L'avatira, modClc divin du roi'', Brdlttin dt l'Ec"lt Frtlllfaise
/'ExtrhN Orintl, 45 (1978), pp. 204- 237; cf. also Hiltebeitel, "The Burning of the Forest
Myth", in Bardwell L. Smith, ed., Hilulwism: N<W Essa.1s in tJu His14ry of /Uligi'1flS (Leiden:
Doru
EJ. Brill, 1976). p. 217; idem, "Epic Knoa at Mathurl", in Srinivasan, ed., MOllunii:
A Colhtral HtriJ4te (New Delhi: Manohar and American Institute of Indian Studies, 1988).
93- 102.
" Sec Hiltebeitel, RihMll of &Ult, pp. 336-353.
" Sec Hiltebeitel, "Burning of the Forest", p. 217.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE ORIGINAL DAKSA SAGA
KLAUS KLOSTERMAIER
The story of Daqa's confrontation with Siva is one of the best known
and most widely studied myths in Indian literature. It will be found in
nearly every summary of Indian mythology, old or new. Each such
summary would also comment on the many and wide variations found in
a great number of sources. Thus Wendy D.O'Flaherty in Hindu Mytlls
(Baltimore: Penguin, 1975) offers her readers two versions: one from the
Maliiibli4rala and one from the Variilia Purm,a. In her evaluation and
interpretation she follows D.C. Sircar, who in his renowned work on the
SOJ;ta Pi/has' provided in an appendix under the title "Evolution of the
Daqayajiia Story", a selection of texts, leading from Q.gveda I 0, 91
(Prajapati's incest with his daughter) through SaJapatlia Brii/imatµJ I, 7,
4 (a commentary on this), Aitarrya BriilimatµJ 3, 33 (Rudra's piercing of
the sacrifice), Gopatha Briilimat}ll 2, 1 (Prajapati's refusal to sacrifice to
Rudra) to the rendition of the full-fledged myth in Maliiibli4rala 12, 283,
17-33, BhagavaJa-Pural}Q 4, 5, 14- 21, Kurma-Purm,a I, 15, 60- 64, to the
account in Dernoli4gavata-Purm,a VII, 30, which connects the origin of the
Sak ti Pithas with the Daqa story. Sircar states his opinion that the latter
development represents an addition to the original story which was made
by Saktas at a relatively late time.
What was the original story? Following the suggestion as regards its
evolutions made by Sircar, we would have to assume that at its core it
describes the conflict between Vedic sacrificial religion and Rudra-Siva
religion which in the epic-puranic phase was reconceived into a conflict
between and Saivism.2
Vai~r;iavism
My own attempts to harmonize the various accounts and to find the
original story have led me to the assumption that the core of it consists of
the record of the Saivite conquest of Kanakhala, a flrtha close to today's
Hardwar, which was of great importance to Saivites, Vai~r;iavas and
Saktas alike, and was linked to an important Vedic settlement associated
1 Fint published in the Journal of tht Royal AsiatU Society of Bmgal, vol. XIV, no. I
(1948). 1- 108 (n:print).
' O'Flahcrty, p. 118.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
111
THE ORIGINAL DAK$A SAGA
with a famous patriarch Daqa. Added to this story were other features
designed to connect it with Vedic times as well as with later develop
ments. As a story of the occupation of a holy place of importance it
provided legitimacy to the Saiva sect of the Pasupatas and in connection
with it to the legitimacy of other Saiva and Si!tta sanctuaries in a
predominantly non-Saivite society.
All accounts of the Daqa story which provide a geographic location of
the event place it at Gailgadvara, the point where the Ganges, India's
most sacred river since time immemorial, breaks through the mountains.
It is identified with Mayapura and Haridvara/Haradvara of later texts.
The place names of the tirtlias along the first few miles of the Ganges after
it has emerged from the mountains reveal the competition between
different major sects: from Brahmaku1;u;la (today called Hari ki paidi) one
reaches Vi,i;iughat, then one proceeds to Mayadevi, Narayar,li Sila,
Niladhara, Bilvake§vara before coming to Kanakhala, where one finds
Mahadeva, Satikui;ic;la, Bhimagoda and Y-rrabhadre§vara.'
Da~vara
Of all these places Kanakhala was considered the most important
tirlha. As a Mahabharata text has it: The Ganga is the great tirlha of
Kaliyuga, the holiest of all rivers, and it is especially holy at Kanakhala
and at Prayaga.4 Several of the epic and puranic accounts of Daqa's
sacrifice explicitly mention Kanakhala as the venue.)
Without connection to the Daqa story Kanakhala is several times
mentioned in the Mahabharata as a tirlha equal to Prayaga6 and a lirlha
where one can gain merit equal to an a.fvamedlia by bathing after having
fasted for three nights. 7 It is prominently mentioned in the Tirlha-yiilra
section and its holiness is pointed out to Yudhi$ihira in connection with
' Stt information in Kalfaa: TirlMirJ:o, vol. 31, no. I (1957), 62ff.
• On the Ganges as nrtha, see P.V. Kane, Histqry of Dlumrtaiastra, vol. IV, 585ff.
' Sioa-Pitrii1/4-Rrulrasam!titi SaJikM1i4a 27; Lingo·P•riit/4 100.
' MallUMrata Vmioparvan, 82, 26:
llUa/i kanakhale miitvi trirauof>oplo naralr I
aJrJam<dlttnn ""4prwti svargaloMm ca goahati I I
' App.I, 13:
krmtkfetrasamii taiiiii. yalra141r®atalriti I
uiJqo oai kanakhale pa,Jii.ge poramam '"""4111
A"'®s..,..,...,. 26, 12:
taittii.4Dir1 kui4oarlt bil..U ,.,,,,;f>Ot'Oak I
taJ/Ji kanakhale miiloii. dlriJ4pii.pm4 dUiam urajtl 11
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
112
KI.AUS KWSTERMAIER
Sanatkumiira's penance.' The forceful occupation of such an eminent
place, vied for by all and sundry, must have made a great impression.
Evidently Saivas were late-comers in the plains and not normally
associated with respectable places of worship. Apparently they were as
keen as the rest of the population to have access to the Ganges at a
favored spot so as to be able to perform meritorious ablutions. Also in
more recent times, as our records document, Saiva ascetics fought for
such priviliges as to who was to enter the Ganges at the most auspicious
times of the Kumbha-mela. A battle fought in 1760 A.D. proved so
decisive that for many decades to come were not allowed
V~J)avas
access at certain occasions.9 Even now the rivalry between Saivas and
is noticeable at the time of the Kumbha-melis-a rivalry
V~Qavas
focusing on precisely the same issue.
Geography has always played a great role in Hinduism: specific places,
with specific acts of penance or worship performed at them, were
identified as "holy places" early on.10 Miihiitmyas ofi mportant tlrtlias are
prominent parts of the PuriiQas, besides the SthalapuratµJs, which provide
the holy history of such places. These texts provide at the same time the
legitimation ofo ccupation of certain favored spots by specific sects. They
are parallels to the landnama sagas of Northern Europe or the Biblical
legitimization of the occupation of Palestine and the holy places of the
Canaanaeans by the tribes of Israel. As a foundational story the
successful Pasupata dislocation of the previous occupants of Kanakhala
and the subsequent permanent arrangement with them provided the
legitimation of Saivism, which the Veda did not provide. It is explicitly
• 88, 18:
bib"'"' tar4Sa gaioga gaiogadWrt yvd/14/liirt 1
ravom w klifiJ"I" raj"" hrolrm4rfig41141m""" I I
SOMIA:umira '-'""-"' PtaJy47fl kanakhalam tatliiJ /
135, 5a:
'" kanakhali rajarfiildm "4.Jita ""laJ/
' G.S. Ghurye, /llllian Sa4/ow (Bombay: 1964), p. 112: "Saiva Samnlysis and Vain1ava
BairigiJ fought a great battle at Hardwar in 1760 to decide the dispute about precedence
at that place. According to an account recorded by Wilson the total number of dead in
that action was 18,000. ... The 1760 battle of Ha.rdwar completely decided the issue in
favor of the Saiva Samniy>is. Since that year till the time Hardwar territory went under
British control the Vai,r;i.avas Bairigis could not visit that place on special religious
occasions''. v..,..,,.,_
•• Cf. the 7irtliaydJra section in the Maliiibhdrata and the 7ir1Mprak4Ja of
Viramitrodaya.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE ORIGINAL DAK$A SAGA 113
stated that this was Siva's first exploit, and it is the first in the cycle of
major Siva myths.
The incident is relegated to an earlier manvantara11- apparently in
order to strengthen the case: the more remote the "foundational event",
the less it would be apt to be challenged. Whatever the time may have
been, it seems to have been a real, i.e., historical, event taking place at a
time when had been accepted as orthodox by the represen
Va~9avism
tatives of Vedic religion. gentleness and civility stood in
V~9ava
contrast to Saiva primitivism and savagery. Vi$QU as Upendra had been
accepted into ).lgvedic sacrificial religion and already in the Brihmat;1as
is considered as identical with the sacrifice, asked to make good its
V~Qu
defects. All the Daqa story versions make it clear that Siva Pa8upati,
who destroys Daqa's sacrifice, is not identical with the Vedic Rudras.
Nevertheless, while his major body of followers must have been in the
mountains, he possessed sympathizers in the plains too. Dadhica, one of
the guests at the sacrifice, is quoted in virtually all versions as pleading
for the invitation of Siva and the allocation of a part of the sacrifice to
him.
The objective both of the historical conquest and of the story reporting
it is twofold. The Pasupatas wanted to become part of the sacrificial
community. They wished to share the prestige and recognition associated
with the allotment of a portion of the sacrifice, being the equal of the
tkuas invited to it, like Indra, and the rfi.r. They also wanted to get
Vi~i;iu
the better of the V ai$t;1avas, who had apparently succeeded in establish
ing themselves as the predominant religion in the upper Ganges valley.
Thus, while first seemingly bent at completely wiping out traditional
Vedism with its gods (some of the versions make it a point to detail the
disrespect shown by Virabhadra's army towards the Vedic gods and
Vedic institutions), they relent and acquiesce to Daqa's plea (supported
by to restore the sacrifice and its tradition. There arc unavoidable
V~t;1u)
changes, though Daqa's head can no longer be retrieved and the
damage done to the gods can only be partially repaired. Pasupata Saivas
were obviously prepared to become part of the tradition which they had
set out to overthrow.
In tum, Vai$t;1avas had to accept the legitimacy of Saivism (even the
equality of Vi$QU and Siva, who arc now co-creators of the world); they
" While tcVeral previous rebirths of Daqa arc mentioned in some accounts most seem
- · ·
to agree in placing the story of Siva's destruction ofDaqa's sacrific< in the Vaivasvata
Google Origiral frcn1
019111zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
114
KLAUS KLOSTERMAIER
must surrender one of their holiest places and acknowledge the
supremacy of Siva in it.
If such a comparatively minor event connected with a no longer very
prominent place seems too small an occasion for the emergence of the
vast D~a saga, which occupies a large place, e.g. in the Siua-Puriil}Q,
we have only to think of the .Nibelrmgen Saga and the places connected
with it: villages and small towns which are unlikely to evoke any heroic
sentiments in today's visitor.
That the Daqa saga-once established as a major part of Siva
tradition- had its applications quite apart from legitimating the
Pasupata occupation of the Kanalr.hala tirtlia is evident from its Tamil
versions.12 In these Siva plays a dominant role from the very beginning,
whereas is relegated to a very subordinate position. Brahma is
V~i;iu
prepared to offer Siva a share in the Vedic sacrifice, which he claims "by
Vedic injunction". In the Tamil version Daqa is throughout a devotee
of Siva- his conflict with Siva is due to a temporary clouding of his
mind. In the Tamil country there was no need for the legitimation of
Saivism. The story, of course, was part of traditional lore, but its
significance changed drastically.
Since it is by origin a North Indian saga, Sanskrit sources will be,
generally speaking, closer to it in spirit and articulation. The following
reconstruction will be based exclusively on epic and puranic material
and will be biased towards those accounts which put Kanalr.hala into the
center of their narration. If that seems to be circular arguing, it should
be kept in mind that the idea of the story concerning the Pasupata
Dak~a
Saiva conquest of Kanalr.hala emerged, of course, only from a reading
and reflecting upon these materials.
Rec1J11Jlruction of the Story
The following reconstruction is based on the accounts given 1n the
following texts: the Mahilbh4rala, Siintiparuan, Ch. 284;'1 Riimiiy41]Q,
BiilaJciil}t/a, Ch. 65, 9- 12; Siva-Puriil}a, which has two versions of it:
Rudra-samhitii Satikhal}t/a, Chs. 12-42 and Vayavijasamhitii, Chs. 18-33;
" D.D. Shulman, Tamil Tnnplt MJtlts (Princeton: 1980). pp. 337ff.: "Nowhere is the
distance between the Tamil myths and their Sanskrit counterparu more evident than in
the different versions of the myth of Daqa's sacrifice . . .."
" Sintiparvan, Ch. 284 (Vulgate; the Critical Edition [hereafter CE] has relegated
paru of it to the Appendices).
Google Origiral frcn1
019111zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE ORIGINAL DAKSA SAGA 115
Yayu-Puriitµi, Ch. 30; Liiiga-PuriitµJ, Ch. 100; Skmuia-PuriitµJ, MaluJalchatJ4a
KttfiiralciilJ4a, Ch. 2; Brahma-PuriitµJ, Ch. 39; Kiirma-PuriitµJ, Pt. I, Ch. 15;
Matsya-PuriitµJ, Ch. 5; BhagavaJa-PuriitµJ, Pt. IV, Chs. 1-7; and Harivamfa,
Bliav4Japaroan, Ch. 32. It is noteworthy that the story is reported in
Saivite as well as Vai$r;iava and Sakta Purar;ias (cf. Devihhagavatam, Pt.
VII, Ch. 38}. Apparently it recalled a historical event of some mag
nitude which could not be passed over with silence by any sect. Quite
clearly too, it was an event which established the indubitable dominance
of Saivas in a particular place which was of interest to all. Saivites, of
course, fully exploit the story to demonstrate the superiority of Siva over
Vi$r;iu. Vai$r;iavas, in most of their versions, while unable to turn their
defeat into victory (which the Harivamfa attempts to do}, suggest that it
was ultimately Vi$r;iu's punishment of Daqa, who had not recognized
the oneness of Siva and Vi$r;iu.
The report of the crucial event is prefaced in most narrations by
background information on Daqa. Daqa and his clan seem to have
been quite prominent apart from the incident described as "Daqa's
sacrifice". This, in a sense, was the reason why it was so impartant to get
hold of his settlement, Kanakhala, in order to legitimate Saivism as an
equal to Vai$r;iavism. There is a Daqa story in the context of traditions
on the patriarchs, the "mind-born sons of Brahma", whose genealogies
formed an early part of puranic traditions. Thus the Virou-Puriitµi, by
fairly common agreement one of the oldest in its present form, devotes
only a few lines to the Siva-Daqa incident after extensively reporting on
Daqa's progeny, his sixty daughters and their families. The Bhagavalam,
one of the latest and perhaps the best organized of the purai;ias, in which
the Daqa story fills a whole section and is treated like an epic in itself,
devotes hundreds of Jlolcas to describing Daqa's career through several
incarnations in successive manvanlaras. By contrast the Vi!;ni-PuriitµJ,
perhaps the oldest of all the extant Purai;ias, briefly summarizes the story
of Daqa's sacrifice by Siva". The Siva-Puriitµi, which has two lengthy
different versions of the Daqa story, while paralleling the Bhagavatam in
its prolixity as regards the pre-history of the Siva-Dak$a enmity, connects
Daqa's importance from the very beginning with Siva and Siva.
Parallel to the treatment of the story of Daqa before the crucial
incident we find the Sati story enhanced or compressed according to
need. All sources report Satrs marriage to Siva--some make it a point to
provide also Sat i with a "pre-history", others combine it with an
apparently independent tradition explaining the origin of Sakti-piJ}las in
order to provide legitimation for them (see Sircar, App. VI).
It is worth noting-in general, before entering into detail-that there
must have been a common literary source for the accounts in the Viiyu-
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
116 KLAUS KLOSTERMAIER
Piuiilµt, MaM/JltiiraJa, SiN-hriilµi-V-~yasamlrila, Jranna-Puriilµt, Bra
hma-Puriilµi, which have some crucial Jlokas in common and agree on
most features, whereas considerable divergence as regards detail and no
literary dependence .either on each other or on a common source
characterizes the other sources utilized.
of
A. The Stqry tlu prajapati Dakia
Daltp must have been a famous and respected personality before the
destruction of his sacrifice; that precisely was the reason why his
misfortune aroused such an interest. The Saivitc occupation of Kana
khala brought the Daltp story to its end; it did not diminish his fame.
The Swa-Purana-VOyllliyasatialiita narration, which exhibits great hos
tility towards Daltp from the very beginning, traces the various rebirths
of Daqa in successive '11111W011Jaras and places even the beginning of his
enmity towards Siva in one of the previous births ( 18, 4- 62). The
BhiigaooJam describes Daltp in a very favorable light. Daltp was one of
the mindborn sons of Brahma. From Svayambhii Manu he receives his
third daughter, Prasiiti, as wife. Together they have sixteen daughters.
Of these, thirteen arc given in marriage to Dharma, one to Agni, one to
Pit{'S and one to Bhava (IV, I: 11-47). In several accounts he is
described as "fond of his daughters" and so there is the puzzling question
why, out of dislike for his son-in-law Bhava, he slighted his daughter Sau
(Bh.P, IV, 2, I).
The $iva-Purii!}a-Rudrasamhita Sah7chatµ/a has the most fantastic ver
sion (Ch. 12, 18ff). Siva, appearing to Da~a after long and arduous
tapas, grants the boon to Daqa that she would (for the first time)
incarnate as his daughter and become Siva's wife. Then and there she
admonishes him: "If in the future you were to be less respectful to me I
will cast off my body ..." (v. 33).
In a later chapter we are told that is advised by Brahma, his
Dak~
father, to marry Virir:ii (Ch. 13, 6). With her he procreates 5,000 sons,
called the Haryasvas, who go west "to the holy lake Narayar:ia where
there is the confluence of the celestial Sindhu and the ocean" (Ibid.).
Later he procreates 1,000 sons from Paiicajana. They, the Sabalasvas,
also go west. Daqa then curses Narada, the purported instigator of these
migrations. It is difficult to say what these stories mean. Perhaps they arc
memories of parts of the clan moving westwards into the Sindh.
Da~a
The narration then leads baclr. to the introduction: after sixty daught
ers have been born to from ViriQi, Sau is born. then sings a
Da~a Da~a
long hymn in praise of the Goddess (Ch. 14, 28ff).
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE ORIGINAL DAK~A SAGA 117
B. Tiu Story of Dok.fa's Sacrijice
The reports about the sacrifice which became the occasion for Siva's
wrathful intervention arc again widely divergent. According to Silltl
Puriil}a-JIOyamyasamhita, Daqa performed in his various incarnations a
series of sacrifices (Chs. 18-19). At the first, in a previom manvantara, he
insults his daughter Sati, who abandons her body. So docs Dlip.
Reborn in Caqu$a manvantara as the son of Pracetas, he is again reported
as having offered a great sacrifice (18, 5lff). Finally, in the Vaiva$vata
manvanJara, he prepares the fateful horse-sacrifice: gaitgware fubhe
dtJe ... (19, 5). The Silltl-Pu:riil}a-RJUbasarialiita reports but a single
sacrifice offered at Kanakhala (Ch. 37). The Mahabkarata begins its
narration of the Daqa episode (Santi-parvan, App. I, no. 28) with
Janamcjaya's question how the aJvamtdlta of Prajapati Dlip, son of
Pracctas, was destroyed, and Vaiiampayana's report about it, as having
taken place "where the Ganges issues out of the mountains". 14
The Bkagalltltam assigns the relevant detail of the Dlip-Siva confron
tation to two different sacrifices: the first, a sacrifice arranged by the
Prajapatis for Sri Hari (lasting 1,000 years) attended by Dlip becomes
the occasion for Daqa's enmity with Siva, which is sustained for a long
time (IV, 2, 4ff). It is at a second sacrifice, the Brhaspati-Sava ofDaqa,
that Sati gets insulted, whose suicide then is the reason for Siva's
wrathful intervention (Ibid., Ch. 3).
The Skanda-Puriil}a knows of only one sacrifice, a mahayajlla at Kana
lthala, which becomes the occasion ofDaqa's being angry with Siva and
Siva's avenging Sati's death (I, I, 1, 2). The Kiirma-Pu:riil}a too reports
only one sacrifice, set in Gangadvara (I, 15); so docs the Brahma-Purana
(39, 21 ). The HarivamJa has a widely diverging version (Ch. 32). It tells
us that Daqa Pracetas began an aJl!IJmedluJ and that Rudra, together
with Nandi, appears to avenge the sin of animal killing. The Lmga-Puriil}a
locates the sacrifice at Kanalthala, near Gangadvara.1 The Viiyu-Puriil}a
)
mentions the curious detail that the gods participated at Daltsa's sacrifice
in Gangadvara with Siva's permission (Ch. 30, 80ff).
" V. 6; this text uses the same expression as Si. Pu. Vayam;wamlrita:
pvra ltimaDauiJ) Pul< dJJJ:10 uai .J<Jjl"'1n Olr4rat 1
glllig°"""1t Miu ikie rfisiddlwi4tviu 11
" Ch. 100, 7:
.Jdjlla""'41 lillltii 14!1" gllligOdvara-samipala/i I
taddlle cailNJ vikltydlam ... dvija!i 11
~ltalam
Google Origiral frcn1
019111zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
118
KLAUS KLOSTERMAIER
C. The Cause of D~a's Enmi~ with Siva
This issue is for most of the accounts the most crucial one and also the
point where the widest divergences and contradictions emerge between
the different accounts. In any case, it is a complicated story which has
much to do with traditional proprieties broken, with disputed claims
within the sphere of Vedic sacrifice and with possible rival loyalties
between V~i;iavas and Saivas.
The Mahabharata account depicts a Dadhici, who is angry that· Siva
had not been invited and who foresees disastcr.16 He pleads with Daqa
to invite Siva. Without visible connection to that account we learn there
after that Uma inquires from her husband what to choose to make
uralas
sure that one half or one third of the sacrifice would be his.17 There is no
confrontation between Daksa and Siva.
The BhagavaJa-PurQ/µl, on the other hand, fully accounts for the
hostility between Siva and Daqa (IV, 2): at the great (first) sacrifice
arranged by the prajapatis, prepared for Hari, and lasting a thousand
years, Siva (like Brahma, Daqa's father) docs not rise to pay respect to
Daltµ. Daqa utters then and there a lengthy curse (vv. 9- 16). He
mentions that Siva is his son-in-law and that he had been unwilling to
give his daughter to him, having been persuaded to do so by Brahma.
The curse culminates in Siva's exclusion from a share of the sacrifice.18 It
is Nandi, Siva's companion, who in turn curses Dak~a and all brahmans
(vv. 21-26). Bhrgu, as spokesman of the brahmans, utters a countcr
cursc of Nandi and all followers of Bhava, who henceforth would be
considered heretics: 19
Those who observe Bhava-vratas and those who follow them shall be heretics
acting contracy to scripture. Only th0$C who have abandoned purity, are
stupid, wear matted locks, ashes and bones, and will receive Siva-diqa,
which is connected with wine. Denouncing the Vedas, which lay down the
rules of behavior, and the brahmans, you have embraced the position of
heretics. The path of the Vedas is the only eternal one; it has been followed
" SiiAtipon>an App. I, no. 28, line 2+: na ayam JOj"'1 na vii d/uJrma yatra nuiro na i.iJau.
" The CE separates the two accounts and leaves only the conversation between Umil
and Siva in the text; Ch. 274.
" v.
18:
'!)'Oiii Ill .Uva,,.jana indropmdtiU/ibhir bhavai} /
saha bhagam na labhat41n dnJair lkvagan4dham4'} / /
" Ibid. vv. 28-32: Bhrgu accuses:
bhavavraltU/hara .l' ea .l' ea tan samanuura141) /
pOJcluuµ/iJw I< bhavant• sa&clrii!trapariP<11'llrill41} /
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE ORIGINAL DAKSA SAGA 119
by the ancients and has the authority ofJ anardana [Vi$Qu]. By condemn
ing the Vedas, the supreme, flawless, eternal path of the virtuous, you go
the path of the heretics with the lord of ghosts as deity.
For a long period this smoldering enmity between Siva and Dalqa
and we can infer between Saivites and brahmans--continu.es without
any further incidents. Daqa rises to a high position: Brahma appoints
him "the chief of all lords of created beings" (Ch. 3). When he prepares
for the "ultimate sacrifice", Sau is not able to persuade Siva to join her
in attending the sacrifice (Ch. 4). She is slighted by her father (although
welcomed by mother and sisters). She speaks out strongly against her
father, curses her own birth from him,20 and eventually kills herself "as a
mark of displeasure against (w. 24-27). Sati's attendants who
D~a"
try to kill Daqa are beaten back by Bhrgu's creatures. Then only we
hear about Siva's rage and subsequent action against Daqa (Ch. 5).
What is remarkable in this account is that a daughter considers her
bond with her husband stronger than with her natural father: while
Vedic religion sanctified the natural ties, sectarianism considers them
inferior to the bond that unites fellow-believers.
The Siva-PurDl}a-Rudrasamlrita adds a further complication (Ch. l 7f.).
It first reports that Daqa "joyfully gave his daughter Sau to Siva"
(18, 33). Then it mentions how Brahma angered Siva and Siva cursed
Brahma (Ch. 19). Daqa (and later Vi$QU} tries to mediate. Without any
obvious connection a later chapter (Ch. 26) tells about the fury ofDaqa
when Siva, at his sacrifice at Prayaga, fails to bow down to him. Oaqa
calls Siva names-"shameless frequenter of cremation grounds"-and
expels Siva from the sacrifice. 21 Bhrgu and others join Dak$a in cursing
Siva. Nandi countercurses Bhrgu and the brahmans (v. 19f.). He accuses
the brahmans of being "egotistic .. . engaged in discussing Vedas but
ignorant of Vedic principles." he foretells them that they would be
"beggars, officiating at the sacrifices of Siidras, perpetually poor."22
Curiously enough, the next chapter reports how Vi$QU, invited by
Siva, presides at Daqa's sacrifice at Kanakhala. Dak$a does not invite
'°
Ibid., vv. 11-23:
na tltna ikAma """ krtagaso dJrodbltlJvena ..• kuj1J11"""'4
utf44 1Mln4llhiil k•}anaprasangalas ta}}""""' dltig .JO maltat4m avadyakrt (22)
" Ibid., v. 18:
/m.asi1uwasi ku/4jan,.,,JrinaJJ
n Vv. 30-42. This is materially identical with Bh.Pu. IV, 2, 21- 26. There is, however,
no literary dependence.
Google Origiral frcn1
019111zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
120
KLAUS KWSTERMAIER
Siva, because he is a kapilin, nor Sati, his daugh1er, because she is a
kapilin's wife (Ch. 27). He defiantly praises Vi$r;iu "1he prime cause of
all dei1ies" and denounces Siva.21 Contrary to what we learned above he
now says that he had reluctantly given his daughler lo Siva, persuaded
by Brahma. Siva is not a man of nobility, "he has neither father or
mother, he is the lord ofg oblins, ghosts and spirits and is incorrigible. He
is a haughty self-conceited fool, unworthy of this sacred ri1c" (vv. 42ff.).
Sati, though uninvited and informed by Siva aboul the enmity
between himself and Daqa, decides to attend together with "60,000
attendants, favorites of Siva, who sang songs of praise of Siva and who
jumped in their joy wilh hearts of childish innocence" (Chs. 28, 43). Sati
does not get attention from Daqa or the gods and she gets furious at
Vi$r;iu, Brahma and Indra (Ch. 29).
In her presence Dalqa again denounces Siva: "Your husband Siva is
known to the wise as inauspicious. He is not of a noble lineage. He is the
king of goblins, ghosts and spirits. He is excluded from Vedic rites. ..
Induced by Brahma I gave you in marriage to the wicked, haughty Siva
who does not know customs" (v. 3lff.). Interestingly, in this version Sati
is offered a portion of the sacrifice, which she refuses by saying: "He who
reproaches Siva, and he who hears such reproaches, both of them go to
hell and stay there as long as the moon and sun exist".24
Sati heaps abuses on her own father: "You arc wicked, you are evil
minded ..." and then burns herself in her own yogic fire (Ch. 30).
Many of her attendants also kill themselves, others mutilate themselves,
the rest attack Da~a. A "celestial voice" reminds Dak$a of his mistakes
and admonishes Vi$QU and Brahma to leave the sacrifice (Ch. 31).
The same puriitµJ in the Viiyavijasamliita locates the source of the enmity
between Siva and Oak~ in an encounter in a previous manvantara (Ch.
18, 4ff.). Da~a, visiting Siva and Sati, did not receive preferential
treatment from them and is offended. He, in 1urn, does not invite them
to his yajifa. Sati attends nevertheless and questions Dak$a aboul ii.
Dak$a insults her: "The younger daughters are better than you ... their
husbands are superior to your husband ... he is stiff-souled and he is
antagonistic to me" (vv. !Off.).
" V. 37:
miilam uifrµtr dt1JQ/iiMm yatra dlronnaJi sana14na/J I
sa..W.ito maya samyak kimiiMm }'4}.W."""'li 11
" Ibid., v. 38:
yo lfindoJi maMdtvam nU.t!:famiuuun lnD}oti va I
t4vuh"'1• narakam yal4M yalXld tandradwakarau 11
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
121
THE ORIGINAL DAKSA SAGA
Sati is infuriated and replies that she will not suffer Dak$a to insult her
husband, who is Lord of the World. "Know that your family is defiled
and ruined" (vv. 40ff.). San then abandons her body and goes to
Himavan. Siva curses the assembly and prophesies about Dalqa's future.
Daqa too abandons his body (vv. 50ff.).
The curse, however, is transmitted to his birth as son of Pracetas (vv.
54ff.). Therefore, the report about the wrecking of Dak$a's sacrifice by
Siva is not preceded by any other explanation of Siva's anger. Dadhica
enters into a heated exchange with Daqa concerning the recipients of his
sacrifice, but there is no direct offence to Siva or San contained in
Daqa's answer. The Linga-PurOIJfl too, without telling the reason for
Siva's anger, introduces the catastrophe by a description of the portents
that accompanied the sacrifice (Ch. 100, Bf.).
The Skanda-PurOr,a follows the Sivapu.rii7}Q-Rudrasathhitii in most details
(I, I, I, 2f.). Daqa curses Siva for not standing up to honor him and
refuses to invite him to his sacrifice at Kanakhala. Dadhici's intervention
is fruitless (Ch. 2, IOff.). Sati, after discussing the situation with Siva,
enters the fire, after which Siva- through Virabhadra- wrecks Dak~a's
sacrifice (Ch. 5).
The Viiyu-PurOIJfl knows of no previous conflict between Siva and
Dalqa. Dadhica pleads for inviting Siva, which Dak$a refuses to do (Ch.
30, BOff.). Dadhica, after prophesying disaster, leaves. In reply to Uma's
question why he is not attending the sacrifice, Siva says: "This is the
contrivance of all the gods, that in all sacrifices no portion should be
assigned to me. According to an arrangement formerly devised, the gods
allow me no participation"." Siva in this version directs his anger not so
much against in punishment for a personal offence but against the
Dak~a
arrangement of the gods, the Vedic sacrificial order.
KUnna-Purii7}Q and Bralima-Purii7}Q similarly do not find it necessary to
construe a personal conflict between Dak$a and Siva previous to the
sacrifice but report-what seemed to be Vedic practice-that no portion
of the sacrifice and no official prayer was dedicated to Siva.26 It is at
u Ibid., vv. J 12ff.
S11Tair tva maMh!Uige sarNm 01tiqlitam I
.JOi4'f111l """"" s•rv«• "" b!Uiga up..kalpi/4/J 11
pUroopi.JO(>a/HmNll<I mii.rgt1}4 Mr<Wii,.,Pm I
na mt sir~ praya<&luvtli h/Uigam yajilluya dlilma/4/J I/
,. KVrma-Purii'la I, 15, 112f. 8raluM-Purii1J11 Ch. 39, 39:
na mt -~ prayat:eluvtti b/Uigam y<1jllasya dliarmata~.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
122
KLAUS KLOSTERMAIER
Devrs request that he forcibly inteivencs so as to obtain a share and
receive official acknowledgement (v v. 50ff.).
D. Tu Dadhici-Dalqa Dialog1U
The one element which shows most agreement in all the puranic
accounts of the Daqa episode is the dialogue between Dadhici and
Daqa. Identical verses are found in several accounts. It can be assumed
that it formed an original and important part of the original Daqa saga.
It seems to identify the core of the conflict.
Dadhlci apparently was a person of stature; thus he was among the
officially invited guests at the great sacrifice. According to the Mahii
bhiirata it was he who noticed first the absence of Siva (S iin,iparvan, App.
I, No. 28, 1.23). "Foreseeing in a yogic vision the coming disaster", he
pleads with Daqa to invite Siva, even at that late time, since he is the
"Protector of all creatures, the Creator of the universe, the Lord of all,
the Puissant Master, the taker of sacrificial offerings". He urges: "He will
soon come ... you shall see him" ( 11. 37- 39).
Apparently Dadhici, as Yogi, belonged also to the (extra-Vedic)
Pasupata sect, which was not related to any of the Vedic Rudra cults.
Daqa retorts (and the phrase is literally repeated in several other
accounts in various puriilJllS): "I know the eleven Rudras, I do not know
this Mahc5vara".2 ' Then he professes his Vedic-Vai~r;iava faith, which in
all probability cost him his life: "Here in this vessel of gold, intended for
the Lord of all sacrifices, is the sacrificial offering sanctified by mantras
according to the ordinances. I intend to make this offering to who
Vi~r;iu,
is beyond compare. He is puissant and the Maker of all; unto Him
should sacrifice be performed".2 8
The Mahiibhiirata account breaks the dialogue off here and shifts the
scene to the Himalayas, where Uma confers with Siva about a plan of
action to obtain part of the sacrifice. The Siva-PuriilJa· Vi!Javfyasamlzitii,
which has much the same account,29 even literally repeating the same
words (as also the Viiyu-Purii1µ1 ) makes Dadhici reply to Daqa's confes
sion of faith: "O since Rudra, the Lord of the chief of Gods is not
Dak~a,
" Ibid., 11. 40f:
S011li no baliavo nulrOJ, !UWta.st41) kapardina1} I
tkQdaiaslMMgatii niiham wdmi malu!Nram /I
" Ibid., 11, 45-48:
elan makhtJiiya "'"'"'14p0trt liauilJ samaslam vidlrim411trapul4m / rte.
" Ch. 19, 9f. Thrrr arc slight differences in wording (v. 19).
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE ORIGINAL DAXSA SAGA 123
propitiated, your sacrifice will not be efficacious" (v. 20). With that he
leaves the assembly.
In the Rudrasainhita account of the same puriilµJ, Dadhici is already
introduced as a devotee of Siva, who is worried by Siva's absence and
insists: "The sacrifice cannot be perfect without Siva"! (Ch. 27, 24ff.)
After listening to the reply by Dalqa, which not only includes the praise
of Vi.$i;iu as "prime cause of all deities" but also abuse heaped on Siva
(vv. 42ff.), he leaves with his colleagues, only to be cursed as "slow
witted and senseless ... rogues indulging in false deliberations and
d.IS CUSS. lOns ... out f t h e Ved"I C C.l rC 1e ...." 30
0
The Skanda-PuriilµJ account is much the same as that of the Maha
bharata {I, 1, I, 2f.). In the Brahmii-PuriilµJ version Dalqa categorically
states in reply to Dadhlci's entreaties: dadii.mi bhagam na tu Jaiilcaraya (Ch.
39, 33). The Kiinna-Pura1}1J equally makes state that he docs not
Dak~a
know any Rudras besides the eleven Vedic ones and that Hari is iJvara
andjagatsu/a {I, 15, 12f).
Interestingly, the Dadhlca-Dalqa dialogue is completely absent from
the long Bhagavata-PuriilµJ account, the Liiiga-PuriilµJ and the Harivam.Ja
versions. This may partly have to do with another source which these
versions used and partly with the lack of importance attributed to the
presence of an adherent of Siva-P..Supati at Dalqa's Vedic-Vai$i;iava
sacrifice in Kanakhala.
The dialogue seems, however, to pinpoint the root cause for the
incident: a first, peaceful attempt to accommodate Pasupata-Saivism
within the Vedic context, which had already accommodated Vi.$i;iu, had
failed. The religious sensibilities of the followers of Mahc.Svara were
deeply hurt and thus violence broke out. While some accounts claim that
Siva had a right to receive a share in the sacrifice, most point out,
correctly, that Siva had been denied a share by an ancient convention.
Apparently he would have accepted such a state of affairs, but for Sati,
his consort, who felt slighted and who did not want her husband to be
inferior to others.
E. The Vlrabhadra Phmommon
Virabhadra plaques, popular even today in the countryside of
Mahar~­
ira, display the goat-headed Dak$a at the feet of Siva Bhairava. The
.. v. 53:
iMa/"""'4 I
""""'4Jca mitlrfaDdaro/Qli lr.NJ4I)
!Jdoauas "
11<da6ilt;t0 rbui<aras maluJkamuuii 11
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
124
KLAUS KLOSTERMAIER
association must be old and must have been made in connection with our
Daqa episode. If we could find a large amount ofe ven verbal agreement
in the dialogue, we find an even larger amount of
Dadhici·D~
disparity in the treatment of the V-irabhadra phenomenon.
The MaMbkarata account is comparatively restrained (CE, XII, 274,
29ff.). It simply reports that the anger of Siva takes shape in Virabhadra,
who is joined by Mahakali, the embodiment of Uma's anger. The Y-1!11'·
Pur01µJ, also restrained, reports Siva creating Virabhadra from his mouth
(Ch. 30, l 22ff.). Virabhadra then created from his pores a large number
of frightening helpers.
The Si1JO-Pur01µJ-Rudrasainhitii devotes an entire chapter (Ch. 32) to
the description of the birth of Virabhadra and another one (Ch. 33) to
the account of his march towards Kanakhala, in the company of a large
host of frightful beings.
Similarly extensive is the account given in the same pur01µJ's Vayavfya
samhitii: urged by the goddess, Siva creates Virabhadra, with the
intention to destroy sacrifice (Ch. 19, 24ff.). Virabhadra creates
Da~a's
from his anger Bhadra, the representative of the goddess (v. 35). He is
described as being fond of cremation grounds. From his body he creates
a large number of gQl}QS.
The Bkagavata-P11.101µJ adds a novel feature: the enraged Siva pulls a
lock from his matted hair, dashes it to the ground and thus creates
Virabhadra (IV, 5, 3). He is described as "touching the sky, having a
thousand arms, three eyes, fierce teeth, matted hair, wearing a garland of
skulls, with all kinds of weapons" (v v. 4ff.). Arriving from the north he
proceeds to "dispose of and his sacrifice".
Dak~a
The Skanda-PurOIJa has much the same account as the Maliabkarata (I,
1, 1, 2f.). However, here Siva creates Virabhadra only after Sati has
entered the fire. In the Kiirma-Purarµi it is the Devi who requests Siva to
create Virabhadra (I, 15, 30ff.); similarly in the Brahma-PurOIJa (Ch. 39,
51ff.), where Virabhadra id described as accompanied by Bhadrakali.
The Linga-PurOIJa describes Bhadra "who was like a black fire" only
briefly before reporting about his activities (Ch. 100, l lff.).
F. The Destruction of the Sacrifice
We are now at the climax of the episode. The forcible interruption
Dak~a
of Dak$a sacrifice, the assault of the followers of Pasupati Siva at the
settlement in Kanakhala must have shaken the witnesses deeply so
Dak~a
that neither friends nor foes could forget it. The Saivites remembered it
as their triumph over brahmans; the V as a sad event
Vai~i;iava ai~i;iavas
in their glorious history. The Malwbkarata describes the catastrophe quite
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
125
THE ORIGINAL DAKSA SAGA
briefly (CE, XII, 274, 34ff.): it mentions explicitly the large amount of
food and drink stored by Daqa and consumed by the Rudras and the
fact that they burn the sacrifice, although it was protected by the lhvas
(v. 4-0).
No mention is made of Dak$a being beheaded. Dak$a, bewildered,
inquires who this Virabhadra was and he is instructed that "it is
preferable to incur the wrath of that foremost of gods than to obtain
boons from any other deity" (Sp. App. I, 28, 1.122). Dak$a understands,
bows down to Mahesvara and begins a hymn: "I throw myself at the feet
of the effulgent lsana ..." (I. 124ff.). Mahc5vara finally appears from
within the sacrificial pit and grants it to the dazed Dak$a that the
scattered sacrifice may be of use to him.
Quite clearly this account stresses the superseding of the Vedic
dispensation by the Saivite one. Siva, pleased by Dak.$a's conversion,
promises him not only his companionship but also the fruit of a thousand
horse-sacrifices and a thousand vajapeya&. It is Siva now who reconfirms
Dak$a's eminence as patriarch (CE, XII, 274, 55ff.). The Siva-Puriirµz
Viiyavfyasamhitii amplifies the description of the episode by going into a
great deal of detail emphasizing the humiliation of the Vedic gods who
were defenceless against Siva ( Viiyavfyasamliilii, Ch. 20£.). Virabhadra's
gang begins by beating up the gods, including Indra (20, 37). Bhadra
strikes Pavaka, Yama, the Rudras, Varui;ia, Vayu, Nirrti. "He attacked
the gods and the sages antagonistic to Siva" (21, 12ff.). Special mention
is made of SarasvatI having the tip of her nose cut off, Bhaga having his
eyes plucked out, and having his teeth knocked out (21, 15).
Pii~n
Bhadra stamps the moon with his toe (21, 21). He eventually cuts off
head and hands it to Bhadrakli.fi, who plays with it! (v. 23) The
D~'s
sacrifice itself is hit and smashed (v. 33), the bhiitas and vetiilas molest the
women present (vv. 25ff.). The sacrifice in the shape of the deer is
decapitated (v. 33). This last act infuriates Vi$1;tu, who begins fighting
Bhadra. A terrible battle ensues between Vi$1;tU and Bhadra, in which
the latter proves stronger (VS, Ch. 22, vv. 18ff.). Eventually the struggle
ends with an intercession by Brahma (Ch. 23). The few surviving gods
(Vi$1;tU among them) eulogize Siva; they repent and express their fear of
him (vv. 8- 11 ).
Siva's reaction is- well- predictable: he laughs. " It is only to bless
you that the punishment has been meted out to you by the merciful
Lord" (v. 15). Eventually Vi$1;tU utters a hymn in praise of Siva (vv. 27-
30). The account in Rudrasamliitii is almost identical (RS, Chs. 37- 42).
The anti-Vai$1;tava bias is overwhelmingly clear. The Rudrasamliitii
adds a chapter entitled "Vi$i;iu's folly" (Ch. 38). Vi$i;iu had been cursed
by the Saivite Dadhlca and fights (unsuccessfully) with him (Ch. 39).
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
126
KLAUS KLOSTERMAIER
The SiN-PUTiil}li, a Pasupata scripture, rubs it in: the Vedic gods are
powerless; they have been made ridiculous by the injuries inflicted on
them by the servanu of Siva; Vi.$1,1u is second-class; he too depends on
Siva's benevolence. The Skarula-Puriil}li has much the same story, but
narrated with more restraint and less offensively {I, 1, 1, 5).
Violent anti-brahmanism also seems to guide the author of the
account in the Linga-Puriil}li (Ch. 100, I lff.): with glee it reporu Bhadra's
uprooting of the sacrificial posts and throwing them, together with the
hotr and the praswtr into the Ganga (vv. 13ff.). It also mentions the
uprooting of Bhaga's eyes, the knocking out of Piiµn's teeth (vv. 16ff.).
Herc Indra's head is cut off (v. 18), Agni's hands arc severed (v. 19), his
tongue is tom out (v. 19), he is kicked on the head (v. 19). Yama's staff is
cut (v. 20), thousands of dtvas and rlis are killed (v. 22). In his fight with
Vi.$i;iu, whose discus seems to have lost all iu power, Rudra cuu off
Visnu's head too (v. 30), as well as the heads of the sacrifice and ofDaqa
(v. 32f.). It requires Brahma's intervention, who otherwise plays the role
of a dew oliosus, to restore the heads to Indra, Vi$1,lU and (vv.
Da~a
4-0ff. ).
vayu
Among the Saivitc puriinas the shows greatest moderation (Ch.
30): it describes the wrecking of the sacrifice but lets Daltµ, unharmed,
take refuge to Siva: "for the anger of Rudra is better than the blessing of
the other gods" (vv. 186ff ). Siva appears from within the ruined sacrifice
and promises to let have the merit accruing from his sacrifice.
Da~a
The Brahma-Puriil}li has an almost identical account (Ch. 39).
The Vai$i;iava pura114s have a most delicate matter before them: they
probably could not gloss over the incident and could not make the loss of
Kanakhala appear as a gain for V ai$i;iavism. So the Bhagavalam reports
how the Rudras desecrate (!) the sacrifice {IV, 5, 15ff.), how they punish
Bhrgu, Bhaga and Piiµn for offences against Siva (vv. l 7ff.) (never
mentioned before), and how they ritually killed "Virabhadra
Da~a:
severed the head of from his body ... treating the sacrificer as an
Da~a
animal to be sacrificed .. .. He threw head as an offering into the
Dak~a's
sacrificial fire, called Dak$inagni" (vv. 24ff.). Brahma, together with the
other gods, intercedes with Siva, who, it emerges, is after all an aspect of
a truth which had not realized (vv. 33ff.).
Vi~i;iu, Dak~a
The Kiirma-Pura114 makes Virabhadra realize that whom he is
Vi~i;iu,
about to strike, is the creator of the world (I, 15, 12): instead of hurting
Vi$QU he proclaims the identity of Siva and Vi~i:iu: yo v4rJW1 sa svayam
rudro yo rudra/J sa janiirdanafJ . . . (v. 89). The world, it states, has been
created by Rudra-NarliyaQa ... (v. 90).
A similar compromise is also reached in the Harivain!a account, which
gives the upper hand (Bkav4Japarva 32). When Rudra's entourage
Vi~QU
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE ORIGINAL DAK$A SAGA 127
begins to destroy Dak,a's sacrifice, Brahma reports to Vi,r.iu, who,
enraged, tries to shoot Siva (v. 20). Not succeeding, he strikes him with
his (blue) hand at the throat-which explains why he is called n'ilakalUha
(v. 40). Vi$1)U finally recognizes that Siva is sarva-bkila-agama-iUiirya (v.
49) as well as ka~ kartii ca uikartii ca ... sarvabkiiutu uJtama ( v. 51).
Vi$f,IU asks Siva for forgiveness and announces that henceforth any slight
to Siva would make an offering to Vi,f,lu unacceptable (v v. 54ff).
Apparently the "Saivite revolution" meant much more to the Saivites
than to the Vai,r.iavas. For the Vai$i;tavas it was a loss ofa cherished h"rtka
and it implied an arrangement with the Saivitcs, who continued to be
looked down upon as rather uncouth. For the Saivitcs it meant the end
of the Vedic-brahmanic supremacy, which had been under Vaifi;iava
protection. It meant equality with the Vai,i;iavas and social respec
tability with the possession of a universally acknowledged holy place on
the Ganga.
G. Tiu Aftermath
In each and every account a reconciliation takes place between Dak$a
and Siva. The Mwbkarata declares Siva satisfied with Dakµ's long
hymn to Siva, the All-God, the giver and taker of everything, and Dakµ
can now hold his elevated position on account of Siva grace. Siva also
mentions that he has "extracted from Vedas, Samkhya and Yoga the
Pasupata religion, which is unparalleled, open to all, leading to eman
cipation, shrouded in mystery" (XII, App. I, 28, I). Finally, promises of
blessings are attached for those who recite Dak$a's hymn. In line with its
more dramatic style the Siua-Puriil}Q-Vayaulyasamhitii has a more detailed
and more colorful story of the aftermath (Ch. 23, 87ff.). Vi$QU himself is
made to pray to Siva, who then revives the gods (v. 37). "Lord Brahma
made the face of Dak$a look like the face of an old goat as a befitting
punishment for his sins" (vv. 39-41 ). The revived Dak$a, in the course of
his prayer to Siva, calls him "the Lord of Vi$QU". Dak,a's prayer is
followed by a whole chapter providing the rules governing Pasupata
vrata (Ch. 34). In the Rudrasamhitii account Siva, after being eulogized
by the devas in Kailiisa, ordains:
"Let the head of Dak$a be that of a goat, let the god Bhiiga receive his
share in the sacrifice in conjunction with the sun ... Bhrgu shall be goat
bearded ... " (Ch. 42, 7f.).
Dak$a, revived with a goat's head, praises Siva: "Today I have
realized the truth. ... Thou art above all. Thou art served by Vi$QU,
Brahma and others" (vv. 32ff.). Vi$QU is made to apologize to Siva.
Nothing remains of the belief in Vi$QU "the prime cause of all deities".
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
128
KLAUS KLOSTERMAIEll
The SkanJa-PuriilµJ has essentially the same story (Ch. I, 1, 1, 5).
The liiaga-PuriilµJ makes Brahma intervene with Siva who then restores
their heads to Indra and and the tip of her nose to Sarasvati ( 100,
V~Qu
40ff.). Quite clearly, the authority of Vedic and Vai$Qava religion now
rests with Siva. "He sportively made another face similar to the head of
Daqa, whose face had been destroyed" (v. 46). Gaining consciousness,
Daqa eulogizes Siva, who makes him the lord of the g111,1as (v. 47f.). The
BraluM-PuriilµJ, which docs not know of any cutting off of heads, makes
Daqa implore Siva that his sacrifice be not in vain and ends with the
Sivasahasranama spoken by Daqa (39, 60ff.).
The Viiyu-PuriilµJ also ends with Dak$a's conversion to Siva and his
·plea (answered by Siva) that the sacrifice be not in vain (30, 189ff.).
The Bhagavatam has a more complicated task to perform (IV, 6, 33ff.).
To begin with, the gods under Brahma's leadership, approach Siva in
Kailisa after Daqa' s death. Their eulogy contains a new Siva-creed:
Siva is Brahma (v. 42). Siva becomes vedantized (v. 43); from now on by
right a share of each sacrifice is his (v. 45). Siva is pleased with that and
is now in a forgiving mood: "I never recollect the misdemeanor of fools
dominated by the Lord's Maya. ... Let Daqa have the head ofa goat!"
(Ch. 7, 2). The limbs lost by the gods and rishis arc restored, but a
certain amount of exchange takes place (Ch. 3ff.).
Now, finally, Siva is invited to the sacrifice "Daqa, free from malice,
felt inclined to offer praise to Siva . .. but could not do so on account of
affection and grief as he recollected his deceased daughter" (vv. 3-5).
Daqa acknowledges that Siva did him a favor by punishing him: Siva,hc
now understands, is an aspect of Vi$QU, as is Brahma (vv. 9ff.). Now
appears in person and is praised by Dak$a and all those assembled
V~Qu
(vv. l 7ff.). Daqa and the other priests deplore their foolishness to
consider their Vedic sacrifice to be above the Lord. Dak$a appears to
remain a Vai$Qava: he worships Vi$QU and offers his share to Siva too
(vv. 48ff.). Eventually SatI too is reborn in Mena, the spouse ofHimavan
(vv. 58ff.).
For the writer of the Bhagavata the change brought about by the Dak$a
episode was only local and marginal. The Harivamsa seems to agree.31
Conclusion
Assuming, as we did, that the Daqa episode refers to a real event in the
history of Indian religions, i.e., the Saiva conquest of the important tirtha
" Bluutif!OJ>ania 32. Da~a gets 1hc full benefit of his sacrifice which benefits all beings,
due 10 Vi~r;iu's di51'4'nsa1ion!
Google Origiral frcn1
019111zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
129
THE ORIGINAL DAKSA SAGA
of Kanakhala associated with the Patriarch Daqa, we can also assume
that there were a number of witnesses who disagreed among themselves
both with regard to events witnessed and to the possible interpretation of
these events.
The basic events included a solemn major sacrifice to which all the
important personalities of the area were invited: the setting was vedic
brahmanical, Daqa expressing a definite bias towards Vi$1)U, which was
widely but not universally shared. A participant, who perhaps as a yogi
had links with Saivitc groups, suggests a more ecumenical representa
tion, including also Pasupatas, who appear to have dominated some
mountain regions. not heeding this piece of advice, courts the
Da~,
enmity of the Saivas. He has to learn the hard way that Vai$f,lavism is
not all-powerful and so he accepts "a new head". From the standpoint of
the Saivites this was a complete victory ofSaivism over Vai$uavism, from
the standpoint of the V ai$uavas, this was an unpleasant incident which
necessitated certain concessions to be made in the directions of Saivism,
but it did not fundamentally alter their belief.
The Saktas, who must have been associated with the Pasupatas in the
high mountains around the Ganges, linked with the basic story, which
may indeed have included the protest self-immolation ofDaqa's daugh
ter, who had become a follower of Siva, possibly the wife of the Pasupata
chief, their entire foundation story. The Saivite versions leave little doubt
that Saivites fully exploited this event both to claim a rightful share in
what Vedic sacrifices there were still performed and to legitimize their
occupation of the Kanakhala tirtha, considered to be as holy as Prayaga.
Postscript
After this article was sci I came across a recent essay by Bandana Chatterji, "The Story
of Dakfa·Yajna-Nlia: A Critical Study'", in Journal of tJu Ganganalha }ha Knulriya
&tnskrikl Vidyapulha, vol. 36, nos. 1-4 ( Jan.-Dec. 1980), 87- 101, which in addition to
the epic and puranic materials makes use of some later poetic materials as well.
According to P.N. Chopra, ed., in &ligiotts and CommunilUs of India (Vision Books: New
Delhi 1982), p. 181, "1he Bhullar clan of the Sikh J ats claims to have originated when
Siva, enraged at Dalqa's refusal to invite Pirvati ro his sacrifice, pulled out a hair from
his matted locks (ja/4) and dashed it on the ground".
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE SAUPTIKA EPISODE IN THE STRUCTURE OF
THE MAHABHARATA
RUTH KATZ
lntrliduction
This paper will suggest that the Sauptilca episode of the Mahabhiira/a epic,
that is, the events detailed in the epic's tenth book, the Sauptikaparvan
(Book of the Night Attack), encapsulates the central meaning and
message of the epic as a whole for a particular poet, or group of poets,
who took control of the epic story at a certain stage in its development.
The paper opens with a recounting of the Sauptika events; its second
section shows how these events mark the culmination of two particular
threads of the epic narrative. The third section of the paper discusses the
disengagement of various levels of the epic plot from one another in the
Sauptikaparvan. The fourth section speculates upon the party or parties
who may have been responsible for the role of the Sauptika episode in the
extant epic.
I. The Sauptika Events
The central story of the Mahiibhiira/a is the epic tale of a great war on the
battlefield of Kuruqetra between the basically righteous Pa1:u;lavas (five
brothers: Bhima, Arjuna, and the twins) and their allies,
Yudhi~thira,
and the basically evil Kauravas (one hundred brothers, cousins of the
Par;iQavas, led by Duryodhana) and their allies. Books 1- V of the epic
recount the events leading up to the war, centering upon the Par;iQavas'
loss of their kingdom to the Kauravas. The battle books, VI-IX, named
after the four Kaurava allies whom Duryodhana appoints successively as
his generals, describe the war itself, detailing its vagaries, and telling of
how the Pat;iQavas eventually triumphed, but not without recourse to
deceit. After this painfully earned Par;iQava victory, the events of the
Sauptika episode come as a rude shock. They are as follows:
At the end of Book IX of the epic, Duryodhana, dying of wounds
sustained late in the war, hastily appoints his follower ASvatthaman to
leadership of the completely broken Kaurava army, as its fifth general
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
131
THE SAUP T/KA EPISODE IN THE STRUCTURE OF THE MAHABHARATA
(IX.64.38).1 ASvatthaman has been craving revenge ever since his father,
Dror;ia, weapons teacher of both Par;i<;lavas and Kauravas but fighting for
the Kauravas in the war as their second general, was killed unfairly by
the Par;i<;lava army in battle. The Sauptika episode revolves around
ASvatthaman's deeds as general, and the Pai:i<;lavas' reaction to them.
For openers, ASvatthaman leads the only other surviving Kaurava
allies, Krpa and Krtavarman, on a highly illegal night raid against the
sleeping Pai:i<;lava camp, in which all surviving Paficalas and other
Par;i<;lava partisans arc killed (X.8). ASvatthaman obtains the strength to
accomplish this feat by dedicating himself to the god Siva (X.7.50ff.).
The five Pai:i<;lava brothers themselves escape the slaughter only because
their ally and advisor Koi:ia, himself the god incarnate, has gotten
Vi~r;iu
them out of the camp;2 Ko1;1a and his compatriot Satyaki likewise
survive, bringing the Pai:i<;lava survivors to a total of seven (l.1.158,
X.9.47-48). After the raid, ASvatthaman and his two aides manage to
inform Duryodhana of their success, bringing him a certain satisfaction
before he expires (X.9.46ff.).
Among those slain in the Pai:i<;lava camp arc the five Draupadeyas,
sons of the five Par;i<;lavas by their common wife, Draupadi (X.8.50ff.). It
is Draupadi who, hearing of the slaughter, first demands that the eldest
Pai:i<;lava, Yudhi~thira, seek revenge (X. l l.14ff.). (He, true to his
relatively passive character, has done nothing up to this point but
lament). Draupadi threatens to undertake a praya vow (that is, to fast)
·until revenge is obtained. ASvatthaman must be slain, and a gem which
he has worn on his head from birth (a gem with which he was born) be
brought to her if she is to go on living. She reminds the second Par;i<;lava,
Bhima, of his former heroic feats, and he sets out after ASvatthaman.
Some time later, Koi:ia, YudhiHhira, and the third Par;i<;lava, Arjuna,
mounted together on Koi:ia's chariot, follow and catch up with Bhima.
They observe as Bhima discovers ASvatthaman, seated by the Ganges
river with a group of seers (X.13. l 2ff.). At the sight of Bhima and the
others, ASvatthaman calls into being in a reed, apiitµJaviiya ("for the anni
hilation of the Par;i<;lavas"}, the great bralimaJiras ("head of Brahma")
1 All references are to the Malr4bli4ra14 in its Critical Edition, 19 vo!J. plus 6 vo!J. of
indices, ed. Vishnu S. Sukthankar, S.K. Belvalkar, P.L. Vaidya, ct al. (Poona: Bhan
darkar Oriental Research lrutitute, 1933- 72).
' This he has done simply by telling them, at IX.61.35, that they must spend the night
out of the camp u1al4rtliii.Ja ("for the sake of good fortune").
Google Origiral frcn1
019111zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
132
RUTH KATZ
weapon, which he learned to use from his father (X.13.17ff.).' Arjuna,
incited by Knr;ia, calls upon his own brahmafiras weapon, also obtained
from DroQa (l.123.74ff.), to neutralize ASvatthiman's weapon
(X.14.lff.).4
At this point, the seen Narada and Vyisa hurry to the scene to pacify
ASvatthiman and Arjuna (X.14.1 lf.).' Upon seeing these two great
figures, Arjuna calls back his weapon (X.15.lff.). The narrator, Vaiial)l·
piyana, states here that none but Arjuna could have accomplished such
a feat, not even the gods, including their king, Indra; a great hero,
Arjuna was able to recall the brahma!iras weapon by virtue of his
adherence to his vows, obedience to his teachers, and especially his
braltmacarya (chastity). ASvatthiman is, however, incapable of recalling
his brahma!iras weapon. He admits that it was sinful to unloose the
weapon, but says he did so in fear ofBhima, who had killed Duryodhana
wrongly (X.15.13ff.). Vyisa now demands that ASvatthiman withdraw
the weapon, telling him that ifhe wants his life to be spared, he must also
relinquish the gem on his head (X.15.25ff.). The latter ASvatthiman
agrees to do, but he still cannot stop the weapon; the best he can do is to
divert it by sending it into the wombs of the PiQ<java women, killing the
Piu(java heirs rather than the Piu<javas themselves. Knua, however,
promises by his power a revival of the as yet unborn son of Arjuna's dead
son, Abhimanyu, who will be Arjuna's grandson, to be the one
Parik~it,
remaining heir of the Piu<java line (X.16.1 ff.). Meanwhile, KnQa
condemns the child-slayer, ASvatthiman, to three thousand years of
wandering (X.16.lOff.). Knua's actual revival of the murdered fetus is
described in Mahiihharata XIV.65ff.
II. Story Threads Culminating in the Sauptika Episode
of
A. The Story the Pailcala line
As I have indicated in the preceding summary of the Sauptika events, all
the Piiicila allies of the Pau<javas who survived the war die as victims of
' That the weapon used by Nvatthlman is indeed the 6rah11111iiras is not actually stated
until Vyasa's speech of X. I 5. I 9ff. The way has been prepared, however, by the story of
Nvatthaman's acquisition of thi! weapon in X.12.4ff. ·
• Again, the weapon's name i! not stated until X.15.19ff., but that it is the 6ralim4Jiras
is implied clearly in the statement that Arjuna learned it from Dror;ia (X.14.2).
Alternatively, Arjuna learned the 6ralt""'1iras weapon from Siva; see IIl.41.7ff. and
VII.57.79, where the weapon i! called the p4Jupal4 (see below, n. 21). The Sauptika
episode does not, mention this fact.
how~cr,
'Vylsa's appearance i! redundant, as he was already on the scene as of X.13.13.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE SAUPT/XA EPISODE IN THE STRUCTURE OF THE MAHlBHllUTA 133
ASvatthaman's night raid. To elaborate, these figures include the
extremely important Paiicala warriors Dhntadyumna (X.8. I 2ff.) and
Sikha1.ujin (X.8.60); and one must also list with them the five
Draupadcyas, sons of the Paiicala princess, Draupadi, since their
mctronymic appellation regularly classifies them with their maternal
lineage. In fact, all named victims of the night raid arc Pandi.las.6
The importance of the Pancala people for the Mahabharata as a whole
cannot be overestimated: it is so great that a number of Mahabharata
scholars of the past have suggested that the Pancalas, not the Par,ujavas,
were the heroes of the earlier talcs upon which the extant epic is based;
these talcs described a conflict between the Kurus (Kauravas) and
Paiicalas, and it is the place of the Paiicalas which the Par,ic;!avas,
pushing the Paiicalas into the background, took over. 7 This suggestion
appears to have much merit, insofar as one finds a continuous parallelism
in the epic between Paiicala themes and the dominant Par,ic;lava story, for
example, in the peculiar double leadership of the Par,ic;!ava army by
Dhntadyumna and Arjuna (V .154.12(). One can sec, furthermore, in
two cases, how Paiicala themes mold the alliances and paired combats of
the Kuruqctra war: although it is not stated explicitly, scrutiny reveals
that the ciders and Dror,ia, the first two Kaurava generals, fight
BhI~ma
on the Kaurava side not because they are really against the Par,ic;lavas
but because they arc sworn enemies of two Paiicala figures, Sikhar,ic;lin
and Drupada (later his son, Dhntadyumna).8 In fact, the role of the
• Besides the individually named victims, certain groups mentioned in X.8, Pra
bhadralr.as, Somalr.as, and Srfijayas, appear also to be Plilcllas: see their entries in Sercn
Sercrucn, An /rukx 14 tJu Ntlmls in tlu Ma/iQbMrata ( 1904; rpt. Ddhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1978).
' In this regard, a most useful, though brief, article is B.C. Mazumdar's comment on
MaMbMrata 1.94 (Critical Edition 1.89) in the Jo•TMI of tJu Royal Asiatic SO<UIJ of Grtal
Britain and Ireland ( 1906), pp. 225- 26. Mazumdar finds in this chapter remnants of an
independent Kuru-Piiicila struggle, to which the Pir;i<java story, he feels, has been
grafted "for conferring dignity upon the heroes of the new story ... " (p. 225). The many
arguments in favor of an original Kuru-Pli\clla conflict arc summarized by N.N.
Bhattacharya in bis paper entitled "The Kuruqetra War and the Par;i<javas", in Tiu
BMrata War and PurOl}ic Cmtalogies, ed. D.C. Sircar (Calcutta: University of Calcutta,
1969), p. 37. Of great importance is the fact that the Pir;i<javas arc not known to the prc
epic Vedic literature while the Pli\calas arc.
' On the Silr.har;i<jin-B~ma enmity, see V. I 70ff. On Bhifma as Silr.hai;ujin's "share"
in battle, V.56.12, etc. On the Orupada-Drooa antagonism, see 1.122, etc. Once, after
being defeated by Dro9a (with Pa1.1cjava help, for this was prior to the Pir;idava-Pii\di.la
alliance!), Drupada had performed a sacrifice to beget a son who would be able to defeat
Dro11a; as a result, DhnJadyuma was born, from the sacrificial fire, as Dro1,1a's
antagonist. (Note that Draupadi took birth incidentally at the same time, from the
sacrificial altar. The basic story of the birth of Dhni.adyurna and Draupadi is told in
1.155.)
Google Origiral frcn1
019111zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
134
RUTH KATZ
Paiicalas as embodied in the figure of Draupadl is absolutely central to
the Manabharata as a whole. Draupadl incarnates Sri (Prosperity)
(l.61.95, etc.), and an insult to her punctuates the Pai;i9avas' loss of their
kingdom; to regain the kingdom is to avenge Draupadl/Sri. As the joint
Pa1,19ava marriage to Draupadl and the concomitant alliance best
illustrate, a conscious attempt is evidently being made throughout the
epic to link the fates of the Pa1,19avas and Pa.iicalas, or to replace the
central Piiicala role with that of the Pi1,19ava brothcrs.9 One might even
suggest that the epic makes the Pa1,19avas five in number so as to link
them with the Piiiciila people, the first clement of whose name is pailc-,
''five'' .10
In the SaMptilca episode, for ASvatthaman to avenge the death of his
father, Droi;ia, means first and foremost to kill Dh11J.adyumna and the
other Paiicalas, against whom he has inherited Dro1,1a's enmity; that he
docs so is perfectly understandable as part of the chain of revenge which
' Note the recurrent phrase "Pil)c;lavas and Pliicilas" ("pil)c;lupancila ..." ) and the
frequent appearance of the Piilcila pair Yudhimanyu and Uttamaujas (also killed
eventually in the night ra.id) u the protecton of the wheels of Arjuna's chariot (Vl.16.19,
etc.). With regard to the Plikila generalship of the Pil;lc;lava army, note that XIV.59.91f.
specifics that Sikh~c;lin wu the lint general, Dhniadyumna the second. Arjuna
protected Sikh~c;lin, it iJ stated (XIV.59.9), Bhima protected Dhn1adyumna
(XIV.59.15). Contrut V.149.181f., in which Arjuna nominates Dh111adyumna for
general, while Bbima favon Silr.hal)c;lin (Dhn1adyumna being chooen ultimately).
10 The number of Pil)c;lavas gives the impression of being an artificial construct,
particularly because the two younger brothen, the twins, are separated from the older
ones by having a separate mother. In a sense, the three oldest Pil)c;lavas constitute a
political grouping which iJ complete in itself, each making a characteristic contribution
to the whole, while the twins look u though they have been added as an afterthought,
their characteristics being less clearly and consiJtently defined than those of their older
brothcn. If, then, the fivefold grouping iJ very likely artificial and intentional, what is its
basis? Several explanations may be and have been offered: live iJ a number of totality
(possibly with a directional significance); there arc many Indo-European parallels and
parallels within the MaM/Jh4ra14 itself, etc. What I am mentioning here is merely one
additional aspect of a complex iJsuc.
It has been suggested by scholan that the historical name "Piiicila" wu derived from
the fact that the nation was constituted of live tribes, joining together to form it; sec
Hcmchandra Raychaudhuri, Po/itieal History of AllCimt India, 3rd ed. (~cutta: Univer·
sity of Calcutta, 1932), p. 47. (The fivefold count of these lndo-European tribes would
probably have been ideological, rather than real). That the Pioc;lavas were counted as
five by analogy with the Piiicilas was suggested as early as the nineteenth century by
Christian Lassen, seconded by Joseph Oahlmann; sec Dahlmann, Gtn1ru tits MaM/Jh4ral4
(Berlin: Felix L. Dames, 1899), pp. 2241f.
In conclusion of this note, it is necessary to point out that Georges DumCzil, following
Stig Wikander, would not agree that the twins arc an afterthought added to bring
the Pll)c;lava count to five; sec Oumczil's M;ytlu <I lpoplt, I (Paris: Gallimard, 1968), pp.
531f., for another analysis of the Paoc;lava family structure (but one which does not
attempt to expla.in why the Pi1;1cjava count is precisely five).
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
135
THE SAUPTIKA EPISODE IN THE STRUCTURE OF THE MAHABHARATA
constitutes the epic story line. What is shocking about the night raid,
however, is its finality: the Pancalas can never again avenge themselves;
they have been wiped out completely.
This result of the night raid means a major twist in the epic plot as a
whole: Draupadi's family has been killed off, and she herself leaves no
offspring. If the entire Kuruk.$etra war can be described as the Pa1;ujavas'
successful revenge for an insult to Draupadi, or, more broadly, as their
Sri
fight to establish their kingship with incarnate as their queen, what
possibly can be the meaning of a fruitless Par;u;lava-Draupadi marriage?
It may be argued that many an epic hero leaves no offspring; yet the
absolute importance of children for the Pil;lc;lava family permeates the
&ulptilca episode. What one may suggest, rather, is that someone is
getting rid of the Pancalas to make way for another Par;ic;lava heir.
Through Book IX the epic is the story of a Pancfila war and victory, with
a superimposed Par;ic;lava plot. Book X tells of the twilight of the
Pancalas, but does not provide a Par;ic;lava parallel. Instead, the
Par;ic;lavas survive the termination of the Pancala line, and are forced to
stand on their own.
B. The Establishment of the Lineage of Janarnejaya
The offspring left to the Par;ic;lava lineage at the end of the Sauptika
episode is, as detailed above, Just like the thread of Pancala
Parik~it.
events running through the Mahiibhi.rata, the events having to do with
the ancestry of may be traced through the first nine books of the
Parik~it
epic; only in this case they constitute a sub-plot, which does not surface
until Book X, when it takes over where the Pancala plot leaves off. The
major episodes of this sub-plot are Arjuna's stealing of Kor;ia's sister
Subhadra as his fourth, but for this plot most important, wife (l.21 lff.),
and the birth of Abhimanyu to Arjuna and Subhadra; Arjuna's teaching
of the Matsya princess Uttara, and the marriage of Uttara (first offered
to Arjuna) to Abhimanyu (IV.66.27ff.); and the death of Abhimanyu in
battle, killed by Kaurava treachery (Vll.32ff.), leaving Uttara a preg
nant widow. Note that all of the epic's glorification of Abhimanyu as a
great hero reflects favorably upon line, as does, for that matter,
Parik~it's
all glorification of the Par;ic;lavas, especially Arjuna.
In the thread of the Mahi.bhiirata plot comprising genealogy,
Pari~it's
two peoples besides the Par;ic;lavas are particularly important: the Vor;iis
(Kor;ia's people) and the Matsyas. (The Vor;iis are doubly important to
Pariqit: first, his grandmother was a Vor;ii; second, when Asvatthaman
killed him, a Vor;ii, Kor;ia-his maternal uncle-revived him). Any
information about these two peoples in the first nine books of the epic
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
136
RUTH KATZ
may be construed as having been included to prepare the way for
birth: for example, the fact that the last year of the Par:icjavas'
Pari~it's
exile from their kingdom was spent in the kingdom of the Matsyas
(which is, therefore, the scene of Book IV of the epic)." Similarly, any
praise of Knr:ia in the epic is indirect praise of lineage.
Pari~it's
Consideration of the frame of the Mahabharata makes it easy to see who
was responsible for fostering its Pariqit-oriented sub-plot. One of the
epic's two accounts of its own composition states that it was first recited
by the brahman Vaisalllpayana to a Kingjanamejaya. Thisjanamejaya
was, in fact, the son of Pariqit, and the recitation took place at a snake
sacrifice held by him to avenge the death of his father by snake bite
(l.36ff.). Evidently, poets catering to the whim of this king (whatever his
historical name may really have been)12 saw fit to commandeer the
Paiicala cycle of heroic tales for the glorification of the king's ancestors,
known to the epic as the Par:icjavas. Eventually, in the Sauptika episode,
the poets killed off the Paiicalas to make way for the king's father, the so
called Parik$it, and the king himself.
Ill. How tht Levels of Discourse of lht Mahabharata Narrative Disengage
Themstlvts in tht Sauptika Episode
Careful reading of the Mahabharata, with special attention to its uneven
nesses and inconsistencies and their causes, suggested to me, as I worked
on my doctoral dissertation on the hero Arjuna, that the story line of the
epic might be analyzed into three "levels" of discourse." The levels could
be identified, I discovered, in terms of their respective emphases: heroic,
human, and Hindu. In a brilliant feat of combination and permutation,
the Mahabharata plot creates itself through fluctuation between the levels.
" Note 100 that Uttara, the Matsya prince who plays an important role in Mo/UJ
bli4ra14 IV, is the first major casualty of the Kuruqctra war (Vl.45.38-39). Peculiarly,
some lists of victims of the night raid include the Matsyas along with the Piincilas
(X.8.15, CIC.).
12 As the name ''.Janamejaya" is applied 10 a number of different figures in the
MaMbli4ra14 and elsewhere, including some from much earlier generations (1.89.44, 47,
1.90.11, etc.; sec also 11.8.21), and so might have been borrowed as prestigious, it cannot
be assumed to have been the real name of a historical personage who was Arjuna's grcat
grandson. Noncthclcsa, thisJanamcjaya seems to represent a king or group of kings who
flourished historically, most likely Hindu conquerors of the autochthonous inhabitants of
northern India (this being the probable meaning of Janamcjaya's snalt< sacrifice and
conquest of (1.3.18) in the epic).
Ta~ill
" I studied the Bombay and Poona (Critical) Edition!, but what I say in this section
could apply to any edition of the epic.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE SAUl'TIKA EPISODE IN THE STRUCTURE OF THE MAHABHARATA 137
One may, for example, note this fluctuation in the battle books of the
epic as follows:
At Level I (the heroic level), the books describe typically Indo
European heroic warfare, very similar in cause, character, and results to
the wars described in the Iliad, the Ttfin Bo Cuailngt, or any one of a
number of other Indo-European works of heroic literature, but, of
course, couched in the language of India: dharma ("law" or "right") as
well as kingdom is at stake, although it is destined to win out in the end
("yato dharmas tato jayal:i" ["where right is, there is victory"]
[V.141.33, VI.2.14, etc., etc.]); the war as a whole is conducted as a
sacrifice to preserve world order; it is, too, a reflection of the age-old
battle between the Indo-European (Vedic) gods, headed by Indra, and
the demons. This heroic level comprises the Par;u;lava tale built on a
Paiicala base, as described above.
Level II (the human level) of the battle books focuses upon the human
problems emerging in the course of the heroic struggle, as epitomized in
the ambiguity of the moral issues set forth: who is right and who is
wrong? Issues crystallizing at this level include the following: the
complexity of the original dispute (particularly insofar as genealogical
irregularities confuse claims to the throne); the necessity of fighting
against relatives, and the participation of the elders and teachers of the
family on the supposedly evil (Kaurava) side; and the victory of the
supposedly good warriors (the Pal}<;lavas) by means of a series of heinous
deceits. All heroic epics have a certain human dimension: the epic hero,
being, almost by definition, semi-divine, has a human as well as a godlike
side, which always emerges at some point in the epic action. One must,
however, admit that the human side of the Mahii.bhii.rata characters is
particularly well defined. Surely no other epic has its most powerful hero
sitting down in moral despair and refusing to fight, as Arjuna does at the
start of the war in the episode of the Bhagavadgitii. (Mahii.
Kuru~etra
bhii.rata VI.23ff.)." Kar1.1a, the tragic hero of the Mahii.bhii.rata, sum
marizes the moral ambiguity of the battle books, and the epic as a whole,
in the following pathetic words:
. . . dharmapradhii.nii.n abhipii.ti dharma
i!J abruvan dharmavidaJJ sadaiva /
mamii.pi nimno 't(ya na pii.ti bhaktii.n
manyt na ni!Ja111 paripii.ti dharmaJJ / /
" Achill"'' refusal to fight in the /litJJ, while structurally similar, is not inspiml by the
same motive. Provoked by anger, Achill"'' refusal more closely parallels that of Kan;ta in
Ma/JM!t4r414 V .6 I. l 2f., etc., than that of Arjuna.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
138
RUTH KATZ
The knowers of dharma have always
said: "Dharma protects those devoted to
dkarma". Since my [chariot wheel] sank
today, it does not protect its devotees. I
think dkarma does not always protect!" (VIII.66.43)')
It is, perhaps, the Mahahhii.rata's concern for the human condition which
leads it to reach for a higher plane at which ambiguities arc transcended
and the clear right and wrong of the heroic level restored.
At Level Ill (the Hindu level), one finds a fully developed Hindu
response to the issues raised at Level II. The Pai:ic;lavas arc right, the epic
asserts at Level III, simply because they arc devotees of God (the Hindu
god K"r.ia, far more important at this level than the Vedic gods), whom
the Kauravas, by contrast, have rcjccted;16 this is the message, for
example, of the Bhagaoadgitii's hhaktimiirga (path of devotion). Even
seemingly deceitful actions arc good when K"r;ia advocates them;
variants of the statement "Where K"i:ia is, there is dkarma; where dharma
is, there is victory" (Xl.62.34, etc.; compare VI.41.55, etc.) replace, at
this level, the heroic lcvcl's simpler-but discredited-insistence that
dkarma and victory go hand in hand irrespective of Kni;ia.17 In the battle
books the devotional emphasis appears in intermittent references to the
fact that Arjuna and K"i;ia, merely special friends or warrior and
charioteer at the heroic and human levels, arc really Nara and
Narayar;ia, the archetypal devotee and his God. Recurrently, then, at the
very moment when the Pai;ic;lavas' victory is most in doubt from the
" Dharmic confusion is so omnipresent in the Maltiibhmala that it misled the nine
teenth-century Gennan scholars Adolf Holtzmann dder and younger into inventing a
theory which stated that the Kauravas were the heroes of an original version of the epic,
the Pai;><javas its villains; see Holtzmann, elder, /nJiscil< &,m (Stuttgan: Adolph Krabbe,
1854, I, viiif., etc.).
" The major locus of Kaurava rejection of Krn1a is the period of peace missions before
the war. When K11Qa comes as ambassador to the Kauravas, Duryodhana wishes to
imprison him (V.86.13f.; and see abo V.128.4ff.); nor does he relent even when K11r.ia
grants him a divine vision (V.129.4ff.). lfDuryodhana occ.asionally seems to be starting
to understand who K111Ja really is (Vl.64.11), he studiously ignores such an insight for
the duration of the war. He does, howev<r, acknowledge K11i;ia shortly before his death
(IX.64.28f.).
" For the view that K111,1a is a late addition to the phrase "yato dharmas ta to jayati",
see Georg von Simson, "Die Einschaltung der Bliagavodgil4 im Bhipnaparvan des Malti.
blr4rala", lndo-lr"'""1t ]o•rnal, 11 ( 1968- 69), 166 and 174. Sylvain Levi, however, seems
to hold the opposite view: "yatal} k11r.ias tato jayal;l" and "yato dharmas tatal} k111.1al;l"
(and combinations of these) are the primary phrases; "yato dhannas tato jayati" is a
derivative (see his article "Taro Jayam Udiraytl", trans. L.G. Khare, AMal.s of tlu
Bluuuiarkar Institute, I [1918-19), 15).
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE SAUPTIKA EPISODE IN THE STRUCTURE OF THE MAHABHAIU TA 139
human perspective, the battle books remind their audience that the
power of God and devotion is actually invincible.
In the battle books, the three levels of discourse arc intertwined so
neatly that it is difficult to envision one or another standing alone. Not so
in Book X of the Mahiibhiirata, however; and it is this fact which makes
the Sauptilcaparvan so worthy of attention. For it is in Book X that the
intertwined levels of the epic story disengage themselves from one
another: the heroic/human plot is killed off with the Paiicalas, and the
Hindu devotional level takes over in the person of the child
Pa~it,
dependent upon Kni;ia for his very life.18 Before speculating on the
meaning of this transition, l will devote the remainder of this section to
suggesting some of the ways in which the devotional emphasis of the
Sauptilca episode transforms materials from the battle books.
First, one may point to the expanding time frame of the mythic
imagery invoked by the Sauptilca episode as compared to the battle books.
Behind and around the war lurks the myth of the kaliyuga
Kuruk~etra
(dark age), the present, degenerate age of world history, as is apparent
from the epic's concern with the dharmic decline associated with the
conflict. The epic states clearly that the Kuruqctra war marked the
onset of the kaliyuga in the present yuga cycle.19 But degeneration of
dharma, moral ambiguity, is only a Level ll (human) problem for the
Mahiibhiirata; it is meaningless at Level Ill. Appropriately, then, the
Sauptilca episode expands beyond the human-oriented, morally deter
mined yuga cycle to the tremendously longer cycle of days and nights of
the god Brahma, what might be called divine, or eschatological, time.
The myth behind the Sauptilca episode is the myth of pralaya, periodic
" Pariqit's dependence upon Krnia is evident in the pusage which describes the scene
at the time of his revival (XIV.69.1 ff.). This passage may be contrasted with parallel ones
describing the births of other heroes, for example, that which treats of the birth of
Bharata, ancestor of the Piir.i<;lavas and Kauravas (I.68. I ff.) or that which treats of the
birth of the Draupadeyas (l.213.7lff.). For example, it is Kma who names Pariqot
(XIV.69.9f.), while the other heroes tend to be named by sages. With rcganl to Pli'lcila
dissociation from the devotional level of epic narrative in the Saaptika epi.sode, it is worth
noting that even the earlier books of the epic do not view the Piiicalas as particularly
talented spiritually; see VIl.165.41ff. for an illustration of this point.
" Stt 1.2.9, 111.148.37, IX.59.21; cf. V. 72.18, V .140. 7ff., VI.62.39, XIl.326.82ff. Note
that the Purloas postdate the MaMbliOrala chronology slightly, stating that the A:ali.Jvl•
began with the death of Kn11a. One may conjecture that the MaMbiiOrala is placing
greater emphasis than the Puri\)as on the explicit connection between the events of the
war and the dhannic decline which is the A:ali.Jvla. Many aspects of the MaliObiiOTala story
seem to have been shaped consciously with the Kuruqetra war-A:ali.Jvl• connection in
mind: to give just two examples, the obvious failure of dlumoa during the dice game in
which the Pio<;lavas lint lose their kingdom to the Kauravas, and the breakdown of
family unity in the struggle.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
140
RUTH KATZ
violent destruction of the universe after a day of Brahma; the kaliyuga is
dwarfed by comparison.20
One indication that the myth behind the Sauptilca episode is the myth
of pralaya is the key part played in the story by the god Siva, working
through ASvatthaman. Herc ASvatthaman imitates the role of Siva as
World Destroyer at the time of pralaya, developed in classical Hindu
mythology. Regarding the eschatological role of the braltmaiiras weapon,
with which ASvatthaman attempts to complete his work ofd estruction, it
is necessary only to point out that the epic sometimes views the
bralimaJiras as identical with the paSilpata weapon (although the Sauptilca
episode itself docs not mention this idcntification).21 The name of the
piilupata weapon indicates its close connection with Siva, who himself is
Pa8upati (Lord of Animals), and the weapon is stated in 111.41.8 and
elsewhere to be the destroyer at the end of an age.22 stopping the
K~t;1a,
'°
The chronology worb nicely: the war followed by the nighi"r aid parallels the Jiil•
cycle followed by f"al4ya. It is necessary to note here that Madeleine Biardeau, whose
work on the Maltiib!rirala I greatly admire (sec, especially, her "Etudes de mythologie
u
hindouc", 1-V, Bull<lill l'&olt FrGllfais• d'ExtrtrM-OrimJ, 54 [1968], 19-45; 55 [1969],
59-105; 58 [1971], 17- 89; 63 [1976), 111-263; 65 [1978], 87-238) (partially reprinted
u
with modifications as £twits m.1thologit hiN/ow, Tome I: Cosmogonus pwm,;qws,
Publications de l'Ecole Fran~aise d'Extreme-Orient, vol. 128 [Paris: Ecole Fran~aise
1981 )), would probably not agree with my distinction between the
d'Extr~mc-Orient,
k<&l!Jotla-inspircd and the f"al4.JG·inspired sections of the epic. She regards both the war
and the S...ptika episode as based on the image of fWal4,JG, and to her the night raid is
essentially a "reprise" and clarification of the war; sec "Etudes", IV, pp. 208ff. She docs,
however, have many interesting ideas regarding the details of the fWaU.ya imagery in the
S""/ltik4 episode: Bhima as the wind of fWala.10; Uttari's womb as the water, <tc.
("Etudes", IV, pp. 210ff.). Similarly, Dumezil seems to view 1he whole Mali4bfl4tal4 war
as a reflection of the lndo-Europcan eschatological conflict, although, in fact, the S""/Jtika
material figures most prominently in his discussion of the matter; sec Mytlu ti lpoplt, I, pp.
218ff. Only Alf Hiltebeitel seems to concentrate on the Sa¥1ika events (plus the
antecedent story of Abhimanyu's death) as particularly cschatological; sec his Tiu Ri1""1
of Bault: Kris/ma i• tM Mali4bfl4tal4 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1976), pp.
3 l 2ff.
It is quite true that imagery of fWal4ya abounds in the battle boob, for example, when
the battlefield is described as paralleling the chaos of the time of universal destruction
(Vll.100.5, etc., etc.) or when certain warriors arc compared to the forces of nature
which destroy the world at the end of a cosmic age. I find it most helpful, however, to
view the cschatological imagery of the battle scenes as primarily formulaic. (Hiltebeitel
[p. 312) seems to be of the same opinion). The battles arc described as resembling fWal4.JO
in intensity, but this says nothing about the time frame of the epic, which places the war
at the onset of the Wiyuga, not at the moment of universal destruction. Nor docs fWalaya
imagery seem to me mold the events of the war or the characters involved in it, as
10
k41i!".'"
imagery docs, until the Sa¥1ik4 episode.
' Sec lll.41.7f. for the identification of braltmafiras and paluJ>ala.
22 On the other hand, the ultimate nature of the paiuJ>ala weapon is not always stressed.
It is sometimes grouped on lists with other weapons, and both Dro\\a and the Kauravas
arc said, in such cases, to possess it (Vll.163.28, Vlll.43.21).
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
141
THE SAUPTIKA EPISODE IN THE STRUCTURE Of"THE MAHilBHif/UTA
brahmaiiras weapon, functions in his classic Vi~Qu role of Prcscrver.25
In part, the SauptiJ.:a episode employs the concepts and imagery of the
battle books: humanity and Hinduism superimposed upon a heroic
conflict. ASvatthaman justifies his night raid on the basis of previously
committed Pai;ic;lava misdeeds, and sees it as an act of pragmatic policy
(X. l.33f.).2 In words fraught with emotion, he bemoans Duryodhana's
'
fate (X.4.27) and pledges revenge. Krpa disputes the morality of
ASvatthaman's plan, yet agrees to help, predicting an Indra-like perfor
mance on ASvatthaman's part (X.2, 4, 5). The raid is conducted like a
sacrificial act, having much in common with the heroic Khai;ic;lava
burning episode of Mahahhiirata 1.214-25,2 but it is, like the war as a
'
whole, a sacrifice of human beings. That only a few survivors remain
afterwards is very much a kaliyuga situation: when Yudhinhira laments,
"jiyamana jayanty anye jayamana va~arp jitab" ("The others who were
being conquered conquer; we, who were conquering, have been con
quered") (X.10.10), the ambiguity of the outcome is stressed. Later,
when ASvatthaman throws the bralrmaiiras weapon, he does so out of a
sense of iipad (emergency) (X.13.17). The humanity of his reaction is,
however, qu_ickly resolved into the divine madness of Siva at the time of
world destruction.
As discussed above, Arjuna is portrayed in the battle books as Knr:ia's
devotee par excellence. It has also been pointed out that at the Hindu level
of discourse in the epic the Kauravas are seen as evil specifically because
they reject Knr;1a. The Sauptilca episode emphasizes this same anti-Knr;1a
bias in Asvatthaman and contrasts Arjuna's attachment to Knr:ia with
ASvatthaman's rejection of him. In this regard, one especially interesting
story is told for the first time in Sauptilcaparvan 12 (ASvatthaman's
relations with Knr;1a not being of particular concern to the earlier books
of the epic): ASvatthaman, wandering the world, had once arrived in
n Compare the depiction of pro/aµ in Bhaga-'git4 XI= Vl.33. The parallelism
between this chapter and the Sa..ptilca episode is underscored by the mention in each of
the key role of A:al4 (Time or Fate) in world destruction; sec VI.33.32, etc., juxtaposed
with X.8.65, etc., recounting the appearance of the violent figure of kaJ4riiJri (Night of
Fate) on the scene of the night raid (compare also X.7.62f.). Striking, however, is th< fact
that in BM.,avadgilO XI, K11Qa himself is Ocstroy<r as w<ll as Prcscrv<r, while in th<
Sa..plika episode the roles ofOcstroy<r and Prcservtr ar< divided between Siva and K11..,a
(with Warilri as yet a third figure). On Bhagavadg'U4 Xi's connection with prai4ya, sec
Biardeau, "Etudcs", III, p. 53, IV, p. 116, and V, p. 139.
" Ht copies th< conduct of an owl whom ht secs killing sleeping crows. This story
sounds very much lik< th< sort of parablt one might find in a work of arthaJistra (political
science).
" OutJtandingly, th< setting of fires and the slaying of those fleeing at th< gate
(X.8.IOff.), as wrll as th< panic of the victims.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
142 RUTH KATZ
Koi;ia's city of Dvlirakli and asked Koi;ia for his discus in exchange for
the brakmafiras weapon. When Koi;ia had offered the discus to him,
however, he had been unable to lift it."He had then admitted that had he
obtained the discus, he would have used it to fight against Koi;ia. Herc
Arjuna and several VoQ.is are contrasted with the extremely evil
ASvatthliman: these had never made such a request of Kor;1a
(X.12.25ff.). In X.12.27, Koi;ia calls Arjuna: "yasmlit priyataro nisti
I
mamanyal) puru$O bhuvi nlideyaip yasya me kiqicid api daral) sutlis
.tathli ("He than whom no other person on earth is dearer to me, to
whom I would give anything, even my wives and sons").
The contrast between the behavior of ASvatthliman, who was told
even by his father that he would be unrighteous (X.12.9), and Arjuna is
also implicit elsewhere in the Sauptik#. episode. Both Arjuna and ASva
tthaman were warned against clrelcss use of the bralima!iras weapon
when they were, at separate times, given this weapon by Dror;1a
(ASvatthaman against Dror;ia's better judgment).26 The Sauptilcaparvan
states that Arjuna set his brakmafiras weapon in motion "piirvam
I
licliryaputrliya tato 'nantaram litmane bhrlitrbhya.S caiva sarvebhyal)
11
svastity uktvli ... devatabhyo namas krtya gurubhya.S caiva
I . ... "
sarva.SaJ:i ("having spoken a blessing for the son of the preceptor,
then at once for himself and also for all his brothers, having honored the
deities and also all the teachers . ..." ) (X.14.5-6). That Arjuna's
goodness is dependent upon Koi;ia is clear from the fact that his good
action was prompted by this mentor. For Arjuna, the bralima!iras weapon
is devotional in character (marking a development over his other
weapons, outstandingly the bow GliQ.Qiva), and he has the devotional
power to control it. It is not surprising, then, that Arjuna is able to
withdraw the bralima!iras weapon while ASvatthliman cannot, although a
brahmanical weapon (for such its name and source show it to be) should
by right be handled better by a brahman than a warrior, especially when
that brahman is the weapons teacher's own son. ASvatthliman fails in his
handling of the bralima!iras because he is not a devotee of Knr;ia.
But the ASvatthaman of the Sauptika episode is more than just a human
rejector of K11r:ia devotion; he seems, rather, to become an arch-rival
god. In this episode, then, Vi~i;iu-Siva opposition completely replaces the
heroic and human oppositions of the battle books, defining the
" At l.123.75ff., Dror;ia warns Arjuna not to use the />Ta/J:m4Jiros weapon on humans; it
could bum the world. Siva warns Arjuna ttgarding the brolun4Jiras/~ at 111.41.15:
he mwt not use it without due consideration. At 111.163.49- 50, Siva t<lls Arjuna not to
use the~ against humans; it must only be used against other weapons. Regarding
Dro~a's hesitation and warning to A!vatthiman, sec X. I 2.6ff.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
143
THE SAUPTIKA EPISODE IN THE STRUCTURE OF THE MAHABHARATA
devotional opposition of the Hindu level of the epic far more sharply
than it was defined before.27
The metamorphosis of the ASvatthiman of the battle books into what
may best be characterized as an incamation-<>r representation-<>fSiva
is a major accomplishment of the SauptiA:a episode. This transformation
provides an example of how each level of discourse in the Mahii.bliiirala
chooses appropriate materials from other levels to remodel according to
its own needs. For equation with Siva, a more appropriate character
from the earlier books of the epic could not have been chosen. Having all
the external heroic traits of beauty and auspicious markings (IX.5. 7ff. ),
and known as a hero,28 ASvatthiman has nevertheless been a peculiar
" Before the Saytihl episode, VifQu-Siva opposition in the epic i.s not clear..:ut. Siva,
opposing K"iµ, i.s sometimes said to be aligned with destructive forces having some
Kaurava or anti-Pi9(java affiliation: Jarisall\dha, for example (11.13.63, 11.17.19,
11.20.8), and Jayadratha (lll.256.25ff.). EIJewhere, Siiupila, Kma's enemy, is said to
have been born three-eyed (11.4-0.1), a Saivic trait. The births of the Kauravas
themselves arc sometimes said to have taken place only after the propitiation of Siva
(1.103.9 and 111.24-0.6) (this proves little, however, because propitiation of Siva is a
common action for one desiring progeny throughout the epic, and elsewhere the
Kauravas arc said to have been born through a boon from Vylsa (1.107.7ff.]). On the
other hand, the magic charm which made possible the engendering of the Pio(javas was
a gift to Kunti from Durvisas (l.104.4ff.), who is a portion of Siva (Xlll.145.35 and I,
Appendix I, No. 118, lines 73f., and later texts; Durvlsas i.s also given as a name of Siva
in XIl.12.61). Siva i.s also involved in the variow stories which explain how the multiple
marriage ofDraupadi took place (1.157.189). In many other ways as weU, the P11)4avas
arc associated with Siva: note especially the Arjuna-Siva initiatory encounter of Book Ill
(similar in some ways to Aivatthlman's initial encounter with Siva in the S~
episode), in which Arjuna wins weapons from Siva. During this meeting, Siva gives
Arjuna a vision of himself. Herc and elsewhere, Arjuna wins the pldll/Jal4 weapon
(meanwhile, Aivatthlman bas the ,,.;,~ weapon, which can be countered only by
passive resistance (VII. l 70. l 5ff.]). In the battle books, Arjuna i.s sometimes compared to
Siva; as I have stated in n. 20 above, however, I feel that such formulaic comparisons do
not indicate anything regarding mythic affiliation. Far more striking i.s the fact that Siva
i.s said to precede Arjuna on the battldield (VII. l 73.9f., Xll.330.69f.). After the war i.s
over, the Pil)(javas propitiate Siva to get the gold required for their bone sacrifice
(XIV.64.lff.).
The confusion in alignments seems to have a double cause. At the heroic level there i.s,
of course, no ViJyu..Siva opposition, and thus no reason not to permit the PlQ(javas to
fraternize with Siva where appropriate. At the devotional level, the epic has been
interpolated by both Vi,ou devotees and Siva devotees, each group trying to allow its
favorite deity to absorb the deeds ofhi.s opponent. One thus finds Niriyaoa praising Siva
at VII. l 72.63ff., Kma calling Siva a uibltiai (manife3tation) of Vifou (Vl.32.33), etc.
Even in the SdJl/IW episode there arc hints ofs uch admixture, for example, a suggestion,
in X.6.17, etc., that Knoa somehow stands behind Siva. Yc t a single devotional group
which bad control over part of the epic could mold it at will, and this sccnu to have
occurred in the case of the Sap/WJ episode as a whole. Siva reveals himself as a force
oppoaing K"1;1a and the PiQ(javas here, as he tells Ajvanhiman that he has until now
protected the Piilcilas for Kmia's sake, but that their time is now past.
• Even in the words of Arjuna; see VII.167.25ff.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
144
RUTH KATZ
figure, a fighting brahman like his father (IV.46.8f., etc.). In childhood,
he distinguished himself among Droi;ia's students sarvqu"
"rahasy~u
("in all mysteries") (1.123.41). Not only was ASvatthaman born to
enmity against the Paiica!as; he must also have been resentful of Arjuna
from his earliest days, knowing that his father preferred Arjuna to him
(1.125.7, etc.). The fire of this enmity would have been fanned by the
Pai;i<;lava-Paiicala alliance, culminating in the unrighteous slaying of
Droi;ia. A natural by-product of ASvatthaman's enmity against Arjuna
was, of course, opposition to Kni;ia. Just as the imagery of the lcaliyuga
expands into imagery of pralaya, so ASvatthaman's human resentments,
combined with his special powen, expand into divine destructiveness in
the Sauptilca episode. Reflecting ASvatthaman's fully developed role in the
epic, the list of partial incarnations of Mahiibhiirata 1.61 describes him as
"mahadevantakabhyarp ca kamat krodhac ca ... ckatvam upapan
nanarp jajnc" {"born of the Great God [Siva], Death, Anger, and Desire
combined") (l.61.66).29
ASvatthaman is enabled to act effectively in the night raid by virtue of
his devotion to Siva: he gains power by offering himself as a sacrifice to
Siva, and afterwards his behavior is wildly Siva-like. The Pai;i<;tava camp
at the time of the night raid is reminiscent of the cremation grounds
frequented by Siva; the fire set there by the night raidcn resembles that
with which Siva burns the world at the time of pralaya. The gem on
ASvatthaman 's head is like Siva's third eye."' The wandering to which he
is condemned ultimately is Saivic behavior.
Underlining the identification of Asvatthaman with Siva, the last two
chapten of the Sauptilcaparvim consist of stories of Siva, told by Kni;ia to
Yudhinhira in connection with Knr:ia's explanation of how ASva
tthaman was able to succeed in the night raid. One story, a version of the
well-known talc of "Dak$a's sacrifice"" (although Dak$a is not men
tioned in it by name) (X.18), has imagery which is connected intimately
with that of the night raid, imagery of pralaya. Herc Siva is portrayed as
a malcontent who feels himself slighted by the other gods; this is a
sentiment which closely parallels Asvatthaman's bitter feeling towards
the Pai;i<;!avas, as depicted throughout the Sauptilca episode.
In the ultimate conflict of the Sauptilca episode, ASvatthaman as Siva
" The same chapter identifies Kfl"' as an incarnation of the Rudras (v. 71) , gods
closely related to ~iva.
"' Siva's third eye is, in fact, mentioned in the SiUAptika episode (X.7.8).
" Found in the Mahab"4ral4 at Vll.173.29, •Ufl'., XIl.274, etc., as well as in the
Puri11as.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE SAUPTIKA EPISODE IN THE STRUC:TURE OF THE MAHABHARATA 145
threatens to destroy the universe, represented by the Pii:u;lava family. At
this moment of extreme crisis, Knr;ia, aided by his devotee Arjuna, must
intervene. Together, Knr;ia and Arjuna manage to preserve world order;
or, to be more specific, they manage to rescue that very small remnant
which is necessary to recreate the world after its cyclic destruction.'2
That remnant is The pralayic imagery of rebirth from a
Parik~it."
remnant is probably based on the imagery of the funerary sacrifice, in
which a body is burned and the ashes quickened with water so that
rebirth (or, in the case of pralaya, a new creation of the universe) may
occur.54 In the Sauptilr.a episode, however, the sacrifice turns out to be
God's, and its successful outcome is seen to depend upon God's ability to
reverse the natural processes of life and death; the message being that of
the epic at its Hindu level: that devotion must inform sacrifice.
IV. Who Composed the Sauptikaparvan?
Evidently, the composers of the Sauptikaparvan were committed devotees
of who, as outlined above, substituted a devotional version of the
Vi~r;iu,
epic conflict for a heroic/human one. Equally evident is the fact that the
devotees who were responsible for this work were poets in the court of the
king known to the epic asjanamcjaya; for, as indicated in Section 118 of
this paper, a major emphasis of the episode is to establish consciously and
deliberately the position of Janamejaya's father,
Parik~it.
For these poets striving to please their king, the Sauptika episode
encapsulated the central meaning of the MahiihhiiraJa, which was a
political meaning: the riddles which led to the Kuruqctra war had been
solved perfectly; that is, the succession conflict was over permanently, a
single descendant of the entire Kuru line having been provided, and the
oppositions of the war dissolved once and for ail. "As truth and dharma
arc constantly established in me, let this dead child, the son of
Abhimanyu, live" ("yatha satyalJl ca dharma5 ca mayi nityalJl prati
I
Hhitau tatha mrtal;i sisur ayalJl JlVatam abhimanyujal;i") (XIV.68.22),
said Knr;ia as he revived Parilqit. The royal claim of Janamejaya,
Parilqit's son, was established absolutely, on the basis of a devotional
" See Biardeau, "Etudes", IV, p. 127.
" Biardeau, "Etudes", V, p. 162. The idea of a child as r<mnant is found mon: than
once in the Manuhira14: compare the cases of Paribra (l.167.13ff.) and Aurva
(l.169.20ff.).
" Biardeau, "Etudes", 111, p. 31, n. I, pp. 75ff., IV, p. 190. Indeed, the main
descripti~n of f"alaya in the Maliabharal4 (IIl.186.56ff.) follows this pattern.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
1%
RUTH KATZ
relationship with Koi;ia (to whomjanamejaya traced his ancestry), who
saved world order by saving Pariqit.•s
At this point, I ask for my readers' indulgence as I turn to speculation
and present the following hypothesis: that the poets responsible for the
extant Sauptilca episode were adherents, or forerunners, of that sect of
Vi~i;iu devotees known as Paiicaratrins,3 6 who molded the Sauptika tale to
illustrate their own doctrine symbolically. According to this hypothesis,
the night raid, followed by the bralunaiiras portion of the episode, would
represent the "night" (riitra) referred to in the compound " Paiicaratra".
This symbolism would correspond well to what Walter G. Necvcl, Jr.
cites convincingly as an early interpretation of this term (possibly
representing its "original" meaning): that "Paiicaratra" refers to the
"night of the five", the "five" being the earthly elements, which
disappear at the time of mokfa (individual salvation) or pralaya.31 In the
night raid of the Sauptilca episode, the five who are destroyed arc the five
shadowy Draupadcyas, or, alternatively, the Paiic-alas.38 The point is
that even as the worldly clements arc destroyed, the power of devotion
prevails.
" Note the words of Janamejaya's ministen to him in praise of Parikpt: "govindasya
priya.S cl.tit pita te janamejaya" ("Janamejaya, your father was dear to Govinda
[Knoa]") (l.•5.12).
,. On the Piincariitrins, see, for example: F. Otto Schrader, lntroductiOfl to tlu Piiil&ariilTa
and tJu Ahfrbrullutya Satpliitii (Madras: Adyar Library, 1916); Jan Gonda, Vipiuism and
SW.ism: A Comparis. . (London: Athlone Press-University of London, 1970); Suvira
Jaiswal, Tiu Origin and Dtutlopmmt of Va4'1411ism ( VaifllOvism .from 200 8.C. to A.D. .m)
(Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1967); Miuunori Matsubara, "The Early Piiicaritra
with Special Reference to tbe Ahirbudhnya Sarphitii", diss., Harvard, 1972; and Sushi!
Kumar De, "Sccu and Sectarian Worship in the Mahabharata", Our Htri14gt, I (1953),
1-29.
" Neevcl, /anuwJ's Vtd4nl4 and POfkariilTa: Irmgrating tlit Classical and tlit Popular,
Harvard Dissertations in Religion, 10 (Mi.uoula, Mont.: Scholars Prcu, 1977). pp. 8ff.
The emphasis on the night of the raid as "k4/ariitri" \sec n. 23 above) goes well with this
interpretation. Compare the statement of Blragaoadgitii 11.69-Vl.24.69:
.fa nili sarvabltiiliin.ii'fl 14s.Jii'P jiigarti SQlp)'aml /
yas.Jii'I' jiigrati bhiitani sii ni!ii paiyato mune~ I I
In what is night for all creatures, one- who is
restrained is awake. When creatures art:
awake, that is night for a seeing sage.
For a discussion of some other suggestions as to the origin of the name "Pailcariitra" in
both Hindu tcxu and modem scholarship, see Jai$wal, pp. 41ff. See also two important
articles: J .A.B. van Buitenen, "The Name 'Paiicaritra' ", History of Rtligions, I ( 1961-62).
291- 99, and V. Raghavan, "The Name Piii\cariitra: With an Anal)'llis of the Sanat
kumira-Sarphiti in Manuscript", JourNJI oft!u Amtrican Orim141Socit!J1 85 (1965), 73-79.
1
,. It i$ worth noting here that the piikaratrQlp sacrifice of Sa.14palha Briiluruu/a
XIII.6.1.1, etc., often cited in discussions of the etymology of "Pi!.i\caritra", is likewise a
human sacrifice.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE SAUPTIKA EPISODE IN THE STRUCTURE Of THE MAHABHARATA 147
It is probable that a cycle of Pailcala tales which provided the core of
the Malli.f>harata included a story of a night raid.'9 Perhaps some
Paiicaratrins picked up this talc as an illustration of their doctrine,
identifying the archenemy of the Paiicalas, ASvatthaman, with Siva; if
so, they could have been attracted to it particularly because the name
Paiicala fits so beautifully into their "five" symbolism. Between Pailcalas
and Paiicaratrins the five Pai;i9avas mediate perfectly; so perfectly that it
is impossible to determine whether their fivefold count is influenced by
the one group or the other, both, or neither.40
It is tempting to speculate that Janamejaya and his court poets were
themselves Paiicaratrins. Is Parik$it's revival, perhaps, the reflection of a
Pailcaratra initiation?" It is more likely, however, that the family and
court ofJ anamejaya participated in a pre-Pailcaratra form of Vai$i;iav
ism, and that Paiicaratra material entered the epic only later, adhering
to devotional material already there. It is, of course, possible that the
imagery of the Sauptika episode influenced Paiicaratra thought and
language, rather than the reverse.
What is absolutely certain, however, is that at some point in time the
Paiicaratrins did take control of the epic text; we know this from their
interpolation into it of the clearly Piincariitra .Nariiyal')f)la episode
(XIl.32Iff.).42 It is reasonable, therefore, to hypothesize some Paiicaratra
influence upon the Sauptika episode, whether sooner or later. Strikingly,
" Compare the night raid on the Thracians ofl /Uul X.469ff. Most likely, the talc of the
night raid against the Pancalas was the final talc of the original cycle of Piiicila •torics,
just as it is the final Pii\clla talc in the extant epic. Most epic cycles end with the deaths
of their heroes; the Ma/i4b"4rata itself ends in this way, with the PliQQavas' journey to
heaven. The night raid story would have been the equivalent in the P-aiiclla cycle.
40 In support of the PiQ<;lava-Pancaratra connection envisioned here, it is noteworthy
that the PliQQavas arc sometimes compared with the five elements: V.63.2, Xll.53.18
" On Pliicaritra initiation, sec Schrader, pp. 121f. andjaiswal, pp. 14-0ff. Note that
Kl"fl)a is known cl>CWhcre as a reviver or rescuer of children; sec HarioalfUa
LXXIX. IOff. and Clff., where Arjuna is brought into the story (compare B/Ji.gaoola
l'rlrOt,a X.89.22f.). Other!, however, also revive children in the epic; sec Xll.29.14lff.,
Xll.149.106ff. More broadly, ofcouDC, Parilqit's death and revival provide an example
of the hero's threatened childhood.
The name ••P10Qavas'' means To some, this name hu scemcd to identify
''Wh.it~··.
the PliQ<javas as an organization, not a family. Gcrrit Jan Held, in his Tiu Ma"4bltfirata:
A• Etlmological Slluly (London: Kcgan Paul, 1935), pp. 297ff., identifies the Plo<javas as a
phratry specializing in initiation, named for a color. In fact, the color white is often
associated with initiation; sec Mircea Eliadc, Rills (l1flf Symbols ofl •itialWn: Tiu M.JslnUs of
Birtlt (l1fl/ lllbirtlt, trans. Willard R. Trask (New York: H~r Colophon, 1975), pp. 37, 44.
" Besides mentioning the Plilcariitra school by name, this episode refer! to the
Plilcaritra ,,,.,,,, (translated by Gonda [p. 50) as approximately "arnngcmcnt")
doctrine, whereby Vi11.1u is said to emanate through four or five successive l/ftJw, named
after the various Vn-tii warrion.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
148 RUTH KATZ
the very sages who dominate the .NiiTiiyatJiya, Narada and Vyasa, play
major roles in the Sauptilca episode as well.45
Conclusion
I have shown in this paper how the Sllllptilca episode of the Maliiihliiirata
modified the meaning of the epic by depicting the epic characters as
participants at the cschatological turning point in cosmic history. I have
shown how the episode completes certain threads and levels of the epic
narrative, and suggested that some episodes of earlier books were
included or stressed primarily to pave the way for the S4"ptika events.
Devotional redactors were responsible for this reshaping of the epic, and
I have made a suggestion as to who they may have been.
To conclude this discussion, I would like to point out that the
Paiicaratrins arc certainly not the only identifiable reshapers of the
Mahiibhiirata text. The sort of analysis offered in this paper might usefully
be applied to other sections of the epic besides the Stlllptilca episode,
representing the concerns of other groups. To my mind, one other
example is outstanding and particularly deserves mention here. We
know that, like the Paiicaratrins, the Bhargava brahmans also comman
deered the epic at a certain point in its history, adding to it many of their
stories, most obviously that ofRamajamadagnya.44 Moreover, even the
most cursory reading of the Anu!iisanaparvan (Book of Instruction, Book
XIII of the epic) shows it to be the work of brahmans who cavalierly
advise their audience that the highest religious act is to give brah-
" It;. noteworthy that the .Narii)'d'liya contains a story ofa fight between Rudra (Siva)
and Nara and Niriyaoa, at D~'s sacrifice, which greatly resembles the confrontation
between ASvatthiman and Arjuna and KnQa of the S....ptiJca episode; see XIl.330.42ff.
With regard to the difference between the depiction off >ralaya in the Sm.ptiJca episode and
BhaglJIXll/git4 XI (discussed inn. 23, above), might one suggest that perhaps the S<UiptiJca
reflects the Pii\caritra understanding off >ralaya (popular and mythic), while BAIJlavadglt4
XI reflects the Bhigavata understanding? More generally, with regard to the connection
between the Maliiibh4ral4 and Plii\caritra doctrine, one may refer to the play by thc carly
Sanskrit playwright Bhisa entitled Ptlllcaritram. The subject of this play is thc imposition
ofa five-day deadline by the Kauravas late in the Pa1,1Q.avas' exile; ifthe Pil)Qavas can be
located during this time, they will be given back their kingdom. (The ending is a happy
one). Ju far as I have been able to determine, this plot has no basis in the epic itself
(certainly not in the critical text); nor can a good explanation of the title be found. Might
a connection with Piiicaritra philosophy be suggested here?
44 Sec Vishnu Sitaram Sukthankar, "The Bhrgus and the Bharata: A Text-Historical
Study", in his Cri/UaJ Su.di<s in till MaliibAiirata, Vol. I of Swkthatilcar Memorial EditWn, ed.
P.K. Gode (Bombay: Karnatak Publishing House, 1944), pp. 278- 337, and Robert P.
Goldman, Cods, Priests, and Warmrs: Tiu BArgru of tlu MaliiibAiirata (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1977).
Google Origiral frcn1
019111zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE SAUPTIKA EPISODE IN THE STRUCTURE OF THE MAHABHAIUTA 149
mans gifts of food, cows, and money. I suggest that one may look for
the clearest brahmanical contribution to the central narrative of the
MaliahharaJa in Book XVIII, the SvargaroharµJparvan (Book of the Ascent
to Heaven), where the already somewhat brahmanical
Yudhi~fhira
becomes the embodiment of philosophical Hinduism, as the ambiguities
of the Kuruqetra war dissolve into illusion for him. Herc is a different
version of Level III (the Hindu level) of epic discourse:
Yudh~thira
becomes for the jifOnamiirga (path of knowledge) what Arjuna already is
for the bhalctimiirga. The material building up to this late plot twist can be
traced through the earlier books of the epic, just as I have traced the
material preparatory to the Sauplika episode. The importance of the
narrative thread culminating in the SvargaroharµJ episode is such that
YudhiHhira has often been considered the most important Par:u;lava, and
philosophical peace the epic's message.
Perhaps the most fascinating aspect of such endeavors to trace the
reshaping of the Mahabharata by various vested interest groups is that
they point to the richness and malleability of the original Indo-European
story. Because no final editor saw fit to reduce the vast size of the epic
text, and because all layers which found their way into it were permitted
to remain intact, the Maliahharala strikingly reveals the process of
symbolic growth in epic literature, building upon its lndo-European
base.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
INDIA'S FIITH VEDA: THE MAHABHARATA'S
PRESENTATION OF ITSELF•
JAMES L. FITZGERALD
One of the most famous and delightful images connected with the
Mahahli4ra14 is that of the god Ga1,1c:Sa serving as the stenographer for this,
the world's largest "epic". The seer Vyasa has just informed the god
Brahma that he has composed a great poem comprising all valuable
knowledge and surpassing all previous expressions ofi mportant knowledge.
When Vyisa wooden how he would teach this work to his students,
Brahma suggests the god Gar.ic:Sa become Vyasa's scribe :
Brahmi said, "Call Gaoeia in your mind to write this inspired poetic work
down", and then he went back home. Satyavati's son Vyisa then summoned
Heramba to mind, and GaQeSa, the lord over obstacles who satisfies the needs
that worry his devotees, came where V edavyisa was as soon as he was called
to mind. Vyisa r«eived him with great honor and he sat down. Vyisa then
said to him, "Gaoesa, you must be the scribe for this Bhara/4 as I compose it in
my head and speak it forth". The lord over obstacles replied, "lfmy pen docs
not stop for an instant as I write, I shall be the scribe". Vyisa replied to the
god, "But never write without having comprehended". "OM", said GaQcSa
and he became the scribe.
Then, with great enthusiasm, the hermit Dvaipayana secretly composed
a difficult knotting ofvencs, within which, in accord with his stipulation, he
recited this here Bhara/4. There are 8,800 such verses: I, Ugra.Sravas, your
bard, understand them and Vyisa's son Suka does too, Dhrtari$~ra·s aide
Sarpjaya may or may not understand them. Even now that heap of verses
remains knotted extremely tightly and cannot be undone, because the
meanings in them are so obscure. While the omniscient GaQe$a sat pondering
these, Vyisa composed a great many other verses.'
*© 1984 by the author. PrintM here with perrnwion.
1 V.S. Sukthankar, S.K. Belvalkar, and P.L. Vaidya, Ms., Tiu MaMhliizrala,for tlu First
Tim.t CriliaJ/g Ediutl (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Rcoearch Institute, 1933-66), apparatus
ro line 36 of passage I of Appendix I of the Adipa,,,.,,, vol. I, 884-5.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191r1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
151
INDIA'S FIITH VEDA: THE MAHlBH;iRAT A'S PRESENTATION OF ITSELF
Gai;ic5a is a wonderfully whimsical figure to many Westerners, but the
vision of the chubby boy with the elephant's head sitting amid stacks of
palm leaves at Vyasa's feet in the latter's remote forest retreat, breathlessly
running his pen over leaf after leaf, must have charmed Indian audiences
through the ages as well. But I suspect Gal}c5a's critical assistance to the
composition and transmission ofVyisa's Great Bhilrata has been more than
a charming story to readers oft he text through the ages. Ga1,1e5a's presence
at the beginning of the Mahilhhilrata tradition reassures anyone undertaking
the reading ofVylisa's poem that the Great Bhilrata has his divine approval
and is thus beneficial to human beings. And his homely warmth and
friendly generosity-he is the divine "conqueror of obstacles" (vighnajit,
viglwia) millions upon millions have called upon at the beginning of
undertakings of diverse kinds and confidently turned to in distress
(bhaktacintitapuraka)-hearten and encourage the reader, as they promise
Gar.ie5a's company and all necessary help. Such blessings arc certainly
welcome to anyone who would read on through that awesome and
daunting work. The text of the Sanskrit Great Bhilrata that was received by
Indian tradition contains an overwhelming 100,000 Jloka couplets (which
comes to about eight times the length of the Iliad and the Odyssey
combined), and the narrative of war which makes up the central
continuity of the text is a profoundly horrifying account of social fission,
treachery, grotesque violence, and quasi-parricide that has troubled many
Indian people through the past 1500 years.
Though this passage has a bearing on my argument, I mention it more as
an invocation ofGai;te5a at the beginning of this small contribution to the
understanding of the Mahilhhilrata. The argument I present here is an
interpretation of the beginning of a Mahilhhilrata, an interpretation
undertaken and presented because it represents an important key to the
apprehension oft hat Mahilhhilrata's general nature, as it was designed by its
authors and intended to be appropriated by its audiences. The Mahilhhilrata
has played a major role in educating Indian peoples, in structuring and
informing their imagination and sensibilities in fundamental ways for the
past 1500 years or more, alongside the TripiJaka of the Buddhists and the
RamiiylV)ll and several smaller corpora ofs acred texts. The Mahabharata gave
them grand heroes and villains, thrilling stories, and profound crises; it
schooled them in cosmology, philosophy, theology, and ethics, and
through it all it legitimized and inculcated ethical and political patterns
fundamentally important to "Hindu" civilization, patterns which had
been cogently criticized and strongly challenged from within and without
Aryan Brahmanism.Joseph Dahlmann alone among major scholars oft he
Mahilbhilrata understood and tried to explain it as such a dynamic spiritual
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
152 JAMES L. FITZGERALD
and cultural reality. 2 He saw the Mahiibhiirata as "die Erzieherin des Volkes
zu hi:iheren religii:iscn undsittlichen ldeen, Lchrerin des Volkcs" (the tutor
of the people for higher religious and moral ideas, the schoolmarm of the
people).' But Dahlmann's basically sound apprehension of the Mahiibhiirata
was too strikingly alien to the predilections of late nineteenth-century
Sanskrit philology; and parts of his argument were not sound, so his
understanding of the Mahiihhiirata was buried in a heap of criticism and
remains largely unknown today.• But Dahlmann was right in seeing the
Mahiihhiirata as the educator of the Indian people, and my modest
exegetical effort here is part of a program to interpret the Mahiihhiirata
which derives fundamental inspiration from Dahlmann's general under
standing ofi t. The kinds ofc laims the Mahiihhiirata makes for itself and the
way in which it presents itself demonstrate manifestly that it sought
self-consciously to be the educator of India. Gajanana's help will be most
welcome in this effort from now until the Mahiihhiirata is understood.
I say this, though one oft he first obstacles to be faced is to state as clearly
as possible what I mean here by "Mahiibhiirata", and as a result ofm y doing
that GaQcSa becomes invisible. The effort to establish a critical edition of
the Sanskrit text of the Mahiibhiirata (carried out at the Bhandarkar
Institute in Poona between 1919 and 1970) revealed that a single Sanskrit
version of the" Mahiibhiirata", fixed in writing, was at the base of the entire
manuscript tradition of the Sanskrit Mahiihhiirata, and it revealed that this
lovely GaQc5a episode was not present in that ve.rsion. The collation of
Sanskrit manuscripts (which were gathered from every part of the Indian
subcontinent) carried out for the critical edition disclosed a great amount
of variation in the readings of individual lines, passages contained or
omitted, and in the ordering of passages (sometimes even of longer
passages, or whole sections of the text), as well as in the overall size of the
' Dahlmann's rwo main works on the MBh arc: Das Mahablr4rala aJs Epos raul Rtchlsbiuh
(Berlin: F.L. Dames, 1895) and Gm<sisihs MaMbilMal4 (Berlin: F.L. Dames, 1899). Vittorc
Pisani ("The~ of the Mahlbhlrata", in A Vo/.,.. of Eastmt and buiimi St.dies Presmud /IJ
F.W. TMlllas, ed. by S.M. Kacrc and P.K. Gode [Bombay: Kamatak Publishing House,
1939], 5H2) and Sylvain Levi ("Tatojayam Udirayct'', in Commemoraliat Essays Prestnkd
/IJ Sir RamA:rishna Gopal Bluwlarkar [Poona: Bhandarlr.ar Oriental Research Institute, 1917])
also made significant contributions to this understanding of the MBh.
' Gm<sis ihs Mahabh4ral4, p. 142.
• Oahlmann was also stubbornly wrongheaded on a number ofs ignificant issues which
arc not relevant to what I consider his main point to have bttn. Dahlmann's writings have
never been made available in English, and I intend to publish a review of his contributions
to the study of the MBh. For a brief review of his theses i.n the context of tum of the century
scholarship on the M Bir sec my "The M~a Anthology of the Grtal Bh4rala: An Initial
Survey ofS tructural f53ues, Themes, and Rhetorical Strategics'', unpublished Ph.D. di,..,
University of Chicago, 1980, pp. 36-46.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
INDIA'S FIITH VEDA: THE MAH1BHlRATA'S PRESENTATION OF ITSELF 153
different, orthographically distinct versions. But at the same time there
emerged an overwhelming unity amidst all of these versions, and
geographic patterns of agreement and disagreement in readings and in
passages included or not included, which point conclusively to a single
written "text" of a MahabhiiraJa at some point in the ancestry of these
manuscripts.s This old Sanskrit Mahabhiirata is the "Mahabharata" this
paper is concerned with, though there is no hope ofe ver seeing the original
text of this version of it. For though it is dear that all Sanskrit manuscripts
of the Mahabharata basically derive from this single text, the complexity of
this text's transmission is such that many of the disagreements among the
witnesses cannot be resolved cleanly through the standard principles of
textual criticism.• The critical edition of Poona is the closest approximation
to the archetype behind the manuscript tradition we will ever get,' and,
practically speaking, it is this version of the Mahabharata that, generally,
I intend by "MahabharaJa" (Great Bharata sometimes, for effect, and MBh
sometimes, for economy).
It is not possible to say exactly what this text, the archetype of all the
Sanskrit manuscripts, was in relation to its antecedents, nor to say how it
has interacted with other parts of the tradition of Mahabharata in the time
after its creation. In its largest sense, "the Mahabharata" is a wide and
varied tradition which has existed in ancient and "medieval" India in
several forms (oral, written, dramatic, danced, in puppet performances) in
many languages and in numerous versions, and it is entirely uncharted as
such a super-textual tradition. It is conceivable that this tradition is best
imagined as a generative matrix oft hemes, fixed in part, but very fiuid and
' Stt Sukthanlr.ar's "Prolegomena" to the critical edition, Sukthanlr.ar ct al., Tltt
MaMbMra14, vol. 1, xxx.iv, liv-v, lxxxviii-xci. The amount of unity, both petty and general,
that exists among the M Bh manuscripts, particularly between geographically remote
traditions which olien have discrepant traditions intervening between them such as
Kashmir and Kerala, can be explained only on the assumption ofa fixed text antecedent to
th00<: manuscripts, an archetype. For the variations which exi11 can be explained as later,
particular innovations resulting from various dynamic factors in the tradition, while the
unity cannot be explained, generally, as parallel independent invention.
' Sulr.tbanlr.ar, "Prolegomena", pp. lxxvi-xcii.
' Obviowly Sukthankar's attempt to recover the archetype contains a large amount of
reconstruction by conjecture or speculation, and plainly there is room for honest doubt
whether the manuscript tradition u clear enough to allow for sound conjecture. My own
sense now u that there Sttm to be clear enough indications in the tradition to tempt a bold or
couragcow scholar to make the try. Having gonc as far as he had by thc early thirties,
Suktbanlr.ar did not find the situation so hopeless as to dissuadc him from finishing what he
had so energetically started, and he did not make t.hat asscssmcnt recklessly. It u worth
noting here too that Franklin Edgcrton strongly endorsed the attempt to reconstruct, and
argued that the situation was not as difficult as hc and Sulr.thanlr.ar sometimes madc it out to
be (Franklin Edgerton, in bu introduction to his edit.ion of the Sab!r4parvtui, Tltt
MaMblt4TaJ4, Vol. 2, xxxvi-xxxvii).
Google Origiral frcn1
019111zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
154 JAMES L. FITZGERALD
dynamic, and that the Sanskrit version, which became the archetype, is
but one specific realization of this ideal tradition of "MahabkaraJa",
alongside the thousands upon thousands ofo ther realizations ofi t (including
all actual oral recitations and dramatic performances). It is also quite
conceivable that such a tradition as this changed, perhaps in fundamental
ways, with the emergence of a written tradition of a Sanskrit Mahabharata.
The prestige of Sanskrit in "medieval" India, and the relative stability of
its being written down may have made this version of the MBh the single
most determinative factor in the general MBh tradition. On the other
hand, it may be that the creation of this Sanskrit text, or of similar texts
directly antecedent to it, constituted the very creation of the tradition of
"Great" Bkarata from some prior tradition or traditions. Recent investiga
tions by P.A. Grintser make it seem highly probable that the Sanskrit text
of the MBh was extracted from an improvisational oral tradition that
functioned in terms of compositional formulas and themes rather than
a fixed text.1 I suspect further, in some agreement with Dahlmann's
general view of the genesis of this M Bh, • that this abstracted text was, as
imagined most simply, an elaborate fabrication (basically simultaneous
with the invention of the Bhagavadgltii, which is the center and heart of our
text) in which old epic narrative materials of a " Bkarata" cycle were
adapted to, and re-imagined in synthesis with, materials that existed in
a distinct tradition of religious didacticism to create the "Great" Bkarata of
Vyasa. I suspect that this Great Bkarata was subjected to deliberate
extension or "updating" at least once after the original creation oft he text,
for there arc certain parts of it (for example, the Diinadharmaparvan) which,
while not deviating significantly form the basic thrust of the text as read
without them, do not seem to have the same general measure of
inter-dependent continuity with other parts of the text that is found in the
rest oft he text. Neither the creation oft his text nor the effort to promulgate
it could have been casual, and I suspect both were undertaken by some
royal house for important symbolic or propagandistic purposes. The likely
date for this was somewhere in the long period between I 00 B.C . and
350 A.D.10
' Sec Wendy O'Flaherty's article reviewing publications on the M Bh in &ligwus Studus
&vitw, 4, I (Jan. 1978). 19-28 andj.W. de jong's "Recent Russian Publications on the
Indian Epic" in the A&<ir Library B•llttilr, 39 ( 1975), 1-42 for accounts of the theses of P.A.
Grintscr's DrevntUuJiiskii E(Jos: Gnv~is i Ti(Joloxi.10 (Moscow: 1974).
' Sec Oahlmann, G.,,,sis dts MaJriiblriiTal4, pp. 129-130, 135, 16211'., and 172-174.
•• Various pieces oflitrrary evidence indicate that many themes and stories that we find
in our Sanskrit text of the MB/r existed in Indian culture between 300 B.C. and 100 A.O.,
but there is no dcfinirc evidence ofo ur M Bir before 532 A.O. Georg Biihl<r (George Buhler
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
INDIA'S FIFTH VEDA: THE MAHABHARATA'S PRESENTATION OF ITSELF 155
Whether this text of the MBh is only one realization ofa n old and prolific
matrix of themes, or is a representative of the first "Great" Bhi.rala and
fatherofall "Mahabhi.ratas", it is not the Mahabharata, the "real" Mahabhi.raJa,
nor even the "best" Mahi.hhi.rala. But in either case, it is probably the most
important Mahi.hhi.rata in the history of Indian culture, that is, the most
influential, determinative version ofit, the one through which one gains the
most knowledge about the whole of the MBh tradition. It was written and
thus highly fixed and stable relative to the vast majority of other
realizations oft he text; it was plausibly a complete and full rendition oft he
ideal Mahi.hhi.rata; it was successfully propagated over the whole of the
subcontinent; and it was in Sanskrit, the language commonly favored in
numerous ways as the normative linguistic realization ofa ny truly valuable
knowledge. Thus this version of the Mahi.bhi.rata was uniquely charged to
function as the measure of Mahi.bhi.rala in India, and it probably did,
though "measure" docs not imply the western concepts of "canon" or
"text" in any narrow way.
The Gar;ic:Sa passage occurs only in the North Central version of the text
{that consituted, basically, by the Devanagari script), is not present in the
important manuscript traditions of Kashmir, Bengal, or Kerala.11 It was
deliberately invented and inserted into the text sometime after a written
andj. Kinte, "Indian Studies No. II: Contributions to the History of the Mahabhlrata",
Sil.{1111gsbnicA1t der pltilosop/tisclren-hi.sll>riselim C'4su d<r kai.snlielim Ak4Jmtie dn Wissmsehajlen,
127 [Vienna: 1892], Ab"""41•ng 12, pp. 2~26) showed that the full MBh, including its
HoriDOJflio appendix, certainly existed by 532 A.O. and that the MBh was definitely
perceived by Indian kings as a normative sacred text by 45-0 A.O. Biihler made the not
implausible inference that the text existed at least as a normative sacred text by 300 A.O. (It
should be borne in mind that the Gupta dynasty, which eventually united most of Northern
India, came to power about 330 A.O.) E.W. Hopkins' examination of the text's knowledge
ofd ifferent, dated aspects of Indian economic realia led him to the conclusion that the bullr.
of the MBA text existed by 200 A.O. (though these arguments do not bear upon the question
whether all of this textual material had been synthesized into the MBh by then or not) (Great
E/'itefl rulia [New Yorlr.: Scribner & Sons, 1901], pp. 387-89). The city ofRome is named in
our venion of the second major boolr. of the MBA, a fact which prompted its editor Franlr.lin
Edgerton to conclude that "our text cannot have been composed at any time before this city
name came 10 the can of the Indians. This means surely not before the lint century B.C.,
and very lilr.cly not until a century or two later" (in his introduction to vol. 2 ofSulr.thanlr.ar
ct al., Tiu MohQbhDrato, xxviii).
11 The passage is found only in manuscripts written in Dcvanlgari script: 02- 12, Dnl-3,
(three manuscripts of the t<xt also containing NilakatiJha's commentary) and Orl-4 (four
manuscripts of the text containing the commentary of Ratnagarbha), and in two
manuscripts written in Devanagari script classified by Sulr.thanltar as part of the
Kashmiri-Devanlgari tTadition, K4 and K6, which, along with K3 and K5 of that
tradition, generally exhibit "contamination" from the North Central tradition. This
Ga11ria passage is found in K4 on a separate folio, a "correction sheet" (JodluijNJUro). Sec
Sulr.thanlr.ar's "Prolegomena" to the critical edition, Sukthanlr.ar <I al., Tiu MoMl>hDrato,
vol. I, li.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
156 JAMES L FITZGERALD
Sanskrit version of the MBh was fixed and promulgated. This passage was
inserted into the passage mentioned above which describes an explicit
blessing ofVyasa's composition given by the great god Brahma, the "guru
of the worlds" (lokagvru). It acknowledges and sanctions a written version
of the MB!t-a highly remarkable development in itself for a text "sacred"
to brahmans. It also acknowledges and explains the numerous difficult
verses found in the written Sanskrit tradition. And it provides a touch of
humane levity that counterbalances the majesty and solemnity ofVyasa's
somewhat embarrassed presentation ofh is Great Bharala to the god Brahma
and the latter's grandiloquent endorsement of it (see below). This small
addition to the text was an ingenious and persuasive way to bring the
manuscript tradition ofa profoundly disturbing text under the benevolent
aegis of the god Gai;ie$a, and if it had occurred to the redactors or
promulgators of the fixed, written Sanskrit MBh, the text may have had
a somewhat different, less clouded history. '2
This passage presents a deliberately developed conception of the fixed,
written text of the MBh as a distinct cultural entity. It makes certain
important claims about the MBh as a whole, as a unitary composition, and
it implicitly relates the MBh to other texts or textual corpora of ancient
India. The specific claims of this passage, however, are not what concern
me here. Brahma's blessing Vyasa's composition is more directly germane
to my themes. Brahma happened to visit Vyasa while the latter was
wondering how he would teach his work to his students. After he had made
his guest comfortable, Vyasa told him that he had composed an artfully
sophisticated, inspired work, a poem (kii19'a), which contained within it
knowledge of the secret essence of the Vedas, of events past, present and
future, of the units of time, oft he movements ofc elestial bodies, oft he rules
for religious actions, and ofm uch more. He concluded this recital by asking
Brahma to excuse the fact that the poem presented all this knowledge that
was normally Brahma's role to promulgate. Not only was Brahma not
offended by Vyasa's emulation ofh im, he praised Vyasa as more excellent
than V the dean of the "college" of ancient Vedic seers, and he
as~iba,
praised Vyasa's work in the highest terms, likening it and its functioning to
his own creative promulgation of knowledge.
" The MB!t has long bc:en rrgardrd as an inauspicious text in spite of the trxt's own
internal attempt to neutralize iu presentation of evil and grotesque violence through the
instructional Jami which is constitutrd by the twelfth and thirteenth major books of the
MBA, the SantiJ>arvan and the AowasllMJ>arvan (see note 28 bc:low). Typically the MBA
"proper" (as distinct from ""rtain segments ofi t, most notably the B/Jag"""4fit4) is not road
or rrcitrd in their homes by pious Hindu people.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
INDIA'S FIFTH VEDA: THE MAJl1JJHAIUTA'S PRESENTATION OF ITSELF 157
Had you not made the world bla2e up with the fire of knowledge, it would
have become darkness-mute, blind, deaf, insane. For the world which is
blind and wrapped round by darkness because of its own actions, you have
created a merry riot for the eyes of its mind with your paint-sticks of
knowledge. You have driven off people's darkness with the sun of your
B/aaral4, with its short and long accounts focused on dlutnna, artlra, kiimJJ, and
mokfa. You have awakened the minds of people, who are sensitive to the moon
like red lotuses, with the full moon off MM}IJ shining forth with the light ofJ nui.
Rightly have you fully illumined the entire inner chamber of the world with
the torch of itihiisa that dispels the fog of muddleheadedness."
The critical editorial process disclosed that this passage too was absent
from the promulgated fixed text of the Great Bharata, though present in
a wider range of manuscript traditions than the Gai;ie5a passage inserted
into it in the Devanagari tradition.••
Like the GaQda passage, this blessing was inserted into the already
existing text of the Great Bharata for some purpose. It too intends the text as
a whole and makes important claims about it, but the purposes behind this
episode are more complicated than those of the GaQe5a passage, and they
are not immediately apparent. This passage offers an unambiguous and
strong characterization of the MBh as a comprehensive source of all
important knowledge, and Brahma's blessing of it provides Vylisa's work
with one of the most convincing endorsements oft he great importance and
truthfulness of its contents imaginable. Brahma had come to be widely
recognized as the major source within the samsaric system of the world for
knowledge important within that world. In the general We/tanschauung
which evidently prevailed between approximately 300 B.C. and 300 A.O.
in those cultural milieu where the brahman elite was an important social
and cultural fact, Brahma had come to be regarded as the maker of the
world, grandfather (pitiimaka) ofall its inhabitants, and the formulator ofo r
inspiration for valuable knowledge in the world. u Recurrent in literary
allusions to Brahma are the themes ofh is active concern for the well-being
of the creatures descendent from him and an association with important
knowledge. Sarasvati, the goddess of wisdom, is his daughter in the MBh,
" Sukthankar ct al., T~ Ma/JQbh4ral4, lines 37-46 of passage I of Appendix I of the
AdijHlrvan, vol. I, 885.
" The passage is found in the North Central, Devanagari, tradition and in all Southern
manuscript traditions (those of Kerala, Andhra, and Tamil Nad). It is absent from the
Northeastern tradition (Bengal and Nepal) and from the NorthwC$tem, except for the
borderline manuscripts K4.6. A3 with the Gar;ida passage, this passage is physically
interpolated into K4 on a sheet''.
~'correction
" See Jan Gonda, Die Rtligionm /ndims, 2 vols. (Stuugart: W. Kohlhammcr, 196{µ;3),
1:263-264. Sec 100 E.W. Hopkins, E~i< Mythology (Strassburg: K. Trubner, 1915).
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
158
JAMES L. FITZGERALD
and in later mythology also becomes his consort. For brahmans, Brahma's
four mouths were the points from which the four Vedas were fint uttered in
the world and the ultimate source from which brahmans themselves were
created. For Buddhists, it was Brahma's advocacy, on behalf of his
offspring, that finally convinced the Buddha to preach his insight to
suffering sentient beings (an insight, ofc oune, which could not have come
from Brahma, who as progenitor of and lord over salflSiira could not be the
source of knowledge which is based in something other than Slll!ISiira).
Several Buddhist accounts of the Buddha's life record this impulse from
Brahma to promulgate the Buddhist dharma•• and the Riimiiyarµi, our text of
which also originated i.n this general period, and which, like the MB!z and
the buddliavacana, came to have a far-reaching and profound role in the
shaping of the sensibilities of the peoples of India, was inspired directly by
Brahma.17 So the figure of Brahma constitutes a powerfully authoritative
presence guaranteeing the transcendent value of Vyisa's great B/ziirala.
But, when read in the context into which it was inserted, Brahma's blessing
seems incongruous, superfluous. The text of the Sanskrit MB!z which
existed before this passage was inserted into the manuscripts of the central
traditions had already made similar claims for the text- had established it
as a work. reliably teaching the kinds of knowledge most important for
human beings on the basis ofa theme ofi nspiration and authority that had
an integrity and power which had once seemed sufficient by itself. I shall
offer a suggestion concerning the motivation for the invention and
insertion of the Brahma blessing at the end of this paper. What is most
important now is the original theme grounding the MB!z as an authoritative
corpus of knowledge.
Those responsible for the Grtal Blziirala that was fixed in writing and
promulgated between 100 B.C. and 350 A.D. designed this text as a grand
work. of instruction for kings, dealing with critical issues concerning the
proper action of kings in the samsaric system of the world, and they
grounded the authority of their text in the archaic theme of the V cdic
poetic composition proclaimed by a preternaturally insightful and expres
ui.
sive seer, an They presented their Great Bhiirala as a new Veda come
forth from the mind of the seer K"r;ia Dvaipayana Vyasa, the Veda of
Veda), the fifth Veda, thus calling upon the great evocative
~r;ia (Ki~r;ia
power of the most hallowed of holy things in the world of brahmanic
Indians.
" Sec Edwardj. Thomas, Tht liftofB iultlMa.s ugmtland Hisl'1ry, lhird ed. revised ( 1949;
London: Routledge and Kcgan Paul, 1975). pp. 81-a6.
" Sec S.K. Mudholkar, VaJmikira~, 7 vols. (Bombay: "Gujarati'" Printing Press,
n.d.), 1:1:22ff.
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
INDIA'S FIFTH VEDA: THE MAHlBHlRATA'S PRESENTATION OF ITSELF 159
"The Veda", the (corpus of) "Knowledge", had been, and was then,
an ever available, multiform religious phenomenon which members of
brahmanic Indian society experienced, conceived of, and used in various
ways. The Veda was a sacred acoustic substance, a long concatenation
of uttered syllables which a person heard in special, ritualized contexts,
laboriously learned over a period of years, and produced ritually through
the action of one's own chest, throat, nose, and mouth. Part of the Veda
was an effective instrument for producing and controlling things and
events in the world (mantra). Other parts of the Veda were collections of
authoritative (cognitively infallible) texts (Brahm~nas, Ara1.1yakas,
which made available to Aryan people different kinds of
Upan~ds)
important knowledge (injunctions for the sacrificial ritual [u id/iis) and
specifications of the critically important homological equivalences
(upan4ats) between the infrahuman microcosm (lidhyahnika reality), the
universal macrocosm (lidhihhautika reality), and the system of sacrificial
ritual (adh!Jajilika reality); by knowing which equivalences a person might
attain beatitude, power, and or, immortality, depending upon their
desire). This learning had its ultimate source in the eternal potent reality
which was understood as the ground ofa ll being (brakman), and the acoustic
fonn of this knowledge, the known Veda, was a direct manifestation
among humans of that reality. As a source of cognitive knowledge, the
semantically meaningful form of the Veda (the non-mantra part) provided
knowledge or instruction of the most important kind for human welfare
in this world and the world beyond death. The redactors of the Great
Bhiirata sought to invest their text with as much of the power and authority
of this ancient, primordial, but palpably living "Body of Learning" as it
would carry. They claimed that it had come to exist among human beings
as a result of the same kind of preternatural insight and expressive genius
by which the Aryan people came to possess the Veda and that it too was
a source for the most important knowledge, that required to make the
world a place that facilitated all aspects of the welfare of all creatures.
They did not quite make the explicit claim that the Great Bkiirata was a
direct manifestation ofb ralrman, but they did claim that the simple acoustic
realization of parts of their text was efficacious in producing some aspects
of human welfare, as were the mantras of the Veda. And the awesome
size, grandeur, and complexity of the Great Bkiirata they created do arouse
some of the same feelings of transcendence that the size, claimed
comprehensiveness, and apparent agelessness of the Veda do. As a written
text and as a new "Veda", it was obvious that the Great Bkiirata was a
Veda only metaphorically. The Great Bhiirata was a very different sort of
text from the Veda in many more ways than the two were substantively
similar. But the Great Bkiirata was intended to function in Indian culture
Google Origiral frcn1
0191t1zea by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
160
JAMES L. FITZGERALD
in the same imposing and authoritative way the ancient Vedas had, and
the formulators of this Greal Blr4rata developed their metaphor with some
care.
rfi
The Vedic idea of the was essentially that of someone "who sees the
secret matters of the gods with an inner eye" and gives what he sees
powerful expression." The redactors of the MBh presented Vyisa as
having such preternatural abilities and as having composed the MBh as
a preternaturally insightful and instructive account of the epoch-making,
trans-human events which constituted and surrounded the Bharata war.
rfi
Though not himself an who composed any of the hymns of the Q.g
Veda, Vyasa was a "seer of the brahman" (i.e., a brahmarfi, a "seer of the
Veda", a brahman seer in contrast to a riijarfi, a seer who was a king),
the son of the important Vedic seer Parasara, who was himself the son
of the pre-eminent Vedic seer. Vyasa is characterized in the
Vasi~Pia,
text as possessing visionary intellect, 19 as a learned seer of the brahman,20
who knows the high and the low, an inspired poet dedicated to truth,21
and as possessed of boundless intellect, or thought.22 Three times in its
introductory passages the MBh is referred to simply as "what was thought"
(matam) by Vyasa,2 and at one point it is described as "the narrative
'
which sprang from the ocean of the great seer's mind" (MBh l .53.33c-
34b), suggesting inexhaustible and protean powers of mind. Before
composing the Great Blr4rata Vyasa had divided ( ui'!)'asa) the previously
unitary Veda into four parts, four Vedas, as a favor to the Veda and
•• "Scher heisst im Veda, wer die geheimnisvollen giittlichen Dinge mit dem innrren
Aug< enchaut:" K.F. Gddner, Der Rig-VetliJ aJU don Sanskrit iJu Dntsdu ilbtrst~t, 3 vols.
(Qambridge, MA: Harvard Univcnity Press, 1951), I :2:n.2; cited byJ an Gonda, Tiu Vision
oflM VtdU Potts (The Hague: Mouton&: Co., 1963), p. 40. Furthtr from Gonda: "A oi
obviously is the functionary who enters into contact with divinity . .. he has an in.sight in the
nature ofche gods' greatness ... he aseociates with gods ... he may address them .. . extol
chem . . . honour or praise chem . .. and invoke their aid and favour .. . " (p. 40).
" ... according to the ancients the title rM is to be explained in connection with this
functionary's faculty of "seeing" . . . . The u~ is the man who uuered the sacral
word ... .T he ois are, in the Indian traditional view, said to have visualized the mystic
form of vii<- which according to the Indian conception is a more sacred idea than our
"speech", carrying with it a far deeper significance. Vac- is not only eternal or imperishable
but also subtle and incomprehensible by ordinary sense-organs .. . u<ik in its ultimate shape
is identical with brahman, and ... the great ancient ois were born with such a spiritual
power and faculty of vision as to possess omniscience and chat through them the sacred texts
were revealed to man". (p. 42)
" dJtimiin, MBh l. l.5!>c.
20 rM.an hralimorM, MBh 1. l.53ab; ""' too MBh 1.54.lc.
" por®arajllo hrahmarM *4uiJJ Sal.JO'l'a/4/J ••. MBA l.54.5cd.
" amilabiuldhi, MBA l.56.21d.
" MBA l. l.23c; 55.2c; 56. I 2c; see too MBA l.53.3!>cd.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
INDIA'S FIITH VF.DA: THE MAHlBHlRATA'S PRESENTATION OF ITSELF 161
brahmans, because he observed that the abilities of mortals had decreased
with each passingyuga (MBh 1.57.69).
The Creal Bhiirala presents itself as based in Vyasa's preternatural sight
and insight into divine events and realities. Either with his physical eyes
or with the inner eye of the seer, Vyasa was a witness to all the events
narrated in the MBh from his vantage point as an important participant
in them. The text depicts the first public presentation of his composition
as being called forth by a king asking for what Vyasa had seen:
The deeds of the Kurus and Pa1;1<;lavas-your honor saw them with his own
eyes! Tell them to me, brahman. How did the split between those men
whose actions were always effortless come about? And how did that great
war that finished off so many happen? You arc thoroughly conversant with
it all, blessed one, so tell me everything about this of my ancestors. (MBh
1.54.18-20)
With these wordsjanamejaya Bharata, the paramount king of the world,
asked Vyasa to tell him about the awesome events involving his Bharata
ancestors. Vyasa had recently arrived to attend a great sacrifice King
Janamejaya was holding, and he was the pre-eminent guest there among
many brahmans and others. Janamejaya was the great grandson of the
Bharata Plli;l<;lava hero Arjuna, and the dynast of the Bharatas a number
of years after the Bharata war had occurred and all its protagonists had
departed the terrestrial scene.
Janamejaya's request occasioned the first public recital of Vyasa's
"Great" Bharala composition, and the characterization of the text as a
"Veda" is the most prominent feature of the state'ments the text makes
about itselfi n this introductory passage. Vyasa responded tojanamejaya's
request by commanding his pupil Vaiiampayana to tell the king everything
he had heard about the deeds of the Kurus and Pai;i<;lavas from Vyasa.
Vaiiampayana proceeded to introduce Vyasa's massive account in
100,000 iloka couplets as being much more than a chronicle of the deeds
ofjanamejaya's ancestors. Vyasa's text, he said, was equal to the Veda
in its purifying sacramental power, was itself a Veda, the Veda.
Ka~i;ia
He elaborated some on the sacramental powers ofVyasa's text. It could
remove even the most serious evil karman attached to a person, elevate a
person's position in the samsaric system of the world, bring about the
birth of a son, bring victory, and so on. And it could do all this through
the mere hearing oft he text or causing others to hear it (MBh 1.56.18-20).
Furthermore, he announced that the text was a comprehensive source of
instruction (fii.stra) for all the behavior and knowledge important to human
beings. He told Janamejaya that Vyasa's work contained exhaustive
teachings on profit in material affairs (artha), on the law of the cosmos
which regulates movement and action in the world (dharma), and on the
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
162
JAMES L. FITZGERALD
knowledge of ultimate things (buddJU that is, knowledge
~thiki,
concerning trans-samsaric reality, i.e., ultimate being and the moqa
[escape) from SIUflSiira into that being). It is a complete set of teachings
on these subjects and on kiima (love and sex) too. V aisampayana concluded
his introduction of the text to janamejaya with this statement: "Knr;ia
Dvaipayana the sage worked assiduously for three yean and composed
this supreme Great Bhifrata account. What is here on dliamra, artha, kiima,
and mokra exists elsewhere, but what is not in here does not exist anywhere"
(MBh 1.56.33).
After this brief but exalted introduction to Vyasa's Great Bhiirata,
Vaisampayana began his narrative with a Jong account of the human
and trans-human background of the Bharata lineage and the Bharata
war that further develops the text's claim of being a Veda spoken forth
rfi.
by an His account began with one of the most important actors in
the events described in the MBh, Vyasa, and presented, among others,
rri
the facts that he was the son of the ParaSara, that he performed the
rfi's activity of dividing the Veda, and that he taught the Vedas to his
pupils, the Great Bhiirata being the fifth (MBh 1.57.1- 75). The account
then listed the births of the other principal figures of the Bharata narrative,
dwelling at some length on the supreme God Vi$r;iu-Narayar;ia's taking
birth of human parents (MBh 1.57.83-87). VaiSampayana went on to
explain the human and trans-human, divine, background of the Bharata
war. He set forth here two themes as constituting the background of the
Bharata war. First he invoked the history of the brahman Rama
Jamadagnya's killing of the entire k$atriya male stratum of society
twenty-one times in the past (with new qatriyas arising when strict
brahmans impregnated the k$atriya widows). In the wake of the golden
age following the last such occurrence of Rama's slaughter of k$atriyas,
a host of demons incarnated themselves on earth among k$atriyas and
various animals after their most recent defeat at the hands of the gods.
This latter event is Vaisampayana's second theme and the immediate
setting of the Bharata conflict. The demons living on the earth heavily
oppressed the earth and its inhabitants, to the point that the earth
entreated the grandfather of the world, Brahma, for help. Brahma
commanded all the denizens of heaven to have portions of themselves
born on earth to combat the demons. Led by Indra, who enlisted
Vi$r;tu-Narayat;1a in the enterprise, the gods and other denizens of heaven
took birth on the earth. Vaisampayana then listed the principal incar
nations ofd emons and gods and took up the human ancestry of Bharatas
(MBh J.5iµjl ), arriving eventually at the Bharata narrative. Vyasa's
Great Bhiirata is indeed a chronicle of the deeds ofjanamejaya's ancestors,
but Vyasa was able to see that those men and their deeds had a
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
163
INDIA'S FIFTH VEDA: THE MAH1BH1RATA'S PRESENTATION OF ITSELF
trans-human significance, to sec that the Bhirata war was much more
than a grand melec of kings and armies. His account of those gods and
their struggle with the anti-gods, and of God and his actions and
revelations in the course of this crisis of the entire world system, is the
r#s
most important text to be presented to human beings since the
proclaimed the Vedas among them-is itself a Veda in its import and
value.
Vyasa's Great Bharata, undcntood as a quasi-Vedic text, was received
enthusiastically by a most important group of people after VaiSampayana's
recitation ofi t toJanamcjaya (according to the "greater" Great Bharata we
have). The Great Bharata presented to us is not simply VaiSampayana's
recitation of Vyasa's insightful and instructive account of the Bharatas to
Janamejaya. We, and every other audience of this version of the MBh, arc
witness to a rehearsal ofVai5ampayana's recitation toJ anamejaya, a recount
ing to an enthusiastic brahman audience. This skillful framing of the text
fills an important place in the Veda metaphor and enlists a very important
authoritative voice for the startling teachings of the Great Bharata. The text
explains that V aisampayana's original recitation was witnessed and picked
up by siitas (wandering bards, storytellers). Our text is the rehearsal of
Vaisampayana's recitation by one such siita witness, Ugra5ravas, to
a community of ascetic and ritualistic brahmans living in a retreat in the
Naimi$a forest under the leadenhip of Saunaka. These brahman "seen"
had heard of Vyasa's Great Bharata, and when Ugrasravas offered to
entertain them with stories they immediately and eagerly requested
Vyasa's wondrous "Vedic" text:
We want to hear that satp/Jil424 of the prodigious Vyasa which is equal to the
four Vedas, which deals with dharma, strikes off evil, and removes fear; that
primordial account uttered forth by the supreme seer Dvaipiyana, which was
received with high honor by the gods and brahmic seers when they heard
it; that edifying brahmic utterance"-reinforced by diverse teachings,
furnished with refinements, and containing matters presented in books--<>f
the history oft he Bharatas; the most excellent oft ales, delightful in word and
marvelous in its parts, wh.ich contains subtle matters with subtle resolutions
and is adorned with matters from the Vedas, which the seer Vaisampayana
correctly and satisfyingly proclaimed duringjanamejaya's sacrificial session
at Dvaipayana's command. (MBh 1.1.19, l!'>-18)
of
This request occurs aJ the very beginning our uxt. That is, the framers of our
written Great Bharata present the textf irst ofa il as respected by a community
24 "smphit4'' can refer to anything "put together, compiled", but rcfen to the four
sal(lltil4s of the Vedas in a primary way.
21 ''Brahmic utterance'', brihmi; literally ''of the bralunan, of the Veda''.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
164
JAMES L. FITZGERALD
ofbrahmans as a quasi-Vedic text well uttered by a prodigious rfi. These
men know nothing whatsoever about military affain, yet they eagerly
request to hear Vyisa's account of the war between the and the
Pi~cjavas
Kauravas.26 This enthusiasm for the text by Saunalta's company is not
only a rhetorically important endonement of the text, legitimizing and
recommending it as reliable teaching, it implies a necessary feature of the
text's being a Veda. The most important distinctive characteristic of the
brahman caste as the learned elite ofa ncient India was their possession and
maintenance of that "brahmic" acoustic substance which is the Veda.
Accordingly, a text which is a Veda must be endoncd, possessed,
supported, and maintained by brahmans as part of its constitution as
a Veda. Soon the text twice makes the point explicitly that Vyisa's Bharala
is supported, that is, learned and recited, by brahmans (MBh 1.1.25,
49-51 ).
As V aiiampiyana had done in recommending the text to King
Janamejaya, Ugrairavas praised the MBh for its quasi-Vedic sacramental
power, but more forcefully and at greater length: "For the man who grasps
the immeasurable Bharala, as it is recited, come forth from the space
between Dvaipiyana's lips, holy and purifying, evil-removing and blessed,
what need is there for ablutions with the waters of Pu$kara?" (MBh
1.2.242; 18.5.54) After a number ofs tatements such as this one praising the
sacramental value of the text, Ugrairavas recommended the regular
recitation of the lint chapter of the MBh, the Anukramat}iparvtJll (as an
epitome of the entire text fully as efficacious as the complete text), at the
ritual recitations brahmans perform at the morning and evening twilights
of every day (sa'!ldhyajapa). But for Ugra.Sravas the heart of the Vedic
metaphor lay in the MB/i's being a sufficient guide to proper human
thought and behavior on all topics ofs ignificance. That is, it was a text which
in some essential way corresponded to, and made available to the human
mind, the ultimate pattern of the cosmos, and thus the proper place of
human beings in that pattern and human possibilities within that pattern.
Ugra.Sravas claimed that Vyasa's text, as the product of preternatural
insight, did just this. Early in his recommendation ofVyisa's text to the
" In what is otherwise a puzzling passage, the framers of our MBA cleverly portray
a great discrepancy in the initial interesu in the text held by Saunaka and his company on
the one hand and by Janamejaya and men of arms like him on the other. The redactors
presented the Naimip. brahmans as being completely ignorant of the make-up ofa kµtriya
''army'' or ''division'', an o.klaultit,i. When Ugra.Srava.s mentioned in passing the eighteen
~aMIWPs that met to fight the Bhirata war, the brahmans interrupted him and demanded
to know what an was, and Ugra!ravas itemized iu composition for them. An
~aaAi~I
audience mort alien to heroic epic could hardly be imagined. MBA 1.2.13-23.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
165
INDIA'S FIFTH VEDA: THE MAH1JJH1RATA'S PRESENTATION OF ITSELF
brahmans Ugrasravas concluded a brief account ofc osmogenesis
Naimi~
with the appearance oft he eponymous ancestors of the lineages relevant to
the Bharata narrative and with a statement concerning Vyasa's work:
The great-souled Da5ajyoris had ten thousand sons, Satajyotis had ten rimes
as many sons as that, and Sahasrajyoris had ten rimes more than that again.
Many lineages arose from these-this line of the Kurus, those of the Yadus,
Bharata, Yayari, lk$va.ku, and those ofa ll the kings who were uis-and created
things were sent forth in extensive waves. [And there arose) all the specific
situations ofc reated things and the threefold secret, which is connected to the
Vedas, and the explanation ofit-Jnanna, artlia, and k4ma. The seer Vyasa
saw the teachings on dlianna, k4ma, and artha, diverse other teachings, and the
rule which had arisen for the maintenance of the world. (MBh 1.1.43-47)
The Great Bhiirata was not the mere chronicle of his ancestors' heroic deeds
that King Janamejaya had requested from Vyasa. To be sure, it was
a historic account of the Bharatas and the Bharata war between the
Kauravas and the Pa1.u;lavas, but it was a historic account containing
"elaborations" (l!)'akhyiis). The Great Bhiirata was an itihiisa savaiJakhya,
a chronicle of events which examined and explained those events in
accompanying or interposed or appended elaborations (MBh l. l.48a).
Vyasa's "great" Bharata tale contained and presented to Kingjanamejaya,
to all kings and and to all else who heard it, the insights of a seer
~t.riyas,
into the fundamental principles by which the world works. It was
fundamentally a iiistra, a text which teaches on the basis of the Bharata
chronicle.
The enthusiasm for Kn1;1a's Veda on the part of these forest-dwelling;
ritualistic brahmins had another important rhetorical function. As they
heard Ugra5ravas' rehearsal of VaiSampayana's recitation of Vyasa's
didactic history to the interested Bharata dynast Janamejaya, Saunaka
and his company became viewers ofjanamejaya's reception oft he text and
its teachings. That is, as the written text presents itself to all its audiences
through the ages, the royal audience which was the primary audience of
the text, itself became part of the greater text which is attended to by the
brahmans, who, as audience for Ugrasravas' rehearsal, themselves became
part of the greater text presented to Indian audiences and, eventually, to
us. Janamejaya and every subsequent king who might be identified with
him have had to answer to the enthusiasm of Saunaka and his followers
and all subsequent people who might identify with them or be persuaded
by their view.
So did the creators of the Sanskrit MBh give power to the voice of their
new text. As extravagant as their claims might appear, the new Great
Bhiirata which they presented in this way is a text commensurate to them.
They made the Great BhiiraJa an extravagant text. It teaches such
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
166
JAMES L. FITZGERALD
important ideas with such force and at such length that it makes full and
convincing use of the power and authority of the Vedic transcendence
claimed for it. Both dramatically and didactically their text presents
a contentious new ethic set within a new understanding of the cosmos, an
understanding which is in tum rooted in a new vision oft he ultimate reality
as the personal deity Lord Vi,i;iu-Narayai;ia. Its central narrative is the
racue-action Lord Vifl)U, incarnate as Knl)a, and the subordinate gods
carried out in the face of the threat to the world posed by the
anti-gods-everything taking place on earth in the guise of events
involving the Bharatas and their kingdom and their allies. They carefully
constructed the central part oft his narrative around the figure of the divine
incarnation KnQa- around his herding ofe vents to the virtual annihilation
oft he qatriya Ml'l'J4 and his revelations ofh imself as God Vifi;iu-Narayat;ta.
And they framed this central narrative between two passages that raise
powerfully the major practical issue of the new ethic- whether the people
involved should participate in or withdraw from the war and its con
sequences (a partly hyperbolic representation of all human action). Each
time the issue resolved in favor ofd harmic participation in the war (that is,
in proper social, political, economic, and ritual action).27 As a moral
counterweight (/iinti) to the grotesque war, the creators oft he text depicted
the new king Yudhifihira receiving txlmsivt instructions on numerous
aspects of kingship and society and philosophy, theology, and ethics,
instructions which are offered basically by Knr;ia as a textual resource for
people in the new age.21 And stories, lectures, sermons, and debates occur
throughout the text, developing themes on a number of ethical and
cosmological topics. Janamejaya did indeed receive a Veda from
Vaisampayana, a great body of important knowledge which supports
royal action after the example of Lord Vi$t;tU and provides a basic textual
resource both for a king's enlightenment and his enlightenment of his
subjects. The conception and execution of this Grtal Bkiirala was a truly
creative appropriation oft he most potent brahmanic theme of authoritative
knowledge. It produced a text which in the nature and scope ofi ts teaching
" For a scatement of the "messages" actually taught by the M 8/i see my paper, "The
Great Epic of India as Religious Rhetoric: A Fresh Look at the Maliablr4ral4", Jwmal ojllll
A...ncan AcaJnny of R.ligion 51.4 (Dec. 1983): 611-630.
,. I discuss the brahmanic theme of /iinli and its function in the integration of the large
didactic anthologies of the twelfth and thirteenth books of the M 8/i with the rest of the text
in a paper currently in progress, "SOJiti, the SOJiti Parvan, and the Rhetoric ofS anti in the Crtal
B"4ral4 ofVyisa". For a more complete discussion of these didactic anthologies of the MBA,
and for a thorough discussion of the M~aJM"""fHmxut in particular, set abo my
dissertation, "The Moqa Anthology of the Creal B"4ra14" (see above, n. 4).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
INDIA'S FIFTH VEDA: THE MAHABHlRATA'S PRESENTATION OF ITSELF 167
and in the power ofi ts central rhetorical presentation-the account of an
epoch-making, family-splitting, qatriya-annihilating
w~trongly
rivalled the pre-eminent and relatively new textual corpus of the day, the
record of the Buddha's words, with its central rhetorical presentation-the
biography of the hadllisatlva and Gautama the Buddha. And though
inspiration afterward continuously found voices in India, from Va.lnu1tl's
.Ramiiya/Ja to the hymns of the Alvan, to the ]MntSv4ri, the Mcanas of
the Vira5aivas, and the verses of Kabir, and beyond, to people like
Ramakrishna and Sri Aurobindo, India's fifth Veda was its last and
perhaps its greatest Veda.
While basically ignoring the metaphor of the MBh's being a Veda,
important elements of the brahman tradition in succeeding centuries
accepted the essence of this metaphoric claim and regarded Vyasa's Great
Bharata as an authoritative source ofi mportant knowledge. The brilliantly
magisterial Mimlilpsaka Kumarila Bhana oft he seventh or eighth century
discussed the MBh and the RamaylllJll and other smrtis in terms of the
categories with which the Mimaqua analyzed all texts. The tradition of
Piirva, or Karma, Mimaqua was concerned to derive (mim4J?1S.i) directives
for action (dharma} from whatever authoritative sources were available to
human beings. While the Veda (Jruti} was the infallible source for the
knowledge of dharma, tradition (smrti) was also authoritative, when it did
not contradict the Veda, and the MBh was a principal smrti. Kumlirila
characterized the MBh and similar types ofw orks (such as the Purlii;ias} as
having as their ultimate purpose the enjoining of the accomplishments of
the four human ends, (dharma, artha, kama, and mokfa}. These
thepu~iirlhas
works are made up of (I) injunctive sentences (vidhis}, which are found
chiefly in the Sii.ntiparvan and Anuiii.sanaparvan (the two long books
containing the instruction of the new king at the beginning of
Yudh~thira
the new era over which he will preside), and (2) narrative episodes which
praise the injunctions, make them more attractive for people to perform
(arthavadas, any kind of utterance which enhances the injunctive power of
a vidhi). The epic narrative and heroic stories attached to it are
authoritative because they enhance the injunctions contained in the text.
Some of the parts of these texts are composed as genuine poetry and often
function as arthaviidas merely by pleasing the hearer, while descriptions of
battle are useful to kings in that they rouse the brave and cowardly alike to
do battle. And, as their function is rhetorical, such passages have no strict
requirement to be truthful. 2•
Kumirila, Tan1rllDiirUik4 on 1.2. 7; "'c too on 1.3.2 and 1.3. 7. Kumirila's undcntanding
tt
of the MBlt was lint discussed by Georg Buhler in Buhler and Kintc, "Indian Studies No.
II''.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
168
JAMES L. FITZGERALD
In light ofs uch an understanding of it, the MBh exerted great influence
on the tradition of Dharma5astra. It was often quoted in commentaries
written on such texts as the Manavadharmaiiislra (the Laws of Manu) and the
lajilavalkyasmrti, and didactic portions ofi t were transferred wholesale into
the dharmanibandhas written after the twelfth century A.D., such as
Lak$midhara's Krlyalcaipa1aru. The great Vediintiicaryas Sankara,
Ramiinuja, and Madhva took the didactic authority of the MBh for
granted. Generally, when he quoted it in the course ofa rguments, Sankara
would simply refer to the MBh with a confident "from
"smrlt~",
authoritative tradition". As the final redactors of our Sanskrit MBh
evidently were, Riimiinuja was a Vai$r;iava and the MBh was particularly
authoritative for him. At one point in the course ofa n argument Riimanuja
matter-of-factly stated that Vyasa had expounded the Piincaratra doctrine
(the particular Vai$r;iava theological tradition to which Riimiinuja
belonged'") at great length in the Mokfadhannaparvan of the MBh. He went
on to cite a long passage taken from several places within the Mokfadhanna
to the effect that a body of doctrine had been extracted from the epic
narrative of the Bharatas-the Piincaratra doctrine which was a great
Upani$ad consistent with the Vedas.' ' Madhva was also a Vai$i;tava, and
with him there is a real twist. His opera include not only the standard
commentaries oft he other V edantiicaryas (on the Brahmasiitra, important
Upani$ads, and the most important didactic passage of the M Bh, the
Bhagavadgila), but a commentary on the entire MBh, the Mahii.hhii.ralaliil
paryanil7}llya.32 Madhva's sense of the MBh's instructional value was
explicitly based on the narrative of the MBh as much as on the overtly
didactic portions. According to Suzanne Siauve, Madhva was concerned
"to establish relations between the figures oft he epics andpurat}as by way of
the theory of incarnations, showing in them the law of karman-retribution
for acts- at work".33 (Madhva viewed himself as the third incarnation of
the wind-god Vayu after Hanuman of the RamayQt}a and Bhimasena of the
MBh.)
While brahman intellectuals did not require the Veda metaphor to be
persuaded that the MBh was an important authoritative text, it seems
likely that this deliberately archaic theme was a potent theme ofa uthority
'°
Sec J.A.B. van Buitcncn, ed. and trans. . Yamuna's .1gamapram6Jvam (Madras:
Riimiinuja Research Socic1y, 1971), introduction.
" Sno/lava of Ramanuja, ed. R.D. Kannaker, 3 vols. (Poona: University of Poona, 1962,
1964), on 2.2.42.
" Sec Suzanne Siauvc, I.A doctrine dt Madliva (Pondichery: lnsri1u1 Fr~aise d'lndologic,
1968).
" Ibid .. p. 6, n. 2
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
INOIA'S FIFTH VEDA: THE MAHABHAllATA'S PRESENTATION OF ITSELF 169
for the kings who were the first audience in the imagination of the text.
Vyasa's "Vedic" instruction ofJ anamejaya on his proper action in the
world, and the brahman community's monitoring of that instruction
represented the ancient Indian complementarity between braliman and
kfatra- transcendent wisdom and governmental power. But what of the
Brahma episode, which was one of our beginnings? It docs not seem to
recommend the text either to the brahmans or the qatriyas. Why was it
invented, inserted into some version of the text, and then widely accepted
in the manuscript tradition? What did this blessing of the text add to its
authority or power? Docs it coordinate with the Veda metaphor in any
subordinate or complementary way? As I noted above, the passage seems
superfluous. It merely reproduces the same sort ofc laims for the scope and
value of the knowledge taught in the MBh that the text has already made
for itself in its introductions, through the Veda metaphor. Although the
long list by which the comprehensiveness of the MBh is indicated in this
passage differs from the earlier introductions in style and detail, the only
new substantive element is the approval of the text by the god Brahma.
Vyasa's excusing himself before Brahma suggests that we have here two
not unrelated but different, and potentially competing, rhetorics of
inspiration and authority. With that possibility in mind, I propose that this
episode was composed and welcomed into many of the regional traditions
of the written Sanskrit MBh because it incorporated an important new
audience into the imagination of the text, an audience the text actually
acquired sometime after its creation and promulgation. I am referring to
the most extensive, and in some ways most important audience the text
came to have-the audience which watched both the bralimarfis and King
J anamejaya, an audience excluded, in large part, from the real Veda, and
to whom the Vedic metaphor probably meant little or nothing; that is, the
majority of Indian people, and eventually western scholars and the western
public."' The Brahma passage provides an important supplemental
recommendation of the text to this vast audience new to the imagination of
the M Bh and, indeed, of all brahmandom. The passage also justifies that
audience as an audience of the new Vedic text. Because much of this
" Referring to a dcscription of the MBh's being read in a temple given by the seventh
century A.O. author Bi~a in his KiU/ambari, Georg Buhler remarks, "Public and private
recitations of the Epics and of the Pura~as are common enough also in modern India, and
they are always instituted for one and the same purpose, viz. the edification and religious
instruction of temple-worshippers or of the domestic circle. Mostly the Sanscrit texts are not
only read, but also explained in the verancular for the benefit of the women and of the males
of the classes unacquainted with the idiom of the Brahmanical schools" ("Indian Studies
No. 11": 24).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
170
JAMES L. FITZGERALD
audience (siidras and lower peoples) was prohibited from even hearing the
Veda, not to speak of their ever appropriating and using it, the expansion
of the audience challenged the Veda metaphor. The tradition developed
two parallel remedies to resove this dilemma. On the one hand the
metaphor of the MBh as the "fifth Veda" was quite plausibly extended;
having been simply the fifth Veda, the MBhcame to be the Veda ofw omen
and siidras (shi!Mdraveda).•• On the other hand, the author of the Brahma
episode left the Veda metaphor behind, resorting instead to the universal
benevolence of grandfather Brahma and his general responsibility for
knowledge within the samsaric system of the world. This passage
incorporates the actual mass audience of the text into the text's imagination
by adding Brahma's praise oft he text as a universal, creative promulgation
of knowledge onto the Veda metaphor. Like the light of the sun, the MBh
shines for the welfare ofe veryone. Brahma's blessing of the text justifies the
appropriation of the "Vedic" text by all the different strata of Indian
society, transforming the Great Bhiirata from an imitation of the exclusive
and esoteric Body ofK nowledge oft he ancient brahmans into an imitation
of the universal wisdom of the buddhavacana-a not unlikely fate for a fifth
Veda, a Veda.
Ka~r;ia
z.,
" Stt AdolfHoltzmann, Gesdt~hk Wiii Kritilc iU.s MaltahMral4 (Kiel: C.F. Haesler,
1892). p. 178. Stt too the injunction to teach which Vylsa gives his studenu at MBA
12.314.45cd: irivayec caturovaTQiin lqtvl brlhminam agrar~ // 45 //and Biihler's "'J>Ort
of how Kumirila construes this uid/ri ("Indian Studies No. II": 10).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SANTARASA IN THE MAHABHARATA
GARY A. TUBB
The study of the Mahabhiirata by those viewing it from outside the Indian
tradition has always been marked by controversies concerning the extent
to which the work can be said to possess any unity, and by disagreements
about the nature of any unifying principles that may be discerned. In
continuing these discussions, we might do well to pause long enough for
a more careful look at what thoughtful experts within that tradition have
had to say on such matters, especially in view of the widespread suspicion
that the meanings Indians have found, or have hoped to find, in the
Mahabhiirata have contributed at times to the contents of the work as we
now have it.
Indian tradition has ascribed to the Mahabhiirata at least a superficial
·unity by claiming that the work was designed by a single author of great
wisdom, the sage Knt;ta Dvaipayana, known also as Vyasa. Any attempt to
go further and to claim for that author a unifying vision with demonstrable
effects, must face at the outset a considerable difficulty in identifying the
level or levels on which those effects arc to be found. Are we to view the
Mahiibharata as a work of philosophy, ofh istory, of mythology, of religion,
or of poetry? Most Indian readers of the Mahabhiirata, as indeed most of its
readers throughout the world, have agreed that more than one of these
designations arc to be applied simultaneously, although different readers
may disagree on the list of available categories.
In this paper I propose to examine the view of the Mahabhiirata put
forward in the most influential Indian work on the literary aspects ofu nity,
the Dhvanyaloka ofAnandavardhana, written in Kashmir in the second half
of the ninth century. While the Mahabhiirata as a work of literature can be
analyzed in terms of other traditional approaches as well,' Anandavard
hana's comments arc ofp articular interest for two reasons. One is that the
Mahiibhiirata, somewhat surprisingly, served as his chief example of a work
that fulfills in its entirety the demanding requirements ofp oetic unity. The
other is that in his explanation of this success A.nandavardhana brought
1 Analy>eS of the MaAUllMa14 based on 1tvcral traditional systems of literary theory may
be found in J.P. Sinha, Th MaAU/iaral4: A Li/nary StiuiJ (New Delhi: Mchcrchand
Lacchmandas, 1977).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
172
GARY A. TUBB
together several oft he designations I have just mentioned, while describing
aspects oft he Maliiibhiiraui that, he believed, arc inseparably intertwined in
the achievement of its purpose.
The categories applied by Anandavardhana and his colleagues in their
discussions of Sanskrit compositions differ from those used in many other
traditions. Within the Sanskrit tradition the didactic value of a work has
not usually been of fundamental importance in classification; while
theorists have argued over the ultimate end ofv arious sorts ofc ompositions,
it was taken for granted that any work ofv alue, whatever the principal aim
of its author, will necessarily provide instruction in at least one of the four
major goals of human life (pu"'liirtha). What furnishes the basis for
distinction is the way in which a work provides such edification.
On this basis a classification that has been widely accepted for many
centuries, and that found its classical expression around the time of
Anandavardhana, divides works into three categories. A Jiistra, or
prescriptive work, is of interest because of the authority of its pronounce·
ments; in such a work the word itself is of primary importance. In an
Okhyiina, or story, what holds our interest is the plot being presented; in such
a work it is therefore the sense rather than the word that is predominant.
Finally, in a kavya, or work ofb elles lettres, the predominance lies not in the
words alone, nor in their ultimate meaning, but in the special operation
(l!Yaf>iira) through which the words arc linked to our apprehension of that
meaning; in such a work what holds our attention is the beauty of the poetic
act of expression.2
These basic distinctions were put more interestingly in the analogies
made famous in the great commentary on Anandavardhana's work,
the Locana of Abhinavagupta, written around 1000 A.D. Scripture,
Abhinavagupta said, teaches after the fashion ofa master, by giving direct
commands. The story literature edifies us more gently, after the fashion of
a helpful friend, by presenting interesting examples ofw hat fruits befell the
actions of others in the past. And poetry instructs us in the most effective
way, after the fashion of a beloved woman, by so delighting us that we are
scarcely aware of an underlying purpose.3
' Bha11a Niiyaka's verses outlining these categories are preserved by Abhinavagupta,
Uic. on Dhv. 1.5 (p. 87):
Jahdapriidhanyam aJritya tatra Jii1tram p[thag 11idul] /
artlratallVtna yukla'fl tu vadanty iikhJ•iinam rlll)'OiJ /
dvayor •J•iipiirapriidhanye kalJ)'adhlr blravet.
gu~atur
' In the Locana Abhinavagupta uses these analogies three times: on I. I (pp. 4-0-41,
anyatl&ii prahhusal'(lmit.hhyaJi ... ), on 3.1()-I4 (p. 336, iha prahhu.ra7f1mitehhyalJ . . . ). and on 3.30
(p. 399, eltu ca prahhu.rQl'(lmitebhyalJ .. . ).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SA.VTARASA IN THE A1AH1BHJRATA 173
The express purpose ofA nandavardhana in writing his DhvanyiiloA:a was
to explain the most important operation through which the third category
of composition provides its delight. His treatise propounded the theory of
dhvani, or poetic suggestion, and, most importantly, explained that by
means of this dhvani the reader is granted the experience of ra.ra,
a phenomenon that had long been spoken ofin Sanskrit literary theory, but
the nature ofw hose evocation in poetic works had not yet been described.•
The notion of ra.ra, literally the "flavor" of a work, had first come into
prominence in the tradition of dramaturgy. In the theory set down
centuries before Anandavardhana in the .Nii1Y4fiistra of Bharata, the eight
varieties of"flavor" correspond to eight stable emotions (sthiiyibhiiva) made
known in a play through the presentation of their objects (the persons or
things toward which a character represented on stage is supposed to feel the
emotion- e.g., a woman with whom he is in love), their stimulants (e.g.,
the fragrance of flowers or the presence ofa full moon), and their effects in
the character who feels the emotion (in the form ofp hysical manifestations
such as sweating, and accompanying feelings such as agitation). In the
.Nii"4fa.rlra the precise connection between the sthiiyibhiiva and the ra.ra was
left rather mysterious, and a long history of speculation, now preserved
largely in the works of Abhinavagupta, had addressed the problem. The
early results of this speculation, far from resolving the ultimate question of
the nature of ra.ra itself, did not even manage to settle the preliminary
problems concerning the sthiiyibhiiva, such as whether the emotion supposed
to exist in the actor is an imitation of the emotion belonging to the person
portrayed, or whether it is through inference that the audience comes to
know of the emotion in the actor.
It fell to Anandavardhana's theory of suggestion to give a more
satisfactory answer to these problems. Each of the earlier speculations had
failed in its own way to account for the status of the savoring of the "flavor"
as a purely esthetic experience, distinct from the emotions of practical life.
In the real world the effect of imitation, for example, is more often
ludicrous than profound, and the effect of inferring another's emotion, like
the effects of any of the other everyday acts of knowledge, leaves us
indifferent or concerned, as the circumstances warrant, but seldom evokes
anesthetic response. The theory that the work of art artistically suggests the
existence of the stable emotion provided, for the first time, a mechanism for
• For the most helpful introduction to tlhvani, rasa, and rdat«i notions, sec Daniel H.H.
Ingalls, An Antholog1 of Sanskrit Gour/ P0<try: Villjakara's "Subha/ifdratnako/n," Harvard
Oriental Series 44 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univenity Press, 1965), General Introduction,
Part One: "Sanskrit Poetry and Sanskrit Poetics."
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
174
GARY A. TUBB
explaining the special quality of the savoring of ra.sa as an experience
different from those of everyday life.
The nature ofr a.sa itself was later explained more fully by Abhinavagupta,
who developed a detailed psychological theory that drew heavily on the
contributions made in the intervening yean by the brilliant theorist Bhaua
Nayaka. Abhinavagupta explained that the effect ofs uggesting the stable
emotion, rather than presenting it baldly as an imitation or logically
implying it, is to remove it from the restrictions ofpenonal interest and the
limitations oft ime and place, and so to univcnalizc it and make possible an
identification with it on the part of sensitive readcn or spectaton. Such
penons, by virtue of impressions of past experiences of the same stable
emotion stored in the heart, arc then able, as in no other way, to savor the
essence of emotion without the entanglements of individual limitations.
The resulting experience, because of this special freedom, is essentially
blissful, even when the corresponding penonal emotion glicf, for example,
or disgust-is unpleasant when experienced in everyday life.$
Anandavardhana concentrated on the elucidation of the suggestive
function that makes the experience ofe sthctic flavor possible. What helped
to make his theory plausible was that in presenting it Anandavardhana
repeatedly appealed to the observable features of successful poetry that
distinguish the operation ofd lwani from more mundane functions, pointing
out, for example, that to blatantly name the emotions to be suggested may
preclude the evocation of the flavor.
It was in connection with this appeal to the data found in the great
poems of the past that Anandavardhana made his first reference to the
MahiiiJhi.rata. Near the beginning of his work he proposed to reveal the
precise nature of the suggestive function "so as to provide a foundation for
the delight in the minds ofs ensitive rcaden who have been aware all along
of its operation in works such as the R.amayat}tl and the Mahabharata. "6
Herc the mention of the R.amayatJa is natural enough, as it was
traditionally considered the first kavya. The reasons for including the
MahiiiJhi.rata, however, arc less obvious. In the traditional view of history
' For accounts of Abhinavagupta's theory and his description ofe arlier speculation, sec
Raniero Gnoli, Tht Attthttic E•P<ritnct According to Abhinauaguplo, 2nd ed., Chowkhamba
Sanskrit Studies 62 (Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1968 [!st ed.: Rome,
J.L.
1956]; and Masson and M.V. Patwardhan, Atsthtlit Raptwrt: Tht R4SUh,,Oya of tht
Nii(1414stra, 2 vols., Deccan College Building Centenary and Silver Jubilee Series 69 (Pune:
Deccan College Postgraduate and Research Institute, 1970).
' Dho., end of vrtti on I. I (p. 38): [la.!14 dltuant~ soanipam] riimiiy.,,,,,.,.Jiiibhiira14pahlrflim
lakfJe saroatra prasiddltal!J<Joaloiir•lfl ~lfldlilfl saltrdayOJ!i.m ~ nttJJt4fi labhasiirp praJ4t/14m iii
pralc4fyatt.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
$1.NTAJUSA IN THE MAHABHARATA 175
the Mahabharata did succeed the Riim4.J41J11, having been composed by
Vyisa in the present Kali Age, whereas the author of the Riim4.J41J11,
Vlilrru1ci, lived in the previous Dvapara Age. But it was usually included in
the second category ofc omposition, that of the iikllyQ!la, rather than in the
category ofk ii11.J4; in its broader form that second category contains, along
with works of fiction, works of mythology and legendary history (itihasa),
and of these the MahabharaJa is traditionally the foremost example. 7 Even
so, any suspicion that the Mahabhiirata is mentioned here merely out of
piety, or perhaps out of regard for the excellence of individual verses
contained in it, is dispelled in the final chapter of the Dh'0011y4Joka, when
Anandavardhana finally turns to an exposition of the unity that each of
these two great epics possesses as a complete work.
In this section as well, Anandavardhana's opening remarks on these
works might surprise some readers of the MahabhiiraJa, for here his original
purpose in mentioning the epics is to explain how it happens that even the
repeated occurrence of similar scenes in these works never strikes one as
tedious. This is so, he says, because when a poet is attentive to rasa and its
related phenomena, and to the things in a poem that serve to suggest them,
"then his entire poem becomes fresh. And this is how in works such as the
.Ramaya114 and the Mahabharata the battles and so on, even though described
again and again, appear ever new." 1
Anandavardhana then describes what gives these works their unity-the
employment of a single predominant rasa, to which all the other rasas are
subordinated. And again his remarks may provoke some surprise, for in
each of these works what he identifies as principal is not the heroic flavor
(virarasa) that one might expect to find predominating in an epic poem, but
another flavor altogether.
Furthermore, when in a complete work one presents a single flavor as
predominant, it fosters freshness of meaning and abundance of beauty. Ify ou
ask for examples, we point to the RiimaylUllJ or the Maltihharala. For in the
RamaYIUllJ the First Poet [Vii.lmiki] has set forth kanaia [the compassionate
flavor] a.s the rasa by making such statements a.s "Griefwa.s made into verse,"
' Only very late in the tradition, and with conscious awareness of Anandavardhana's
views, u the place of the MaMhl.arala within the genres ofS anskrit lr4UJ<1 specified. Thus, in
the fourteenth century Vi.ivanlitha, dt.cwsing the genre of the ornate coun epic, the
""1Mk4IJ.10 (great .tiUJ<l), remarks that in the 1Mltiik4uyas from the age of the ancient seen the
aections arc called "stories" rather than "cantos" (SD 6.325<:d: asmiml irft ptDullJ sttrgii
bluuianty ~411'}~). and in his own commentary on thu statement he names the
MaMhlliral4 as an example of such a poem (...,,W, """'4kii1!Jt; yalM-maMb"4ral4m).
IJ.10'iO<
' Dho., rn;tli on 4.5 (p. 529): rasab"4oatadiib"4sarWJ>t /ti tad..,aA}aA:tf• coyatlWoirt/4/lfl'
~ra.ctmilprabaM/wffl aoalti14m41uua/i k4ut~ saroam apii.""11!1 k4l!Jam s_,.ayas.. 14tM
ca r~li4rol0Jjpt so#grOmD44ya/i jNuJ/J fNMr ohlbltitii ~ -~ prak4Ja11J1.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
176
GARY A. TUBB
and he has carried it through by composing his work so as to extend to the
final separation [of Rama] from Sita..
Likewise in the MaJiablrarala, which has the beauty of a kiivya while being in
thefonnofaJ4stra, the great sage [Vyasa) has demonstrated that the creation
ofd ispassion is the principal purport of his work, by composing a conclusion
that produces a despondent feeling in response to the sorry end of the V~i;lls
and the Par,u;lavas, and in doing so he has suggested that what he intended as
the principal subject of his poem is the peaceful ffavor [Jcintarasa] and the
human aim characterized by liberation (mok.fa]. •
Before continuing with the rest of Anandavardhana's remarks on the
Mahiibharata, several theoretical problems raised by his approach must be
examined.
To begin with, there is the general question ofw hether the Mahiibharata,
with its huge collection ofs uch diverse material, is capable ofs ustaining the
difficult task of evoking rasa, for this is said to be so delicate a business that
any significant imbalance or impropriety can be fatal. Yet Anandavardhana
repeatedly insists on reminding us that the epics arc models ofs uccess in this
regard.
On scrutinizing the list given in the Dhvanyiiloka of prescriptions for the
arrangement of a complete work conducive to rasa- the requirement, for
example, that any elements of the story not suitable to the appropriate
flavor must be abandoned10- we may wonder how fully the Mahiibharata
meets the prescription. But Anandavardhana introduces the list with the
assertion that it is quite well known that the sort of suggestion needed to
evoke rasa in an entire composition "shines forth in such works as the
RiimiiyaT]Q and the Mahiibhiirata," and that the list is intended "to make clear
how that shining forth is accomplished.""
This list is followed by another list outlining the things that hinder the
evocation of rasa, and here we may wonder especially whether the
Mahabharata really avoids such faults as "the extensive description ofs ome
other matter, even ifi t is connected,"12 but Anandavardhana ends this list
• Dhv., vi;tti on 4.5 {pp. 529-530): prabandht dirigi rasa tka toopanibadhyamiino 'rthavilt1aliib·
M'!f chOyiitiJaya'!f ,. pujl)iiti. kasminn iveti ctl-yathii riimiiytJl)t yatha vii mahObhiiralt. ramay<l!)t hi
karUl}o rasal) svayam iidikiivina siitrital) "!okal) flokatvam iigata~" ity rcturwiidinii. nircyii4/ial ca sa tva
sltiityan11Jviyogaparyanl4m tva svaprabOJUiham uparaeayatii. mahiibhiiratt 'pi liistrariipam [ r<ad (with
Krishna moor th y) f iis traruptJ kii~10uh4yiinvayini rn: f1J ip01)4avavirasiivasiinar"1i manasyad4.1in il!!
samiip6m upanihad/rnatii mahOmunina vairiigyaj11nanatatpary-a11J priidhanyma svaprl1bandJiasya
darlayaJa makralakrarµili punqiirtha~ liinw rasal ta mukh.1atayii uivak1iiui1ayatVtM. suci~.
10 Dhv. 3.1 lab (p. 329): itivrttavafayiil4'1' ryaktviinanugu~arp sthitim.
11 D!tv., intro. to 3.10 (pp. 328-329): idiinim alakf)'akramavyairgo dhvani/] prabandhOtmii
riima.JOl!OmahiibhOratiidau prakiiJamdnal) prasitWra tva. ta.sya tu yathO prakiiJan11rp liJt pr11tipiidyate.
12 D!tv. 3.18cd (p. 361 ): uistartl)iinvitasyiipi vastuno '•JOS.!• rm71an11m.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SLVTARASA IN THE AIAHABHARATA 177
with the remark, "And the principles we have presented contain nothing
not found in the policies of the most celebrated master poets, led by
Valmiki and Vyasa.""
Beyond these general problems, there are theoretical problems connected
specifically with iantarasa (the flavor of peace). This rasa was not included
among the original eight in the Jratyaiiistra and has always been a source of
controversy. The stable emotion associated with it, often called Jama
(tranquility}, is that of the person who has passed beyond the ordinary
desires and fears ofl ife, and because of its dependence on this peculiar and
rare psychological state, the very possibility ofi iinJarasa has frequently been
questioned. For reasons of space I cannot rehearse here the details of that
controversy, and a bare outline will have to suffice.••
Ift his sthayibhava, tranquility, is interpreted strictly as a state in which all
desires have been gotten rid of, then a few would deny its existence
absolutely, refusing to believe that complete liberation is possible for any
human. Many more would accept its occurrence in the real world but
question its possibility in literature on the grounds ofits rarity in the outside
world: no member of the audience at a play is capable of identifying with
the suggested stable emotion without having experienced that psychological
state in the past, and no audience is likely to include many of those
liberated masters who have experienced true tranquility. And even if those
who are capable ofs avoring the rasa should come to see a play in which the
flavor of peace is predominant, it may be impossible to represent on stage
such an unworldly state: if we do take Jama to mean absolute tranquility,
then no gestures or actions can adequately convey it, and if the actor is
" Dhv., verse before 3.20 {p. 365):
viilmilivyiisamulcJryiiJ ca yt pralchyii.tii.* kaviJvarii.* I
tadabhipriiyabii.hyo Ji•'!' niismiibhir darJito nay•* 11
" For the details, sec Shashthi Prasad Bhattacharya, ~nl4 Rasa and Its Seopt in Litnal•re.
Calcuua Sanskrit College RcS<arch Series 110, Studies No. 73 (Calcutta: Sanskrit College,
1976); Sushi! Kumar De, "The Santa Rasa in thr Na1ya-Sastra and the Daia-Riipaka," in
Somt Probkms ofS anskrit Potties (Calcuua: Firm a K.L. M ukhopadhyay, 1959), pp. l 39-143
J.L.
[reprinted from Sidd/uJ-bhii.rafi, Hoshiarpur 1950); t.fasson and M.V. Patwardhan,
~rasa and AbhiMvagllf>l4's Philosophy of Atsthttics, Bhandarkar Oriental Series 9 (Pune:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1969); Edwin Grrow and Ashok Aklujkar, "On
Santa Rasa in Sanskrit Poetics," ]oUT1141 oft ht Amnicon Orit111al Socit!JI 92 ( 1972), 80-87 (a
review article examining Masson and Patwardhan's Sdntarasa); V. Raghavan, Tltt Numbn
of Rasa-s, 2nd ed., Adyar Library Series 23 (Adyar, Madras: The Adyar Library and
RCS<arch Centre, 1967) [1st ed. 1940); and K.C. Pandey, "Dhananjaya and Abhinavagupta
on Santarasa," Procudings of tht All India Orit111al Conftrt11et 12 ( 1944), 326-330.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
178
GARY A. TUBB
presented as completely devoid of activity, it will make for an exceedingly
dull play."
These objections were countered in detail by Abhinavagupta." He
speaks of the stable emotion in terms of the knowledge of reality, thus
avoiding an insistence on the final state of absolute liberation, and on the
problems ofi dentifying with the sthayibhava and ofr epresenting it on stage,
he remarks:
But while it is true that in its ultimate state it cannot be acted out because of
the absence of [detectable] effects, presentation on stage is just as impossible
in the case ofs uch [stable emotions] as love and griefw hen they have reached
their highest pitch. And identification with it is clearly possible on the pan of
those who p<lS8eSS the stored impressions that are the seeds of that sort of
knowledge or reality. 17
In referring to the highest pitch of love and grief, which are the stable
emotions corresponding to the erotic and compassionate flavors, Abhinava
gupta presumably has in mind the prohibition against explicitly presenting
sexual intercouse or death on stage. 11
Anandavardhana himself was not troubled by the rarity of this stable
emotion in the real world: "Ifi t does not fall within the range ofe xperience
of all people, this fact is not enough in itself to allow one to deny that
particular psychological state in noble individuals who are unlike other
people."" And, at least where his analysis oft he Mahabharata is concerned,
the problems of representation are not as serious as in a play. As Dhanika
put it shortly before the time ofA bhinavagupta, "Although Jantarasa is not
brought into plays because it cannot be acted out, there is nothing to
prevent its occurrence in poems, since all things, including those that are
" The objections to the possibility ofl in14raso arc tnum<ratcd by Dhanika (D/Uvo. on
4.35, pp. 202-203: ilia lin/4raso1(1 proti vddiMm 01Ukovid/tQ vipralipotta,,a!i . .. ), and again by
Abhinavagupta in sevtral portions of tht lin/4 section of the Abh.
" His fullest discussion of the topic is in tht section on linl4raso in the ABh. (Kanglt, pp.
316fl'.; COS, pp. 333fl.'). Tht Sanskrit text of this section is also available in tmtndcd form in
Raghavan, Tiu N•mbtr of Raso-s, pp. 104-117, which is reproduced, together with
a complete English translation, in Masson and Patwardhan, Sinl4raso, pp. 113-143.
" ABh. (Kanglc, p. 338; COS, p. 340): yo44 I• ~/Mnilcaliloblu 'rwbhiivabhaoalj
taJasyapraµjyalvom, rotilok444M opi poryonladola.fam •tn•,10gasyoiuo .JUktatuOJ. /trdayosmrwiido 'pi
14t/iiiuU/JiataJtvoj1'iinalifjasmpsurobhavit4nam bhavaty eoa.
" This is the interpretation suggested by Masson and Patwardhan (Sintarasa, p. 100);
their view is attacked by Gerow and Al<lujkar (sec note 56 below).
" Dhu., 11(tti on 3.26 (p. 393): yadi namo sonHJjOllOnabluwagocarot4 lasJd n4sti iWl4vat4siu
oJotasama•~•bhiiDacitl41Jflliuilqa}J prolikftflt•m JaJc,,aJi.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SJNTAJUSA IN THE MAHABHARATA 179
subtle or in the past, can be presented through their ability to be described
in words. "20
Once the possibility ofs uggesting Jiinlarasa in a poem is granted, a further
theoretical problem arises: can Jiinlarasa abo be the predominant flavor
(angl rasa) in the work, as Anandavardhana explicitly claims is so in the
MaMh/rarata? The Dhvanyaloka insists on the treatment of one flavor as
predominant in any larger work that aspires to excellence, 21 and on this
level the difficulties of representation that separate the plays from the
non-dramatic poems become even more serious. Beginning with the
Dlwanyiiloka, most of the treatises that concern themselves with the topic of
the predominant flavor in plays discuss a single play, the .Nag4nanda, in
which Jantarasa might be considered dominant, and, as we shall sec, they
end up deciding that there the migl rasa is actually the flavor of heroism
rather than that of peace. But from Anandavardhana's time most of those
who accept the existence of Jantarasa concede that it can be dominant in
a non-dramatic poem. Visvanatha, for example, stipulates that the
predominant rasa in a major play must be either f(Jigara (the erotic flavor)
or vira (the heroic flavor),22 but when he later discusses the major genre of
non-dramatic poetry he adds Janlarasa to the list of possibilities.'' It
therefore seems that the status of Jantarasa as the predominant flavor in the
MaMh/rarala is at least theoretically possible.
If Anandavardhana's theory is supportable on the level of practical
criticism as well, it should be possible to trace the outlines of the ways in
which the sthi.yibhava corresponding to the peaceful flavor is suggested in
the poem.
As I have mentioned, the prescise identification of the stable emotion
associated with Jantarasa cannot proceed on the basis of such exalted
authority as is possible in discussing the other flavors, since the old
Jrapaiiistra did not originally recognize the flavor of peace as a rasa. The
widespread designation of the sthi.yib/raua as Jama (tranquility) is based on
an interpolated passage in the .Na(1aiiistra that deals specifically with
Jantarasa. Many theorists preferred to draw their conclusions from what
,. D/Uua., intro. to 4.45cd (p. 223): """" ca JantarasasfaMbltitwyallJOd .J<Ul.J opi "°l1t
'DprGJJtio ,,.;.,,; tatJ#i sWA:~tadiliastWlp uroqO... api labt/4pr~.JGl4fa ~
~"4•.J•INJ!I na nilliryau.
11 Dltu. 3.21 (p. 378):
JWasiddlu 'pi JWabandliiiniJp Mniiras411ibandluuu I
tko raso 'rigr"l:arlal1)'4S ltjiim utJ:arfam i<cltata 11
" SD 6. IOab (in defining the llii/aka, p. 258): 1"6""' blta,,,,/ aiigi Jriiliiro lira n>a vii.
" SD 6.3 I 7ab (in defining the ....n4kii'!J'<J, p. 353): JriliiraiiraJ~ 1ko 'rigi rasa ipat<.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
180
GARY A. TUBB
they recognized to be the older portion of the work, and to rely on
implications found in Bharata's list of the other eight sthayibhavas and in the
immediately following list of the more numerous vyahhiciiribhavas, the
temporary feelings that accompany the basic emotions. One way ofg etting
around the mention of only eight basic emotions was to borrow, as the
sthayibham connected with Jiinlarasa, the first of these accompanying
feelings listed by Bharata, called niroeda, and so have it do double duty.
Abhinavagupta, in reviewing the various attempts to extract a sthayibham
for the ftavorofpeacc from Bharata's text, explains that this interpretation
was thought to account both for Bharata's omission of nirveda in the list of
sthayibhavas and for his starting the subsequent list of1 !J4bhiciiribhavas with so
inauspicious an item, which the sage would presumably not have done
without some special purpose. 24
In this view, which seems to agree well with Anandavardhana's own
conception of the sthayibham connected with fiinlarasa, there arc thus two
kinds ofn irveda. In reference to a 1!Jllbhiciiribhava, the term means a feeling of
discouragement or temporary disgust; this feeling may accompany many
of the stable emotions. In reference to a stable emotion, nirveda means
a more fundamental disillusionment, a psychological state of disregard
directed against the entire phenomenal world rather than merely a response
to an individual source of pain. While both forms ofn irveda share an origin
in suffering, they differ in the ways in which all l!)'abhiciiribhavas differ from
sthayibhavas. The l!)'abhiciiribhavo is occasional and temporary, while the
sthayibhiiva is more lasting: to use Abhinavagupta's example, on hearing
that someone is suffering from exhaustion (i.e., from the l!)'abhiciiribham
called gliina), the natural reaction is to ask why, but on hearing that Rama
is a man of heroism (i.e., that he possesses the sthiiyibhava called utsiiho), no
one asks for a reason." And the practical effects of the l!)'abhici.ribhava are
correspondingly fleeting, while the sthiiyibhava can have lasting results: the
temporary despondency does not move beyond a state of pain, while the
more fundamental version culm.inates in freedom.
Anandavardhana, in his own treatment oft he sthiiyibhiiva associated with
the flavor ofp eace, emphasized this characteristic ofh aving already passed
beyond pain. If Abhinavagupta and I have read him correctly,26 he
" Abh. (Kanglt: on 6.17, p. 112; GOS: on 6.18, pp. 269-270): lallvajMnajo nirvtdo 'sya
slMft, tladartliam tuobltaµdharmopajlvituakhyiipaMfamarigalabhiito 'pyasau piirvalfl nird4/•, sthiiyqu
ca salflklt)'<i noku!J' apart.
" AB!t. (Kangle, p. 168; GOS, p. 284): glano .Jam i!>' u);u kuta iii lttluf"aJneMstMyitMya
siigate. na tu riUna utsiilro.!aktimiin iry alra ltttuprafnam Oltu}J.
" In defining the rasa as a "fostering" (J>arifJOta) of the emotion of happinCiS,
Anandavardhana docs not explicitly say that the happiness is the sthayibhiiva, but this is the
natural way of interpreting his remarks in the context, and Abhinavagupta makes this
interpretation explicit (Loe. on 3.26, p. 390): .. . lad tva .n<k/talfl /IJJya sthiiyibltiilasyaya/J paripofo
r4'yam4natakr/IJS lad tva lak(af)alfl ya.sya sa Jiinto
r4"a~.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
S.:fNTARASA IN THE MAHilBHilRATA 181
defined the slhiiyihhava as "the happiness produced by the extinction of
craving," a phrase he borrowed from a verse in the Mahabharata, which he
quotes in the same passage: "The happiness of pleasures in this world and
the great happiness in heaven cannot match the sixteenth part of the
happiness produced by the extinction of craving."" ·
It is this transcendental happiness that, in theory, we should find
suggested throughout the Mahabharata as the prevailing psychological state
oft he protagonist in the poem. The focus of the Mahabharata story is on the
five Par.icjavas, and to most readers of the poem it will seem obvious that
among them it is the eldest, who functions as the hero in the
Yudh~fhira,
poem. Within the Sanskrit tradition the awareness of the central role of
Yudhi$fhira is so strong that even when another of the Par.icjavas has been
made the focus of a later work of poetry, commentators are likely to persist
in viewing as the real protagonist in those poems. This is done,
Yudh~fhira
for example, by Citrabhanu in his commentary on the Kiriitiirjunl.Ja of
Bharavi, an ornate epic dealing with the deeds of Arjuna. In discussing the
underlying predominance of Yudhi$fhira in the poem, Citrabhanu
explains, with reference to the Mahabkiirata, that "even though 'Bharata' is
the name ofa ll the Bharatas, nevertheless it is the deeds ofYudhinhira that
are presented there as the principal topic. Just as he alone was predominant
in (the depiction in the Mahabharata of the Par.icjavas') ascent into heaven,
just so should it be here (in this poem) as well."28 Citrabhanu goes on to cite
a verse from the Mahabharata that has often been quoted in this connection:
Yudhi$lhira is the great tree composed of dharma,
Arjuna is its trunk, and Bhimasena its branches,
The two sons of Madri are its rich blossoms and fruit,
and its root is Kor.ia, Brahma, and the brahman.29
We come now to the central problem in Anandavardhana's analysis of
the Mahabharata: in the career as it is presented in the poem,
ofYudhi~fhira
" Dho., vi;tti on 3.26 (p. 390): Jiintas ca tu~iilctayasukhasya ya!} paripo1as 141/akf~o rasalJ
pratiyala roa. lathii hi-
.JM ca kiima.suk/zatp lokt yac ca di'!}atp mahat sukham /
trtriiiA:fayasukhasyaite narhata/i tot/afirri kalii.m 11
[The verse appears in Mahiibhii.rala 12.168.36, 12.171.51, 12.268.6, and elsewhere.)
,. Commentary on Kir. I. I (p. 4 ): bhii.ralam ity eva kruna.sya hhiiratasya satpjiW. tatlriipi
J"'llii11hiracarilam tva lalra priidliiinynaa pratipiidyatt. svargiiroh~t taryaiva Jr1itvam iti tadvad atriipi
'>'°'·
" MBh. 1.1.66, repeated at 5.29.<Hl:
pdhi.f(hiro d/uirmJJma)'O mahiidruma/]
skandho 'rjuno bhima.stno 'vi• lakhiiJi I
miidrisutau f>uif>af>halt samrddht
mUlarri kr1'1!0 brahma ca briihmaQiiJ ca 11
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
182 GARY A. TUBB
the blissful freedom from desire that Anandavardhana considers the
slliiiyiQ/WJa oft he peaceful flavor is by no means conspicuous. It is true that
towards the end of the poem, in the events culminating in the ascent to
heaven that Citrabhii.nu mentions, is finally prompted by
Yud~µllra
weariness and disappointment to leave the world behind him. But if, as
Anandavardhana expressly maintains, the flavor ofp eace is supposed to be
the aiigl rasa in the MaMbliiirata, then it ought to be predominant
throughout the work and not merely come into prominence at the end.
Anandavardhana describes this requirement in commenting on the
conditions under which the predominance of the aiigl rasa is not impaired
by the evocation of other rasas within the same work: "If in larger works
a certain flavor is taken up first, and then becomes lasting by being brought
in again and again, then, since that flavor pervades the entire composition,
its predominance is not destroyed by the coexistence with it ofo ther flavors
that appear at intervals." 00 He tells us further that "when in a work
a certain rasa--the flavor oflove, for example-is suggested as predominant,
then no other flavor, whether compatible or incompatible, it to be brought
to full development." 31
In the MaliiibliiiraJa the more obvious candidate for the status of the rasa
that fulfills these requirements is the flavorofheroism, virarasa. Anandavar
dhana himself discusses the possibility of confusing Jantarasa and virarasa,
and provides the criterion for distinguishing one from the other, in a part of
his argument for the existence of the flavor of peace: "Nor is it proper to
include it within the flavor of heroism, for the occurrence of that (heroic
flavor) is determined on the basis ofi ts being composed of pride, while the
existence oft his (flavor ofp eace) depends upon its consisting entirely of the
cessation of ego. "02 In speaking of the two rasas here, Anandavardhana is
actually referring to the corresponding slliiiyibliiivas, a loose but common
practice. The pride or self-conception that he mentions constitutes, as the
commentator Abhinavagupta makes explicit," the very life of the stable
emotion associated with the flavor of heroism, the stliiiyibliiiva called utsiilia,
exertion. The notion is that those who undertake energetic activity do so in
order to fulfill the obligations of a noble self-image.
'°
Dhv. on 3.22 (pp. 37B-379): prahandqu pratlra1111Jlllrat(I prast"""i san """"" fNMt
aiwsandlii~ stMyi ,10 rasas las.JO saJ:olabandluwJdf>i•o rasimlarair anlllriilavartibhil/
.Jd1i
sam41Jtio sa "°1igitam •paMnti.
" Dhv. on 3.24 (p. 382): migini rasiinlllre frriliiradau prabanJMvyaiigyt saty avirodlri virodlli vii
ras~ J>arif>ofat(I "" Mlllvy~.
" Dhv. on 3.26 (p. 393): "" ca uirt tasyiinlllrbMNI) A:ar/lltfl yukllll). tasyiibhimiiMmayatrJtM
uyavastliiipaniil. a.rya eii/uJJiUrapraiamaikarUj>alllyii
stliite~.
" Loe. on Dhv. 3.26 (p. 393): ahhimiina1'11Jyatvnuti-u1$iilto hy a/uJm namuidlra i!JI tva'fl/WiU/a i!Y
ar~.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SANTA/USA IN THE MAHABHARATA 183
This conception of virarasa is open to the objection that energetic
undertakings arc possible without dependence upon self-<:onscious pride.
For example, the deeds of the Buddha, as depicted in a poem like the
Budtlha&arita, can reasonably be called heroic, and yet they proceed from an
inherent compassion rather than from any element of ego. From early
times the Sanskrit tradition enumerated several special types of vira in
recognition of the variations in motive that underlie them. For the
Buddha's type ofh eroism the name is tlafavira, the heroism of compassion;
for Yud~)hira it is dliamuwlra, the heroism ofr ighteousness. For both types
the question arose, based on the objection I have mentioned, of whether
they should be considered virarasa proper or a form of fiinlarasa.
For Anandavardhana the decision in any given instance follows from the
distinction quoted above. "Particular psychological states such as tlayiiiira,"
he continues, again using the name of the rasa to refer to the sthiiyibliiUia,
"arc varieties of fiinlarasa if they arc devoid of ego in any form, but
otherwise they arc varieties of vira."54 To apply this to the case at hand:
what distinguishes Yudhi$1hira from the Buddha is that Yudhi$)hira
consciously identifies with righteousness-he thinks of himself as the
Dharmaraja- and he strives to live up to that identity, with all the desires
and attachments that such an endeavor involves. The Buddha, in contrast,
has passed beyond desire and attachment, having attained the "extinction
of craving" that Anandavardhana mentions as a prerequisite in the
sthiiyibhiiva associated with the flavor of peace.
While Anandavardhana himself does not give specific examples of the
practical application of this distinction, the example of the Buddha and
Yudhi$µiira that I have used appears after Anandavardhana in the Avaloka
ofDhanika, where Dhanika discusses the question ofw hether the Buddha,
and Jimiitavahana (the hero of the Niigiinanda) arc to be
Yudhi$~hira,
connected with Jiinlarasa or with virarasa. He focuses on the .Nagiinanda,
pointing out the description ofjimiitavahana's love for Malayavali and his
winning of sovereignty at the end of work, and concludes:
Although the Buddha and Jimiitavlihana do not differ in being compassion
ate, there is a distinction in whether or not their compassion is accompanied
by desire. HenceJimiitavahana and the othen like him arc heroes oft he firm
type (appropriate to vlrarasa, rather than of the peaceful type appropriate to
Jiinlarasa) .. ,
" Dho. on 3.26 (p. 394): "4y4olridiM!p <a ciuavrttiviJtfaMlfl sarvaA:aram alraiik4raraltilatoma
JiJttarasa{WdhttiatVdm, itaralhO tu uirafJrabhtt/4tQQ1fl .
• DRAN. on 4.4cd-5ab (p. 79): b"44114ji~JOS "'u,,,,,WU.Olliiqt ';i sol.:4awii.tk
~blud04 bhtd.a}J. ato ;im~ dlrirod6ua1oam iti.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
184
CARY A. Tt.:88
The elements ofd esire, attachment, exertion and striving that character
ize heroism are all bound up together in opposition to peacefulness, as
Abhinavagupta brings out when he explains that "passion and anger,
having attachment to objects as their very life, are altogether incompatible
with the peaceful, which is by nature totally devoid ofs triving, since it has
as its essence disillusionment with all the objects of transmigratory
existence, arising from the knowledge of reality."'" This does not mean,
however, that any trace of these heroic elements will preclude the
possibility ofs iinlarasa; as Abhinavaguptasays in discussing the appearance
ofu tsiiha in connection with the peaceful mood, "No state is entirely void of
exertion, for without will and effort one would be a stone. "57 What is
important is the relative prominence given these elements. Thus
10
Dhanjka, in another of his discussions of Jimiitavahana, emphasizes the
pervasive presence of the love for Malayavati and the preeminent position
oft he winning ofs overeignty: "But the contention ofs ome, that tranquility
is the sthiiyibhava in the .Niigiinanda, is contradicted by his love for
Malayavati, which extends throughout the work, and by his gaining the
status of Emperor of the Vidyadharas as the fruit attained at the very
end."58
These principles clearly rule against the choice of tranquility as the
stable emotion of even if we concentrate solely on the final
Yudhi~thira,
episode oft he ascent to heaven. What seeks and finds is not the
Yudh~thira
liberated state of one who has passed beyond attachment, but rather the
engaging world ofa warrior's paradise. And to the end his actions could not
be further from fulfillment of the most consistently mentioned aspect of
freedom from attachment, indifference to friend or foe. In the literature on
Jiintarasa this requirement is repeated from the time of the interpolated
verses in the .Na{yaiiislra, which define the flavor of peace as that ":n which
there is no pleasure, no pain, no hatred, and no envy, but equanimity
toward all creatures,"59 to the time of the last major literary critic,
Jagannatha Pa1:u;litaraja, who begins his list of the manifestations of
tranquility with "the lack ofa ttraction towards objects, and indifference to
" Loe., end of comm. on Dho. 3.23 {p. 38! ): fantasyiipi /JJ1tvajilanasamu11hil4Samas/4sa'!fS·
iirauifayanirwdaprii1}4tvena sarooto nirlhasvabhiiva.rya uiiayasaktijivitiibhyiirri ratikrodhiibhyiirri uirodha
'""·
"' ABh., liinJa section (Kanglc, p. 334; GOS, p. 338): na tutsii!taJUnyii kiiaa apy ava.rth4,
iuhiiprayatnauyatirtkt1)1J pi4ii1}4tiipatu*.
" DRAua. on 4.35 {p. 203):yal I• kaiirin niigiinandadau Jamasya sthiiyituam upaflOn)itJJm, "'"
....U.~ragtt}Opraband"4prllQflkna, an.le vidyijdharaeakravarh·toopriipki ca pir4lahJma ui""""'4m.
" .NS., Jama section (Kanglc, p. 315; GOS, p. 315):
na yatra du/ikharri na suA:ha'l' na duero niipi maJsaral; /
soma~ sarvqu hhiiter• sa Jiinla/i pratliito rasa/i //
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SANTARASA IN THE MAHABHARATA 185
enemies and friends."40 Yudhi$1hira's differing reactions to Duryodhana
and to his own family in the final scenes arc too obvious to require
comment.
Still less can the descriptions oft ranquility as a stable emotion be applied
to Yudhiuhira's wife and brothers, who fall behind him one by one, to the
announcing of their particular excesses of attachment and egoism.
Thus it appears that here we cannot apply the standard canons of rasa
theory by looking for the required sthayibhava in the hero of the work.
Indeed, there is ample evidence to show that, whatever the overall rasa in
the Mahabharata may be, the careers ofYudhi$1hira and Arjuna have been
drawn on by the Sanskrit poets for works intended to evoke the heroic
flavor rather than the flavor ofp eace. Anandavardhana tells us that in the
Ramaya1µ1 and other such works that serve as the source of traditional plots,
the rasas connected with the characters are fixed, and must not be
tampered with." But he also teaches that one must abandon anything in
the original story that is contrary to the appropriate flavor, •2 and remarks
that he himself had to make certain changes when he took up the story of
Arjuna in his own mahalcavya, the Arjunacarita. ••
In this connection the later critic Kuntaka accepts Anandavardhana's
explanation of fantarasa as the predominant flavor in the Mahabharata, only
to applaud a switch to virarasa when treating the story In
ofYudh~thira.
a long passage on changing the flavor ofa story taken from an old original,
Kuntaka cites as an example the play Ve1]tsa'11h4ra, explaining that the
author had wisely scrapped the gloomy emphasis on the vanities of this
world that is found in the Mahabharata, replacing it with the heroic flavor
more appropriate to the talc of the Pa1;u;lavas, so that the play, ending with
Yudhiuhira victorious on a battlefield strewn with the bodies of his
slaughtered enemies,
... imparts delight to cultured readers, since they sec that (the Par;u;lavas),
even though they have suffered such great misfortunes, still conquered their
'°
RG, definition of !iintarasa (p. 168): ui~ayarw:i!atnlmitr0dyaudiisirgace1(4/r4Mninasiigrad·
r1(1dd4yo '""6kiiv4JJ.
41 Dlw. on 3.10 (p. 335): kil(Ua-
"santi siddlrarasaprakhyii ye ca I
riirn4ya1)ii"41a~
kath4Jraya "" lair yojyii svecchii rasavirodluni 11" etc.
'' Dhv. 3.11(jJ.329):
ilivrttava!iiyiita'l' sthitim /
ryaktl>linanugu~ii'l'
ulprekviipy antariib/i#/arastKitakatkonMya/J 11
and ortti on this (pp. 335-336).
" Dho. on 3.11 (p. 336): yatkii ca madiya roiirjunacarite makiika~7t.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
186 GARY A. TUBB
enemies through their own prowess, fortified by their allies, and enjoy this
royal glory, so that (the readers themselves) are endowed with broad powers
of exertion and re1nain undaunted even in misfortunes ...
Of course, the Mahabh4raJa extends beyond the victory ofYud~thira
to include the many sad events that follow, and the lesson that Ananda
vardhana draws from it, as we saw in the opening section of his analysis of
the Manabh4rata quoted above, is quite a different one. His reference there
to a "conclusion that produces a despondent feeling in response to the sorry
end of the Vnr.iis and the Pa1;u~avas" is an indication in itself that the
disillusionment required as the stable emotion associated with the flavor of
peace is not to be found in the Pat;ujavas themselves, since the response he
mentions must necessarily be subsequent to their end-and must in fact be
sought, ifw e take his words literally, outside the poem, as a response to its
conclusion. Anandavardhana strengthens his statement of this moral, and
of its predominance in the poem, in the continuation of his analysis:
This has already been partially revealed by other commentators. It has also
been declared by the Protector of the World (i.e., the sage Vyasa) himself,
who, imparting the light of immaculate knowledge out of his desire to save
a world drowning in great delusion, has many times said such things as this:
"There is no doubt that the more the insubstantial workings of this world
(are seen to) turn out badly, the more a feeling of dispassion is produced"
[MB!t. 12.168.4). And from this the purport oft he Maltabharala appears quite
clearly indeed: it is JantartWJ among all the rasas, and the aim of man
characterized by liberation among all the aims of man, that through the
subordination of all the others is the principal subject matter.
We have already described the manner in which the predominance and
subordination of the flavors operates. It is no contradiction that a subordinate
flavor or a subordinate human aim may appear beautiful through its own
(assumed) predominance, independent of the ultimate inner reality, just as
the body [which is in reality subordinate to the soul] may be considered
beautiful through its own [apparent) predominance, independent of the
ultimate inner reality.0
,. VJ, m;lli on 4.17 (p. 276): ... abhijaliMm OhladDm auahoJi. It hi tatMuidMoyasana}qtlri
b/u.tair api """"" ~·pabrrrrJiitapariitramapdrajitaparipantliillhir bh#jyala tfa ra.iJa!rir iii
akhidyamiinii uipaisv api uipulotsiillabh4jo bhauanli. The discussion of rhe VmismrihOra begins on p.
275 in rhe Sanskrir rext; Krishnamoorthy provides his own translation of the whole passage
on p. 569.
" Dhv. on 4.5 (pp. 530-531): tlat ca'!lit!IO uim;tam ..Onyair uyiil;Jly®idh4yibhi~. svayam eva
taitad iu/girtµIm ltftodirt}4mahamohamagnam ujjihirfa14 lokam aliuimalaj1Wui/o*4diiyina
tokanatlitna-
yatha yathO uiparytli lokal4ntram asifra/Jtll I
14tliii tat/iii viriigo 'tra jiiyatt niitra sa'!liaya/i 11
ilfadi bahtdal) katlrayat4. tataJ ta linto raso rasiinlarair moqa/aX<IU)4/) purUfartlialJ ~iirthanl4rais
taduposarjanatvmiinugamyamana 'ngi1Vtft4 uivakfiitJ#a)'ll iii mahabh4ratal41/J•ryatp suvyaktam
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SANTAR.ASA IN THE MAHABHARATA 187
The last statement is apparently made in recognition of the fact that on
a superficial level the heroic flavor, rather than the flavor of peace, seems
predominant in the poem. But Anandavardhana also takes the trouble to
remind us that he has already described the ways in which a rasa is made
predominant in a work, and we should expect, ifJ iintarasa is predominant in
the Mahiihhiirala, that it will be evoked through the process to which
Anandavardhana devotes so much attention, a process that involves the
suggestion, not oft he rasa directly, but oft he corresponding stable emotion,
by means of presenting that emotion's uihhiivas (the object toward which
the emotion is felt, and the things that serve to provoke or stimulate it), its
OJWbhiivas (the effects of the stable emotion in the person who experiences
it), and its vyahhicarihhiivas (the temporary feelings that accompany it).
Since the primary goal in a poem is the evocation of rasa, and the
sthiiyihhiiva is only a means toward that goal, there is a natural tendency
to speak of the resulting rasa in discussing a poem, rather than of the
intervening stable emotion; we have already seen how frequently Anan
davardhana speaks of the rasas when his remarks actually apply only to the
slhiiyihhiivas instead. And even the rasasiitra itself, the classical explanation of
the evocation of rasa given in the .Nii(1tiiaslra, docs not mention the
sthiiyihhiiva, but says only that the origination of rasa is due to the
combination of the uihhiivas, the anuhhiivas, and the rryahhicarihhiivas. As
Abhinavagupta explains, however, this failure to mention the stable
emotion in the rasasiltra is due to the importance of maintaining an
awareness of the difference between the stable emotion and the correspond
ing flavor:
Thus a cognition of the stable emotion arrived at through inference is not the
ra.sa. This is precisely why there is no mention of the stJrjjyibhava in the .rUJra,
[because not only would such a mention not be helpful] but, to the contrary,
it would actually be an obstacle. It is merely because ofc orrespondence that
the stlriiyibh4'1JO is said to become the ra.sa, and this correspondence is due to the
fact that those things that were known as causes, etc., in relation to the stable
emotion have now become the uibhavas, etc., by virtue of their aiding in the
J. ••
relishing [of the flavor
These causes-in particular the anuhhiivas and vyahhicarihhiivas mentioned
tviioah/i4sau. angOiigibhmiaJ ca y<iJ/t4 rasiiMm /a/M f1ralip0di1am ..... paramarthiMnlas """'°""f>tkfafa
,4rv1..,,,
larirasytvan,abltMJasya rasava f'tlr"fart"4sya "' sva?OdMn.JtM OP7 auinul.dMm.
41 ABh. on th< ra.sasiilra (Kangl<, p. 174; GOS, p. 285 ): Ima st1iii.1if1Talllir amunih'riif>O flTOptD
rasa.t.
M ala tva siilrt stJiii,Yigraluuµi'fl M krtam. lal flTalyula ial.JObhiilalp sfal. ktrxJJam llMtityi.li""""
ttey<IU stJiiifi rasibhiita iii. autily<l'fl tu tatstJiiiyigolalMIO A:ar..,,a,h~ f1Ta.si4dlt4Mm tulltllll4
~.JOgitafa uibM.aJilr!OJombanat. In translating llMtityo as "conupondence" I follow
Gnoli (pp. 80-81).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
188
GARY A. TUBB
in the rasasiltra-presuppose the presentation oft he character in whom they
reside.
In technical terms the problem that confronts us here is one of finding
the iiiraya of the stable emotion, i.e., its locus or substrate, the character in
whom the st/W.yibhiioo resides and through whose reactions and accompany
ing experiences the stable emotion is made known. The question of the
presence of the iiiraya of the stable emotion, like the question of whether
iantarasa is possible, takes a somewhat different form when one turns from
the world ofd rama for which the theory ofr asa was originally worked out,
to the sphere of non-dramatic poetry.
In drama the explicit presentation of the iiiraya is usually inevitable,
since a play cannot be performed without characters. Abhinavagupta goes
so far as to say that the sthiiyibhiiva of the principle character is the drama,
explaining, in his opening remarks on the Jra{yaiiistra's enumeration of the
rasas, that
... drama is a meaning to be unwaveringly determined (by the spectators]
with one-pointed minds, being made present through the power oft he acting
oft he actor, and that is to be suggested through one of the particular types of
poetic composition such as the nataka [a genre of plays]. And although it
consists of an infinite number of vibltDuas and so on, nevertheless, since all
insentient things find their culmination in consciousness, and it in a sentient
subject, and all such subjects in a predominant subject, that [meaning that
constitucs drama] is (in the end) a particular stable psychological state
belonging to a particular subject, who is called the protagonist.•'
He goes on to explain how that emotion, through a process of being
universalized, is transformed into an experience of rasa on the part of the
spectator.
In a non-dramatic poem the poet is free to leave much more to the
imagination of the reader. Once again it is Abhinavagupta who gives the
most provocative explanation of the process involved, in discussing the
differences between plays and poems in presenting the elements connected
with the evocation of rasa:
The most intense form of the savoring of rasa occurs when [the vibltDuas, the
arrubltDuas, and the 1!JIObhictiribltDvas] arc of equal prominence. Actually this
happens only in a play. As Yamana [the author of an early work on poetics]
says, "Among compositions the play is best, because, like a cloth of many
" Abh. (Kang!<: on 6.15, p. 105; GOS: on 6.16, p. 268): tatra M(1<1'1' n<ima najaga14bhina.JO·
pra1>Juwasiikfa1Mr0,,-°"4W.,""""1nanasatriital°"".J0vas<ya/J
sama.s""'4jak4dp.JO"Unaka,,,..,,U1~iU
ea dyo/a11f?o 'r"'41J. sa ta .JO& a/17 ananJavihlriivOdyahn<i tatlriipi sarvtfil!' j<U/41141!' sal!'vidi tasy4J ta
bhaktari bhoktrvargasJ• ea pradMnt bhoktari paryavasan<in n<i)Okabhidh4nabhok1rllil11as"'4yiti1-
tavruiviJe1al).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
189
S.lNTARASA IN iHE MAHABHARATA
colon, it possesses variety through the completeness of its particulan."
However, (the savoring ofr asa is possible] in a longer work (of non-dramatic
poetry] due to the arranging of such things as the appropriateness of
language, dress, and style. (And it is even possible] in an isolated stanza,
through dependence on (a presumed longer work of poetry). And tbus in this
[single stanza) expert readers, by inventing a suitable context, generate
a considerable foundation [for the stanza, by deciding] that in this instance
such and such a person is speaking on such and such an occasion. In this way,
for those who, by virtue of such reasons as their practice in poetry and their
former good deeds, are expert readen, the meanings of such compositions
bunt forth quite clearly, as if they were directly perceived, even when the
unfolding of the uibh4vas and so on is limited. This is why for them poetry by
itself can be a source of delight and edification, even without the drama. ..
These remarks on the stanza are in line with the general tendency within
the tradition to view every piece of poetry smaller than the mahiikiivya as
a fragment ofa hypothetical larger work, and with the standard practice in
the treatises and commentaries of supplying the details of the clements
connected with rasa, even if these are no more specific than "a certain
woman speaking to her friend about some lover." The problem in the
Mahiibhiirata, however, is ofa different order, for here there can be no larger
poem, and the rasa that we are concerned with is the predominant Ravor in
a complete work.
Somewhat surprisingly, the problem of a missing iiJraya is not uncommon
even in plays, despite the boasts of Abhinavagupta concerning the
completeness of detail in the drama. The problem occurs most often in
connection with hiisyarasa, the comic Ravor, for which the corresponding
sthiiyibhiiva is hiisa, the emotion of laughter or amusement. When one
character laughs at another, there is no problem: the one who laughs is the
iiiraya, or subject, of the emotion, and the butt ofh is laughter is the iilambana
or object (literally, the "prop" or "support"). And when a character
usually the jester- laughs at himself, he is simultaneously the iiiraya and the
iilambana. But when a character who is obviously intended to be amusing
appears without being amused himself and without the presence of an
onlooker to laugh at him, as happens in many soliloquies and comic
interludes, then we have only an iilambana, and in the absence of an iiiraya
•• ABh. near the end of the comm. on the ra.rasutra (Kanglr, p. 183; COS, p. 288; ocyond
the portion included in Gnoli): kir(lt• samapriulhiinya "'" ra.rillviidasptkar1a~. 114.1/utas tu
daiaropolca tua. yatl iilia r'limana~ "satritlarbht/u da.larupakar(I irl)"D~. tad dhi dtrarri dtrapa(aratl
cifr1asiikal.Jat" iti. tadropaJamarpa~ii>·• tu prabandht bhii/iil't/aprar'[l!yau<i!riulikalpanat. tadupaj
ivanma muktalct. t.atllii <a talra saltrda)'O~ pUr1·QpartJm u.<itam parikalP.>'a itfrt atra vaktii.sminn al~asart
iJfaJi l>alu•llJTOf!! pltJrabandhariif><Jrri vidlldhatt. tnia ,w kiir)·iibhvii.<apriiktnnapu~;iidihetubnlad iti
saJirdllyas lt/ar(I parimitauibhatVid_yunm'ilant "pi parisphu(a n·a siik1iitkarakalpa~ ki11:riirtha~
splr11.rati. ala tr,10 ltf0'?1 kOi!l'am tN pr;'ti~·)·utpa11ikrd anap1ksitan0()'am api.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
190
CARY A. TUBB
the anubllii'(J(JS and vyahhuiiribhmias cannot possibly by represented. Theorc·
tically such a situation cannot evoke an experience ofr asa in the spcctaton,
since there is no substratum for the sthiiyibhmia upon which the phenomenon
ofr asa is said to be based. Y ct the commcntaton do not hesitate to speak of
hiisyarasa in such instances.
The critical tradition seems to have been very slow in recognizing this
theoretical problem, unless we believe that it is referred to in the
Niitya!ii.stra's division of hiisa into two types, that which is "situated in
oneself" (iitmastha), and that which is "situated in another" (parastha),
together with its explanation that the former is "when one laughs oneself"
and the latter "when one makes another laugh. "49 The writers within the
tradition, however, do not interpret this distinction as referring to the lack
of an iiiraya. The primitive explanation is that rasa is atmastha when one
laughs at oneself, and parastha when one is laughed at by another person
who is also on stage (the stock example of the latter being the queen's
laughter at the court jester). Abhinavagupta rejects this interpretation on
the grounds that it involves a difference in the location of the cause of
laughter rather than of the laughter itself, as he claims the actual wording
in the Niitya.lii.stTa should require. He offers instead the perceptive
explanation that laughter is uniquely contagious, and that in the parastha
form of hiisa one causes another to laugh merely by one's own laughter
rather than by presenting an amusing appearance or action, adding that
this may happen either when the second person laughs without even
knowing why the first person laughed, or when the second person has also
seen the cause of the amusement but is too serious to laugh until someone
else laughs first.• 0 In both interpretations the iiiraya of the amusement is
presented in the work.
As in many instances of phenomena that arc not noticed in the
ground-breaking theoretical treatises and that require independent
attentiveness to the poetry itself, the first clear treatment of the problem of
the lack of an explicit ii.fraya that I have seen is in the Siikityadarpat}IJ of
Visvanatha, who makes no mention of the distinction of atmastha and
" .NS in /r4rya section (Kangle: prose after 6.48, p. 267; COS: 6.56, p. 3f4): duiuidM! '4.Jfll'I
atma.slluJJ/ parastllaJ ca. ya44 svaya1p !UJSati tadiitm4sth.aJ). yadi. I• fiaratfl hiisayali lat/ii parastltal/.
'°
The primitive interpre1ation is prcscn1cd in DRAt1<J. on 4.76 (p. 246), and is the venion
used by Rcgnaud (La R/rJtorigMt S1UUkri1t [Paris: Emesl Leroux, 1884], p. 307). Abhinava·
gupia's explanation is in ABh. on 6.56 (Kanglc, pp. 27~271; cf. COS pp. 314-315) , and is
repealed by Hemacandra in the Vivtka on KArut. 2.11 (p. 114). Both in1erpre1ations are
combined in the anonymous /i/JP41!4 given in Appendix I of Parikh and Kulkami's cdi1ion of
the KArut. (p. 578, comm. on p. 114 Linc 5).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
191
SJNTAIUSA IN THE MAHABHAIUTA
parastha, but who says:
If in some instances the one to whom the amusement belongs is not directly
presented, he is nevertheless implied by the uibhiill<ZS and so on. Therefore, the
spectators can identify with [the sthiiyibhiioaJ through the universality of the
vibhiill<ZS, etc., and they experience this comic flavor. One should understand
that this applies to other flavors as well."
A second solution is offered by the later criticjagannatha Pat;tQitaraja,
who takes up the problem not under the heading ofa musement, but of the
stable emotion of loathing, which is similar in that we may be given
a description of a loathsome object without the presentation of the person
who is disgusted by it. Jagannitha mentions Visvanitha's answer to the
problem, and then suggests an alternative:
One might make the objection that, whereas in [the stable emotions of] love,
anger, exertion, fear, grief, astonishment, and dispassion, examples ofw hich
were given earlier, one perceives both the object [i ilambana) and the locus
[iJrayaJ, it is not so in amusement and in loathing, for there we may perceive
the object alone. (And this is improper,) because since the reader is the locus
of the savoring of the rosa it is not possible for him to be the locus of the
everyday emotions of amusement or loathing. If (this objection is made, we
reply)- True, [but this is not improper,) because there one is to assume by
implication some observer as its locus. Even if he is not assumed, however,
[there is still no problem,) because there is nothing to preve.nt the experience
of rosa in the reader, just as (in the case of a man's experiencing rosa) due to
a verse describing the woman with whom he himself is in love.
st
On this passage the modern commentator Madhusiidan Shastri remarks
that the observer who is implied is in fact the speaker of the verse in
question, and that whilejagannitha seems to regard the reader as the locus
of loathing, but the speaker as the locus of amusement, he himself sees no
air•,,_
" SD 3.220-221 (p. 176):
.JOSY• h4sal) sa ut kvapi naioa nibadlr.Jdle I
s~iin
ta/Mpy era uibhii.adisamarthfad llfi<llablryatt 11
ablrtdena uibhii.adisadlriiraruat prafiyatt /
samajikais tato h4syaroso )am altllbltiiyalt /I
api rastt• bMdltavyam.
""""' "".J<fO
" RG, lint....,.,, under blbliatsarasa (vol. 1, p. 198): ,,_ ralibodltotsiJrablia.J41okauismay
lllfirwdttu pragiulaltrttt• yatltalam1-iiira.Jilyoi) Slll!IPf•rya.Jll-+, "" tallta !Wtj u~;;_,a,p u. lalrilam
bmtas;Jaiva pratilt~. pad.J41rotv.I ca ras~ikarlVJdlvtna 1"11kikaM.sqjugupsiilra.Jil~IUr iii
<ti. .Ja9am. ""'4Jra}'IJSJO dratlfll'ntll11iitftuya ta1ria:f</1.)IOhlOJ. tadanOkft/>< tu Jro""i .ttiyatinl#...,.
Uia rasodbodlu bii4ltaMblr4val.
~
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
192
CARY A. TUBB
difficulty in taking the speaker to be the iifraya in both instances."
For the Mahi.bharata it might be possible to impart continuity to the
in question by viewing it as residing in the poem's author, the
slM~bhava
sage Vyasa. We have seen that in his analysis of the Mahi.bharata
Anandavardhana places great emphasis on the persistent vision that Vyasa
seeks to communicate. And in his role as a character within the poem, as
opposed to his function as author, Vyasa maintains the same attitude; one
could find no better example of the outlook of disillusionment with the
world than the verse from the Mahi.bharata that Anandavardhana quotes
earlier in the Dlwanyiilolca, recording the ominous words addressed by
Vyasa to his mother after the death of Pat;1c;lu:
The times have passed beyond happiness,
and bring down horrors hard upon us.
With each new morrow another day worse,
the youthfulness of Earth has gone.••
In reality, however, remarks such as those ofMadhusiidan Shastri have
in view the isolated stanza, for which the speaker is not the author of the
verse, but the character who would speak the verse ifit appeared within its
larger context.
It would be equally implausible to maintain that our iifraya is to be found
in a character such asjanamejaya, to whom the whole Mahiibhiirata story is
told within the poem. Although his reactions to what he hears are reported
here and there, and in fact become increasingly important toward the end
oft he poem, he is surely too much in the background to perform this role. It
also seems likely that if Anandavardhana had intended his analysis of the
poem to require any such devious mechanism he would have said so.
It might be argued that ultimately there is l.ittle practical difference
between Visvanatha's view that an iiiraya must be assumed as implied, and
Jagannatha's view that the reader himself may fulfill that function. But the
latter view involves a serious danger, asjagannatha himself recognizes, in
that it is difficult to explain how the esthetic distance that is inherent in the
phenomenon of rasa can be achieved if the reader who experiences the
fiavor also experiences the concrete emotion to which it corresponds. The
central requirement in the evocation of rasa, at least in Abhinavagupta's
" MotihruiJJml on RC (vol. 1, p. 199): jugupsafal!f tu tUrfaviJkyaprayoktaivii.fraya/J sa~pyott
iiJambaMrwroJ/ijjJ iii. /raspanW.na sthitir na. mama hl malal[I /rasye 'pi tUrJauakyaprayokta evaJrayo
b"4vatu *Api ~atir nasti.
•• MBh. 1.19.6 (cited in Dhv. on 3.16, p. 350):
atilcrantasukMh 44/aJ) pratyuptUthitadaT11,µih I
!val) sval) paplyadit'OJo prthiui gatayauvana 11
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
193
SilXTAIUSA IN THE MAHJBHilRATA
explanation of the phenomenon, is that ofg eneralization or universalization
(siidhiiral}ikaral](J): before the slhiiyibhiiva can give rise to the experience of
rasa, it must be cognized as belonging neither wholly to another, nor wholly
to oneself. If the reader himself is the ii!raya, the first condition is easily
attained, but the second may be impossible, and this is why Visvanlitha
refers to the generalization of the bhiiva as following from the assumption of
some ii!raya.
The theoretical problem we are dealing with is a product of the massive
confusion between slhiiyibhiiva and rasa that has been a prominent feature of
discussions of rasa from the Niil)lafii.slra onward. I have mentioned several
times Anandavardhana' s laxity in this regard, and he himselfs eems to have
had to correct this same mistake in the very kiirikii of the Dlwanyiiloka that
proclaims the central importance of rasa in poetry.•• And the problem
continues in astonishing proportions throughout the works of modem
scholarship in the West as well.•• The problem is particularly acute in
dealing with Anandavardhana's view of Jiintarasa. He wrote in the period
before the detailed theories ofBhana Nliyaka and Abhinavagupta on the
relation between bhiiva and rasa had been developed, and has little to say on
the matter, so that we cannot really be sure how he conceived of the
difference between the two. As Gerow and Aklujkar point out, it is
Abhinavagupta's theory, not Anandavardhana's, in which "the notion of
generalization and the attendant radical distinction between bhiiva and
rasa" become so important. . , And the peculiar nature of Jiinlarasa brings
" Dhv. 1.5 (pp. 84--85) is intended to declarc that the suggestion of rasa as the soul of
poetry: MV.f4Sftlm4 sa UJ¢rtlw llJtM <iUikave~ p•ra / krallilcaJvandvaui.10gotthalJ iokal/ Jlokatvam
agallJ/J, wl'hat very meaning is the soul of poetry, and so it was that in ancient times the grief
of the First Poet, produced by the separation of the pair of herons (of whom one had been
killed by a hunter), was transformed into poetry." But, as Abhinavagupta argues in his Loe.
on this section, what Vlilmlki actually felt was not grief(for that belonged to the bird), but
rather the corresponding Havor of compassion. It was for this reason, Abhinavagupta
claims, that in his in:tti on this verse Anandavardhana added the explanation that grief is the
stable emotion associated with the compassionate Havor (p. 89: foko hi kar.~asthii,Jibha~).
,. Gerow and Ak.lujkar ("On S3nta Rasa in Sanskrit Poetics," p. 84) rightly complain of
the frequency with which Masson and Patwardhan ignore the distinction between rasa and
bhaoo in their book Sar.11Jrasa. Yet in their attempted correction of the passage in which they
m.
claim this problem is most blatant (p. 85 and 13, referring to Masson and Patwardhan's
p. I0 0 and fn. 2). and Altlujltar introduce precisely thi• mistake where Ma..on and
~row
Patwardhan had gotten it right. In this passage Abhinavagupta is explicitly and clearly
speaking of the depiction of nitvtdll as a stli4yibhava rather than of the Jan/1Jr4Sa itself (as
parallel passagC1 in the DR.Ava. and elsewhere make even clearer), and the context has been
one of discussing different degrees of intensity of the emotion of a rcpr..ented character,
rather than of the esthetic r..ponse of the spectators. Furthermore, the 01U1bilavas arc always
the "indicatory or suggestive signs" of the stli4,Jibha111J, not of the r4'a, and for that matter
there is never any question of the "depiction of any rasa"- it is only the stli4,Jibha111J that i.s
depicted through suggestion, and the rasa i.s an csthetic r..ponse to this depiction.
" "On Santa Rasa in Sanskrit Poetics," p. 82.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
194
GARY A. TUBB
added difficulties; as the same scholars suggest, the "renunciation of
emotional attachment" that is associated with this flavor alone threatens to
obliterate the possibility ofm oving from the "concrete emotion" that is the
sthiiyibkiiva to the csthetic experience that is the rasa. ••
A recognition of differences in the degree of distinction between bkiiva
and rasa among the particular types of rasa is present early on within the
Sanskrit tradition, and may go back to the .Na(yaliistra itself. In commenting
on the definitions oft he individual flavors in the X-apoJiistra, Abhinavagupta
points out a curious inconsistency: the erotic flavor (which corresponds to
the stable emotion of passion) and the compassionate flavor (which
corresponds to the emotion of grief) arc said to "arise from" (-prablullJa)
their corresponding stable emotions, while all the other flavors arc said to
be "of the nature of'' (-<itma.ta) the corresponding emotions. As in the
discussions in later treatises of the problem of the lack of an iifraya, it is in
connection with the comic flavor that Abhinavagupta explains this
inconsistency:
In using the expression "oft he nature of," what he is saying is this. When (the
stable emotion of) passion brings about the awareness called savoring (i.e.,
the experience ofr asa], it docs not bring it about in the form of passion itself,
because the primary uihh4vas (the causes of passion, e.g., the woman with
whom a character is in love] arc not universal. In the case of amusement,
however, the flavor is of the same nature as the amusement itself, through the
universality of the uibltlivas, since such things as the mixing up ofc lothing can
be causes of amusement in the spectators in the ordinary way, so that (the
flavor] is tasted in an act ofs avoring that is referred to as a tasting having the
nature of a.musement. In contrast, passion and grief, since they consist of
constant pleasure and pain (respectively], have corresponding flavors that
differ from them in nature, and they arise from causes that arc restricted in
their application to particular persons, since they are by nature not universal;
therefore the sage has used the expression "arising from" in connection with
these two alone. But in connection with the others he has used the phrase "of
the nature of," since for them the uibh4va is capable of being universal, in that,
for everyone, policy and training arc causes ofe xertion, one who acts unjustly
causes anger, a battle causes fear, such things as a skeleton cause loathing, and
a novelty causes astonishment, so that for these the vibhavas arc universal."
,. Ibid.
" .tbh. on lt4syarasa (Kangle, p. 268, on prose after 6.-la; GOS, p. 313 on 6.56):
ihruiiabdent44m Dha-ralir ii.svaJaMJ:li.faJlt pratilirp uid"""4M .., 141!1 rotiriipam ""' uidliatu,
prarru.kl&t uibM.U,,,, asiWl4rtll!Jal. IWe "' yo OsNdal) so 'pi uiA:r1<w<tUin41rt stmt4jikan ;rati
lokalJ'(llnta IWahttui.ti vibMll<ISiWt4r01!J"dviirma 144.kiuuabliQua ntli li4siitmaJ:arasan4A:hya<a,...,,4-
t•"""1ryat41)'•. ratiiokayor ""'paramatajjiitiyasarpvidiisvad4u [read (with COS) ratilokifo tua param
alajjiit!}>a-] ni/µiiJllQral)ijtm!}>alM•i>'amagraluJgrhitahetubaliid
dh4rii~u/J}.horiipatM1a
tv0l/l<Jd)'tu yatal], ato ·..,,,., rrumini prabhovagrah"'!tUr' krtam. °"J"I• tu vibliQw siidh4r•11J0SOl!lhh40-
an41 taJ4tmaA:opaJui,,.m., M)'OviMJOdn 1111.JOpan:,ah SOl!lgriima.s)'d hvikaJiiJhr arrvall<ISl11114/ ta
sarnin ;rati ulsiillakrodliabha)'dj•gupsiiDismayah1WvnuJ siWr4ra,,.,nbMvat"41.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SifNTAIUSA IN THE MAHifBHiflUTA 195
The underlying idea here is simply that when a character is presented as
being in love with a particular woman, we can identify with the general
state ofb eing in love, but we do not fall in love with that same woman, nor
would it be proper for us to do so. Similarly, the griefo fa character is due to
his loss ofa person with whom he is personally involved, and with whom we
arc not, so that rather than feeling grief we taste the flavor of compassion.
All the other flavors, although they still differ from the corresponding
stliilyibhQIJQS in being esthctic experiences rather than everyday emotions,
do not differ from them in the impossibility of our being provoked to the
same emotions by the same objects: while a proper reader will not fall in
love with Rama's wife, we can all be angered by the actions of any unjust
man or amused by those of any clown.
In the passage just quoted, Abhinavagupta does not mention Jiintarasa,
because it is not included in the Nii!Jaiiistra's list. Later he applies the same
reasoning to that flavor as well, but takes care to insist on the difference
between rasa and bhava:
The use of Jama and Jiinta as synonyms is explained by (what I said about)
!Wa and /Wya. Yc t even between Jama and Jiinta the difference is easily arrived
at, because the lint is accomplished (i.e., is represented as already existing in
a character), while the second is yet to be accomplished (i.e., is to be evoked in
the audience); the lint is ordinary (i.e., an experience possible only in
everyday life), while the second is extraordinary (i.e., possible only in the
world of csthetic experience}; the lint is particular, while the second is
uruvenal."'
In Anandavardhana's analysis of the Mahabharata, however, what is
presented as "yet to be accomplished" in the reader is the emotion of
disillusionment with the world, as the continuation of his remarks makes
even clearer:
[Herc one may make the following objection.) Everything contained in the
Malribh4rata is given in its list ofc ontents, and this docs not appear there; on
the contrary, it is explicitly made known in that list that the Malribh4rata is the
source of knowledge on all the aims ofh uman life, and that it contains all the
rasas within it.
On this we say [the following]. True, it is not explicitly set forth by the list
that in the Maha/Jh4rata it is the flavor of peace that is predominant, and that
among all the aims of human life it is liberation that is foremost.
But it is conveyed through suggestion in this statement: "And here the
eternal Lord Visudeva is praised" [MB/t. l.1.193ab]. For through this
'° A.Bit. in the Jiin14rasa section (Kangle, p. 321; GOS, p. 336): Jama.J4'114_,oli /l<ITfa:l"l:rlalfr. la
/Uisaltiisfablrfan ~y414m. siddlias04/i7"14fa 14dikala.kik41Dlna sii4Aiird114sit/Mr<llJlll4fa ca
oail4A:/t11fJ0111 WMJ~ •l'i sul4bluJm ""'· In trarulating "sit/Mrd114sit/Mr<llJlll4fa" I have
followed logic rather than parallelism.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
196 GARY A. TUBB
statement is meant to be conveyed, by mearu ofs uggestion, the idea that here
in the MaMJJ/rijraJa all the deeds of the Paoqavas that arc praised come to
a painful end and arc by nature a manifestation of ncsciencc, whereas the
Lord Vasudeva who is praised here is by nature absolutely real. Therefore, it
is only to that Blessed Lord that you should be devoted; do not be enamoured
ofe mpty glories or wholeheartedly attach yourselves solely to any one oft hose
[worldly accomplishments] such as policy, training, or prowess. So also the
statements in subsequent passages arc seen quite clearly to be expressing that
very idea, "Behold the insubstantiality of this world," and [in doing so] arc
aided by the power of suggestiveness. The verses that follow immediately,
"For He is the Real" [MBh. 1.l.193cd], etc., are observed to reveal as their
inner meaning the same sort of notion."
Thus, the suggested moral is that the best that worldly civilization has to
offer is ultimately futile, and this is suggested by setting the early glories
and the distressing end oft he Pa1;1Qavas against the unchanging background
of God. At this point it is important not to misinterpret the role of God in
Anandavardhana's interpretation of the Mahabharata. In a poem in which
theistic devotion to a personal God is prominent, the tendency of the
Sanskrit critics is to explain clements connected with iiintarasa as secondary
to an emphasis on devotion, which falls within the category of the flavor of
love rather than the flavor of peace.6 2 And when the deeds of a personal
God are viewed as foremost in a poem, the tendency is to identify the
predominant flavor in terms of those deeds, with results that often differ
from the conclusion that those deeds would lead to if they were actions of
•• Dlro. on 4.5 (pp. 531-532): """" m.aliiihharaJt favanvivaJ:1iivifaya}) so '...A:ra"""!J'ii'I' sarva
euanllkriinlo na caital latra driyate, pral.Jltla sarvapurlL[iiriltaprabodhahttutvalfl sarvarasagarbhat ..' I' ca
m.aliiihharaJasµ tasminn o&e!e svalabtlaniveditalotna prati.Jat<. alro<yaJe-SOl,JO'I' !iintasyaiva
rasasyiiiigilVO'fl m.aliiihhiiraJe mok1asya ca sarvafnm'liirtlrtbltyal} f!riUUlii"70"' il.J etan na s114iabdiiblri4-
JuyalllaliinukramaivQ darJilalfl, dar!ilalfl hi '!}Qiigyatvmtt-"bhagaviin oiisude1J4J ca lrirl.Jalt 'tra
saniitanal)'' il,J asmin odky< . ...,,. lry ayam artlro vyairgyalvtna vivaqilo yad atra m.aliiihhiiraJt
J>iiil'faviidicarilalfl yaJ lrir!Jlalt tat sarvam avasiinavirasam avidfapraplUlcarUf>alfl ca, paramiirilta
salyasoariipas tu blragaoiin oiisudevo 'tra kirryal<. tasmiiJ tanniM tva parameivart bhagaooti bhavata
bhavitautaso, ma blrula vibhut4u ni/µiiriisu riigi~o g•~•I• vii naµvinayapariikramiidifv amifu kevak1u
ke1ucit saroiiJmanii pratinivi1(ad/iiyaJ,. tathii ciigrt-paiyala ni/µiiralalfl salflJiiraryery amum eviirilta'!I
dyotayan splrulam eviioabhasale ".}QlljaJ:a.laJ:ganugrhita! ca Jabdal}. tvalflvid/ram tviirthalfl garblrikrta'I'
samdar!ayanlo 'nantaraJ/okii lak/}antr-"sa hi saJyam" i!Jliidaya}).
" Jagannatha, for example, remarks as follows in explaining why a particular verse that
evokes the sthayibhava connected with the Aavor of peace actually serves to support
a different Aavor (RC, fiintarasa section, pp. 176): atriipi yady api vi1ayaga~lomhanal}
svrasrotaJvinita/OJJ'Ulidipito MJananimilaniidiblrir anuhhiivital) sthayi nirveda~ prati.Jal<, tathiipi
bhagavadoasudeviilambaniifa'I' kaviratau iti na Jiintarasadhvanivyapadt!alutufJ, "Here
g~ibhuta
although there is the cognition of the stable emotion of ni,...da having the objects of the
senses a.. its objects, such things a.. the holy Ganges as its stimulanu, and such things as the
closing of the eyes a.. its results, nevertheless it is subordinated to the poet's emotion oflovc,
which ha.. Lord V asudcva a.. its object, and therefore this does not furnish grounds for
speaking of the suggestion of the Aavor of peace."
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
197
~A.NTARASA IN THE MAHABHARATA
human heroes." Here, however, Anandavardhana removes both these
possibilities by making it clear in his further remarks that Viisudeva is
important in the Mahiibhiirata not primarily because of his appearance in
the form of the individual incarnation known as whom one may
K~i;ia,
worship, but because he is the impersonal, absolute Brahma, the reality
behind this vain world, to be reached through the cultivation ofd ispassion:
And that same master poet, K11r;ia Dvaipayana [i.e., Vyasa], has made this
deep and beautiful meaning completely clear by using the depiction of the
genealogy of Hari [the Hariva'!lia] as his conclusion at the end of the
Maltiibharata. And by virtue of this meaning, which impels one toward an
abundance of devotion for that other reality that transcends transmigratory
existence, all the activities of transmigratory life appear in their entirety as
simply a primafade view. And the depiction of the abundant greatness of
deities and sacred bathing places and austerities and soon is due to their being
means to the attainment of that same Supreme Brahma, and the depiction of
particular gods and others is due solely to their being manifestations of the
powers of that Brahma. And the depiction of the deeds of the Par;ic;lavas and
the its purport is the production of dispassion, and since
othe~ince
dispassion is the root of liberation, and since liberation is the means of
attaining the Lord-is, indirectly, simply a means to the attainment of
Supreme Brahma, which is set forth as the principal topic in such passages as
the Gita.
Furthermore, the one referred to in being denoted by such names as
"Vasudeva" is the Supreme Brahma-the abode of unlimited power, which
has become well known by those names in other passages such as the GTta, and
whose entire nature was taken on in the incarnation at Mathura-rathcr
" So, for example, Kalidasa's Kumiirasamhluwa is said by some Sanskrit critics to have the
ftavor ofc ompassionate heroism as its predominant rasa, although the erotic ftavor is the
more obvious choice. AruQagirinitha presents this view in his commentary on Kum. 1.52
(vol. I, p. 95; the verse is numb<:r 1.53 in Mallinatha's commentary): i141}prabhrti
sverch4parigrllitodiit1iivasth4sµ d<11asya lok0n•grahallttiiv itivrtta iidlrikiirikatafa dayaviro
ua~
raso 'ngi; tad "'!Y'fam angatuam, "What constitutes 1he principal plot is the description from
this point on of the deeds of Siva, performed for the b<:nefit of the world when he had
voluntarily assumed the state of a self-controlled and exalted hero, and in that plot the
prcdom.inanl flavor is that of compassionate thtrcforc, the other flavors arc
heroism~
subordinate." Jn further remarks on this near the end ofhis commentary (on Kron. 8.90, vol.
3, pp. 325- 326), Arui;iagirinitha explains that the lovemaking of Siva and Pirvatr
depicted in the poem is really just an act, and that Siva can not actually b<: subject to
passion; that this doctrine will remove the locus of what had seemed to b<: a prominent
ftavor in the K•miirasamb/lava docs not bother him at all: """" ragitvasytiparamiirtltahudd/la•
k.aJ/lturr ma camatkara.J ca ftrakpratiptidilmlJ
frrigara~ pra~iti. ftra~it•. jagadraA:ta~odyamatmanii
uirniaivanginii rasma sidJ/lal). camat.tare ca siddht ki'!I frjigiiraniband/rma. '"But, (you may
object,) if the notion that Siva is under the inftuence of passion docs not reftect reality, then
how can the erotic flavor b<: able to breathe?' Then let it not b<: able to breathe. The charm
(in the poem) is already established through the predominant ftavor, which is the
previously presented heroic ftavor, having as its essence as undeMaking made for the
proteciion of the world."
Google Original frcm
01gi1ized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
198
GARY A. TUBB
than merely a portion ofi t that took birth at Mathuri (i.e., Kno.a], because
[the names arc] qualified by the word "eternal," and because we see that in
the Riim4)'11114 and elsewhere this name is applied to other foms of the Lord.
And this meaning [of the name] has been ascertained by the grammarians
themselves ...
It seems clear from all this that what Anandavardhana considen the
primary end of the Maliiih/iarata is a state of mind in the reader evoked by
the suggestiveness oft he contents of the poem, but not anesthetic response
corresponding to the emotions of the characten within the poem through
the standard form ofc orrespondence that is involved in the basic theory of
the suggestion ofr asa. This raises the poaibility that what Anandavardhana
has in mind here is not the primary form of the evocation of rasa, which
depends upon the presentation ofa st/iayib/iaoa as occurring in the principal
character and which is thought to evoke the experience ofr asa in the reader
without any noticeable lag in time after that presentation, but rather the
second important form oft he suggestion ofc lements ofr asa, which is said to
be based on the content of the poem and to produce its effect with
a discernible sequence of timc--i.c., to depend upon some process of
deliberation on the part of the reader.
This second form ofs uggestion, that of "suggestion based on the power
oft he meaning, with a discernible sequence"
(arthaJa/dimiila-s~rama­
dlroani), is also called suggestion through "aftertone" (amirlVJana), because it
docs not accomplish its effect until the reader has taken the time to ponder
the implications of the statement in question. Anandavardhana expressly
distinguishes it from the primary form of the suggestion of rasa "in which
there is the cognition of the rasa and so on by means of the uib/iaoas,
anubhaoas, and uyabhicarib/iaoas, made known directly through the words [of
the text].""' As we have seen, the anub/iaoas and uyabhicarib/iaoas cannot be
"°".. " "D ""h "v . on 4.5 (pp. 532-533): •)'Giii ca lfigi4Mr""'4!1i.Jo 'rlM """'4bh4raliWasint /wiVOlflia·
°"""'
sam6pli1f1 ui"""""14 lenaiaa hwi"'dMsii. krVJ4t/11aif>i.i.J"M"O sam)'dk splrllffe;rlali.
wt/rauJ SIJlflSii.rii.Jiu lattvii.nlare b/iaktyatiJa.JOlrl prauarla;tatii saJ:o/a eaa SGf!Uiiriko 11yaval&ii.ra/J
•}'dktnia prak4iau. droatiitirt/Jatap.i/}prabhrtinii.lp ca prab"4oiitiJaya-
~'l1;to
14VOiua parabrahllUlllalJ. praptyupii.yatllm4 1advi6/W.tit...aiua dt""'411ii1t•tanmn an)'<tii.m ca.
pii.JJ44vii.dicarilalNl17JOMS;tii.f>i ooirii.fJ"JS71' ca mok1a..M'4tvii.n moktava ca
Mirii.uaJana~tparyii.d
6/iagavalprii.ptyupii.yaroena muklryatayii. giliiditu pradar!itatuiit parabrahmaprii.pl.Jupii.yataam tva.
/JarlZlfl/HJr•:tii. [read parOl[lpara;tii. with the preceding sentence, as is done by l'vfasson and
Patwardhan (Santarasa, p. I 08 n. I)) uiisudtuii.disalfl}lliibhidlieyatvrna eii.parimilafaktyaspa41ap
param lwahma gitiidipraddiiruat,... ~ /ahdhaprasitldlii mii.lluiraprii.dvrbiia.lii"8-
qlasakalasaarVptuit uivaktilalfl na I• ma1Jwraprii.dwrb/14vii.Jrr!a tva, san4lanaiabdauiJ11ilall!ii.I.
m,,,.la.I
riim4.J01J6disv eii.na;tii. SIZlflJila:tii. bliag~re ~adOT/tlllii.J. eayam artJral/:
JabdalalllJ<lvidb/rir ....
" Dho., vrlli on 2.22 (p. 248): yatra ~ac ehabdllllivtdiubhyo uib~lri<ii.ri­
bhavth/go rasii.dinii.lp
pratiti~.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
~il)(TAIUSA IN THE MAHABHAIUTA 199
made known within the poem without an iilraya of the sthiiyihliiiua to whom
they can belong. Anandavardhana also speaks of the occurrence of this
"aftcrtonc" variety of suggestion in a prabandha, i.e., a larger work, and
gives as his example a passage in the Maliiibhii.Tala, in which the remarks of
a vulture and a jackal, spoken at the cemetery following the death of
a brahman boy, serve to suggest, on the simplest level, the selfish interests of
the two animals. 66 /1$ Abhinavagupta explains, these two suggestions
culminate in the suggestion of the flavor of peacc.17 While some later
treatments of this example seem to interpret the word "prabandha" as
referring simply to an extended statement rather than to an entire
composition,68 the suggestions involved arc consistent with Anandavar
dhana's analysis of the Maliiibliiirata as an entire work. At any rate,
Anandavardhana's analysis of the poem ends by following the comments
quoted above with a repetition of his view of the overall purport of the
poem:
Therefore, the statement cited from the list of contents, by revealing the
impermanence ofe verything other than the Lord, has firmly established that
what is intended in the Malri/Jhilral4 is, from the didactic point ofv iew, solely
the highest human aim characterized by liberation, and, from the poetic
point of view, the flavor of peace, characterized by the fostering of the
happiness produced by the extinction of craving, as the predominant rasa.
And because this meaning is absolutely essential, it is made known through
suggestion, not through explicit denotation. And it is quite well known in
sophisticated and learned circles that one's ultimate intention is revealed
through suggestion, rather than through direct and explicit statement."
In closing his analysis of the Maliiibhiirata with this description of the
flavor of peace as "characterized by the fostering of the happiness
produced by the extinction of craving," Anandavardhana is repeating
verbatim the definition of sat1tarasa that he offered earlier in his argument
.. Dlro., l!flli on 3.15 (pp. 345-346): 4!)'0 uiookfitiinya/Nrr~ dlwoner 4111D'4l)allO~fOO
'pi :J<lll fJrabluda ""4Jtrw duifJrakiirali. so 'pi fJrob4ndluiU kt~ d70tau ...y <l1h4 ea grdltra,o"'4.1"1tl1fl·
"°"°"4• maloiihlrisraU. In commenting on this., Abhinavagupta (Loe., p. 345) quotes four
verses, MBlr. 12.149.8, 9, 15, and 60.
•• Loe. on 2.22 (p. 345): sa tiiblripriiyo oyaktal/ liintarasa tva parinif{Jiilal4rp priiptalJ .
.. Cf. KPra. under 4.42cd (stltra 60), which cites the same verses mentioned by
Abhinavagupta (!itt note 65) as examples 93-96 (pp. 166-168), and glosm "fJrabanJlto"
with ''votan.a. ,,
va.t_,...
" Dlro. on 4.5 (p. 533): lad"""" tuuikrQm4JJinird4/eltO h""8a~tirtkiiiaJJ ~­
}'lryiini!Jatdlp fJrak4layat4 evaikal/ para!J jntrufiirtlral/ liistranayt, .ta.,....ye ta
moicfal~Ol)Q
tr~ayasu1"4paripofal~IUl"'1 !iinto raso maloiib/riiratasyiiitgitoe111J uivaksita iii Stlfn'•lipiiditam.
~iirabluilatviit c~ arlha ~"" darlito no lit ~· siirablrtl/4 ~ arl/r"'1
sva!abdaniiblriJJltyatotna fJrak4litaJi sMlariim tva !oblriim aoa/rati. fJrasidtlliiJ uyam as!J tva uidag
dluwidoatpar4alsu yaJ ablrimatalarQl(I vast• '!)'O'ivatvma prakiiiyalt na siiksii.echabdaoiicyalr!tna.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
200
CARY A. TUBB
for the existence of that rasa. When viewed together with the analysis that
precedes it, this description brings into focus one last time the theoretical
problem that has concerned us. The "happiness produced by the
extinction of craving" (trPJiik.fayasukha) to which Anandavardhana refers
must exist outside the work, since the desires of the Pai;iqavas pursue them
to the very end, and the Lord whose importance Anandavardhana
cmphasi2es has no desires to be extinguished. Gerow and Aklujkar
recognized that this dispassion is to be found in the reader when they wrote
that Anandavardhana uses the term iantarasa to refer to "an intense
experience (not a hardened attitude like that of a true .uuirny4rin) of
detachment that comes from reading or witnessing a work ofa rt depicting
ruin, impermanence, the transitory character ofw orldly existence, and the
futility of ambition," yet they also maintained that Anandavardhana
"accepts, purely and simply, iiinta as one of the many ra.ras-as the ninth
orasa among the already accepted ra.ras-with its proper sth4yi-hhQQa
(trf'}ij-k/aya-sukha) and its epic (Ma/Whharata) if not dramatic (Nagiinanda)
exemplification. "'0 What makes the exemplification of iiinlarasa in the
Ma/Whharata less than simple is the difficulty of determining how Anan
davardhana viewed the difference between the sth4yihhava and the rasa.
Since Anandavardhana never discusses this problem in detail, the most
that can be said with confidence is that the experience of detachment
described by Gerow and Aklujkar is in fact the goal of the poem in
Anandavardhana's interpretation. As their reference to the difference
between the experience of the reader and the attitude of a true ascetic
implies, the explanation of the status of this experience as rasa rather than
as an ordinary emotion is surely to be sought in the simple fa.ct that this
form of detachment, however intensely it may be felt, is still a response to
a work of art rather than a product of direct confrontation with .one's
personal situation in the real world.
In the end the theoretical difficulties involved are subordinate to
Anandavardhana's insistence at the conclusion of his analysis that the
evocation of this experience is the essential core of the poem, and that it is
carried out not directly, but in a subtle and suggestive manner. The result
of this insistence is to assure us that we must not expect to find a neat and
clear pattern of manipulation of the elements associated with rasa, but
rather must be attentive to the cumulative effect of less obvious processes.
We arc thus nudged away from the realm of the problems that
0 "On Santa Rasa in Sanskrit Poetics," p. 83.
'
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
201
SJXTARASA IN THE MAHABHJIUTA
Abhinavagupta and others struggled with later. Abhinavagupta himself
seems to have been aware of this, since his commentary on Anandavar
dhana's analysis of the Mahi.bharata is surprisingly meager, ignoring
questions that provoke him to lengthy discussions elsewhere, and yet in
other works he fervently echoes Anandavardhana's conclusions."
Once Anandavardhana's interpretation of the poem is accepted, it
solves more problems than it raises. In terms of the questions with which
this paper began, two areas of problems are of particular importance.
The first is that of the didactic role of a poem. The emphasis on csthetic
distance that appears throughout the theories of Abhinavagupta and
others brings with it a host ofd ifficulties, for it is difficult to explain how so
pure and disinterested an experience as the rasa they describe can
contribute to the practical fulfillment of the aims of human life, and it is
especially difficult to sec how particular aims can be associated with
particular flavors, given the tendency of the theory to imply the generic
unity ofa ll rasa experiences. We should know a great deal more about these
problems if we still had Anandavardhana's treatise entitled Tattviiloka, for
the work seems to have dealt with the connections between Jastra and
kal!)la. 12 And where fiintarasa in particular is concerned, together with its
role in the attainment of liberation, we must also mourn the loss of the
Kal!)'Gkautuka of Bhana Tauta and the commentary on it by his pupil
Abhinavagupta.7' Yet even without the assistance that such works might
have provided, the connection that Anandavardhana makes between the
didactic and the poetic purposes of the Mahi.bharata follows easily enough
from his description of the attitude evoked in the reader, and the ways in
which he says that evocation is accomplished are clearly applicable to both
purposes.
The second area of problems is that surrounding the question of the
poetic unity oft he Mahi.bharata. Herc Anandavardhana's interpretation of
the deeper intent of the poem provides an impressive foundation- and
perhaps the only p0$Sible foundation- for a serious claim that the
apparently disparate elements of the poem work together toward a single
goal. On one level his interpretation may seem too easy: to say that the
unifying purpose of the Mahi.bharata is to produce a cumulative effect of
disillusionment provides the perverse ofj ustifying every tedious
~ibility
" Sec Raghavan, Th• Numb" of Rasa-s, p. 35 n. 2( I).
2 Sec Masson and Patwardhan, Sanlarasa, p. 33, p. 54 n. 7, and p. 112 n. 2.
'
" That the work addressed such problems is clear from Abhinavagupta 's brief reference
to it (lot. on 3.26, p. 394): mak1ap"4/awma ca;•1111 paramaprt"'liirthani//hatvat sttrvaraubh.Ja6
pr~. sa cOJ""" asmodMpiidltya.J<lbha//alaulma kiivy<JklJJIJuJce, asmiiblrif ca 111.duivartUµ
bah"'4rakrlani"14.JGl>irvapak,asiddliiinla i!JI altJt(I bah•nii.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
202
GARY A. TUBB
accretion in the poem on the grounds of its own contribution to the
frustration of the reader. On a more serious level Anandavardhana's view
of the inner meaning of the poem recognizes an essential concern that is
genuinely present in the Moliiibh4rata, a central focus that can legitimately
be recognized both in the thoughts of the poem's characters and in the
shaping of the work through the centuries.
The extent to which that focus is still recognized within the tradition is
eloquently exposed in the comments of modern Indian scholars who
discuss the theme of disillusionment in the Moliiibh4rata.74 And for an
answer to the objection that the same focus could be found in any other
major work within the Hindu tradition that deals with philosophical and
religious questions, one need look no further than Anandavardhana's own
analysis oft he other great Hindu epic composed in Sanskrit, the Ramiiya114.
But that is another story.
Abbrn1iations
ABh. AbhUuwahh4ratl ofA bhinavagupta, a commentary on the }{jjtyaiii.rtra
of Bharata. Except where noted, I have used the Sanskrit text as
emended in R. P. Kangle, Ras-bh4v-vicar: bharalmumrpcfa "nQtyaiii.rtrii"
fiJ adliyay 6 va 7f atiice "abhinavabh4rat'i" fikesaha sa/ip mariil/11 b/i4iiintar,
22 (Bombay: Maharanra Rajya Sahitya-Sarpskrti
Bh~ntarmala
1973) [abbr. Kangle]. For comparison I have also noted
Ma~(!al,
the location of each passage in Volume I ofM.R. Kavi's edition of
the X-atyaiii.rtra with the commentary ofA bhinavagupta, Gackwad's
Oriental Series 36 (Baroda: Central Library, 1926) [abbr. GOS).
Dhv. Dhvanyiiloka of Anandavardhana, with the Locana commentary of
Abhinavagupta and the Biilapriya commentary ofRamasaraka, ed.
Pt. Pattabhirama Sastri, Kashi Sanskrit Series 135 (Bcnares:
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1940). Where noted, readings
have been taken from the edition ofK. Krishnamoorthy (Dharwar:
Kamatak University, 1974).
DR Daiariipaka of Dhanarpjaya, with the commentary Avaloka by
Dhanika and the sub-commentary Laghu/llca by Bhauanrsirpha,
ed. T. Venkatacharya, Adyar Library Series 97 (Adyar, Madras:
The Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1969).
" Sec especially Raghavan, Tht N•mbn of Rasa-s, pp. 32- 36; Sinha, Mali4h!i4raJa,
chapter 5: "The ~14 "-' the Kufa."'4 of the MaJt4JJMral4," pp. 71-84; and Bhattacharya,
Sanl4rasa ON/ Its &opt, chapter 12: "Santa ra.a in the grcat <pies and in allicd literaturc," pp.
164-183.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
203
$A}{TARASA JN THE MAHABHARATA
DRAva.Avaloka ofDhanika, a commentary on the Dafariipaka ofDhanam-
jaya. Sec DR.
GOS Sec ABh.
Kanglc Sec ABh.
KAnu. wfarudiisana with Allll!lk0raci4Dma'll and Viveka of Hcmacandra,
ed. with two anon. /ippanas by Rasiklal C. Parikh and V.M.
Kulkarni, 2nd rev. ed. (Bombay: Sri Mahavirajaina Vidyalaya,
1964).
Kir. Kiriitiirjuniya of Bhiiravi, with the SabdartlllJIJipikii commentary of
Citrabhiinu, ed. T. Ganapati Sastri, Trivanqrum Sanskrit Series
63 (Trivandrum: Government Press, 1918).
KPra. lllJI!YOPrakiiJa ofMammata with the Biilabodhini ofViimaniicharya
Riimabhatta Jhalaldkar, ed. R.D. Karmarkar, 17th ed. (Punc:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1965).
Kum. Kwniirasambhava ofKiilidasa with the Prakii!iM of Aru1.1agiriniitha
and the vivara11a of Niiraya1.1apa1.1.;lita, ed. T. Ganapati Sastri,
3 vols., Trivandrum Sanskrit Series 27, 32, 36 (Trivandrum:
Government PrC$S, 1913- 14).
Loe. Locana of Abhinavagupta, a commentary on the Dhvanyiiloka of
Anandavardhana. Sec Dhv.
MBh. MaliabharaJa, critically edited by V.S. Sukthankar ct al., 18 vols.
(Punc: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Instituc, 193H6).
NS Na{Jafiistra of Bharata. Sec ABh.
RG Rasagaiigiidhara ofjaganniitha, with the Marmaprakii!a commentary
of NiigcS.i Bhatta, ed. Madhusudan Shastri, 3 vols. (Varanasi:
Banaras Hindu University, 1964-73).
SD Siiliityadarpa,,a of Visvaniitha, ed. Pt. Riimacharal}a Tarkavagisa
Bhanachlirya and Pt. Durgiiprasada Dviveda (Bombay: Nirnaya
Sagara Press, 1902).
VJ Vakrokt!Jlvita of Kuntaka, ed. and trans. K. Krishnamoorthy
(Dharwad: Karnatak University, 1977).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE EPIC'S TWO GRANDFATHERS, AND VYASA
BHl~MA
BRUCE M. SULLIVAN
Two characters in the story of the MaMhharata, the brahmin Vyasa and
the kfatriya are often called pitamaha (grandfather). They are the
Bh~ma,
patriarchs of the epic's central family, the Bharatas. Consideration of
these two grandfather figures together will shed light on both. After
describing how the epic depicts Vyasa and Bhi$ma, I shall state my views
on the meaning of each character and suggest how to fit them into the
interpretation of the text as a whole.
In the Mahabharata (MBh), Vyasa is a great brahmin whose connec
tion to the royal family of /qatriyas, the Bharatas, is through his mother
Satyavati. She describes in these words to Bhi$ma how she had given
birth to the sage Vyasa.'
My father, who was yoked to the dliarma, had a ferry, and one day when I
was in my youth I went on it, 0 d/ianna-spirited sir. Then that greatest of
1he supporters of dlianna, 1he great seer Parasara the wise, came 10 the ferry
because he wanted 10 cross the Ya muna River. While we were crossing over
the Ya muna, that greatest of ascetics approached me and, possessed by
love, coaxingly said to me many sweet things. Fearful of both his curse and
of my father, but promised desirable boons, I was unable 10 reject him, 0
Bharata. After covering 1he area with darkness, with his virility he
overcame me, a young maiden, and did with me as he desired right in the
boat, 0 Bharata. Formerly I had a strong, repellent odor of fish; the ascetic
took i1 away and gave me this pleasant fragrance. Then the ascetic said to
me that upon delivering my child on an island in the river, "you will still be
a virgin". Thus, the great yogi and seer Parasarya, the son I had as a
virgin, was born at that time, the one who is known as Dvaipayana-the
blessed lord and seer who, by the power of his asceticism, divided the Vtdas
This essay is a somewhat altered fonn of a paper presented at the 14th Annual
Conference on South Asia in November, 1985, in Madoon, Wisconsin. I would like to
thank especially Alf Hiltebeitel for commcnts helpful to mc in prcparing this paper. For
more detailed treatment, sec my book KrP!4 Dvaipayana Vyasa anJ the ,'daMl>Mrata: A Ntw
Interpretation (Leiden: EJ. Brill, 1990).
1 MBh. 1.99.6-15.; all citations of passages are to the critical edition edited by V.S.
Sukthankar, The MalriibMral4, 19 vols. (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research lnstitutc.
1933- 59). Scc also the capsule descriptions of Vyisa's career at 1.54.2- 6. and 1.57.55-
75., and 1he many references to Vyisa in I. I. and 1.2.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE EPIC'S TWO GRANDFATHERS, BHT~MA AND VYAsA 205
into four, and hence became in the world "Vyasa", and because of his
darkness, Kni;ia. He is a speaker of the truth, an ascetic devoted to
tranquility, all of whose sins are burned away.
Thus, Vyasa was born out of wedlock, the son ofa great brahmin ascetic
by a woman whose social class is much less clear.
Vyasa's mother Satyavati later met $a!Jltanu, king of the Bharatas,
who was also struck by her beauty and wanted to marry her. $al'Jltanu,
however, already had a son-by Ganga the river goddess in human
form2-and Satyavati's family feared that, as he was the elder son, he
and his descendants would inherit the kingdom leaving nothing for her
and her descendants. To aid his father in wooing Satyavati, the prince
vowed that not only would he never rule, but also that he would never
marry or have offspring, and because of this awe-inspiring vow he was
known ever after as "Bhi$ma".' Bhi$ma's vow eliminated all misgivings,
and Satyavati married King $a!Jltanu, in time bearing two sons, two
princes for the kingdom (1.95.).
At this point in the epic, the structure of the Bharata family has a
remarkable symmetry: the king and queen, their two royal sons, and the
two extramarital sons, one on either side of the family. The king's
extramarital son Bhi$ma, born of Ganga, is paralleled by the queen's
extramarital son Vyasa, born in the Yamuna River (he was conceived in
mid-river, born on an island in that river, and born ofa woman who was
herselfYamuna-born).4 The Ganga and Yamuna Rivers, the dominant
geographical features of north-central India, frame the Bharata king
dom, one on either side, much as these two river-born sons frame the
royal family.
The brahmin Vyasa and the kfatriya Bhi$ma arc complementary
figures who in certain respects are mirror-images of each other. Both
remained unmarried and became the Bharata family's elders, vigilant
guardians of their family's fortunes. though childless, sought to
Bhi~ma,
perpetuate the Bharata lineage by carrying off from their svaya11wara and
This is the result of an intricate series of events, including Brahma cursing a king in
i
heaven to b< reborn on earth while at the same time the celestial brahmin Vasinha was
cursing the Vasus, eight demigods, to b< born on earth as well. The goddess Ganga
agreed to b< the wife of the king and the mother of the Vasus in their earthly
incarnations. SalJltanu and Ganga had sons, and as each was born it was thrown in the
river by Gang!, until the eighth son was born; it was allowed to live. Thus, the
agreement reached in heaven was fulfilled, and king Sa.,,tanu had a son by Ganga who
was Oyaus the Vasu incarnate; he was called Oevavrata Gangeya, and was later to be
known as Bhi1ma. Most of 1.91- 99. concerns Bhitma; see 1.91- 93. for his birth.
' 1.94.50-94.; "bhipru:" means terrible.
' For details on Vyasa'< mother, see 1.57.36- 55.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
206 BRUCE M. SULLIVAN
bringing to court two qatriya women to become brides (l.96.). However,
both young princes of the dynasty died suddenly, one in combat and the
other from illness or dissipation, leaving the family childless and the
kingdom without an heir to the throne. A family member was needed to
produce offspring with the young widows, but because the kjaJriya
Bhi$ma had vowed celibacy, the deceased prince's other brother, the
brahmin Vyasa, was summoned to substitute for Bhi1ma in this role.5
Upon the birth of two princes, Vyasa left the court to return only
occasionally (1.100.), while Bhi,ma remained to raise the boys as
qaJriyas, substituting for Vyasa in the role of parent. These princes,
Dhrtar~ira and Par;idu, call both Vyasa and Bhi$ma "father'',6 and their
sons, the Kauravas and Par;idavas, call both "grandfather".7 Although
Bhi$ma is in fact the biological grandfather of no one, family members
call him pitamaha out of respect.' Despite Bhisma's refusal to procreate, he
is very much a family man, a celibate ascetic kfatriya in a social setting,
while Vyasa, though a father, is no family man at all- he is a brahmin
ascetic of a more solitary inclination. These two Bharata family patri
archs form a complementary pair, and may be seen as embodying two
different approaches to the problem of the incompatibility of asceticism
and family life. They also represent the ideal of an alliance between
brahmins and kfatriyas which the MBh so often advocates, but which was
shattered so dramatically by fratricidal competition for the throne. In
that struggle, Bhi,ma died while Vyasa survived.
To set the interpretation of Vyasa and Bhi$ma within the context of
the MBh as a whole, one must consider that the epic depicts its main
characters as incarnations of gods or demons. Some arc sons of gods
(such as Bhima, son ofVayu), and some are said to be a portion (a'!lla) of
a god on earth (such as Knr:ia Vasudeva, who is Narayar;ia Vi$r;iu's
a'!lia).9 In general, each of the main characters is depicted as sharing
' Though they arc related only by the marriage of one's father to the other's mother,
and not at all genetically, both arc regarded as the brother of the deceased; sec 1.99.25-
38.
•Compare Vl.16.7. and Vl.17.7.
'On Bhi$ma, sec V.23.8.; Vl.14.3.; Xll.38.6.; and Xlll.152-54. On Vyisa, sec
1.54.2.; 1.144.5.; 1.157.16.; XII.33.2-3 and 12.
' Typically in India, all the brothcn of the grandfather would be called pit4ma"4; for
r.
details and documentation sec Karvc, "Kinship Terminology and the Family
Organization as found in the Critical Edition of the Mahabharata," BrJl.ttin of tloe Deuan
Colle1e /Ustarch lnstitou, 5 (1944): 61- 148.
' Arjuna Pi.i;ujava is such an important and multivalent character that he has three
divine idcntitiC$: he is Indra's son, companion Nara, and, according to Vyisa
Niriy~a·s
(1.189.), he and the other PiQ<;lavas are all incarnations of former Indras.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE EPIC'S 1WO GRANDFATHERS, BH!SMA AND VYASA 207
with some particular deity many of the same attributes and epithets, so
that the epic character at times symbolically represents that deity and
evokes in the audience memories of the god's nature, mythic deeds, etc.
The war between the Bharata cousins is seen as another battle in the
eternal struggle between the gods and demons, this time fought on
carth.10 The many accounts in literature of the battles between the gods
and demons have a fairly consistent pattern, and the myth-which has
been called the central myth of Indian civilization11-may be sum
marized as follows. The gods and demons, descended from a common
progenitor, Prajapati Brahma, once were contending for sovereignty.
The demons began to defeat the gods due to receiving a boon from their
pitamaAa Prajapati Brahma; because they had pleased him either with
their sacrifice or their asceticism they won a boon such as invincibility to
the gods in battle. Then the gods go to Prajapati Brahma (who is also
their pitamaAa) asking for his aid in the battle and he tells them how to
defeat the demons. It seems that there is almost always a defect in the
boon Brahma has given the demons, a loophole of which the gods can
take advantage once Brahma gives them the knowledge, and in this way
the gods triumph. This is the well established pattern of the myth about
the gods and demons and their progenitor Brahma which is the basic,
underlying myth of the MBh.
The Pl'h;u;lavas are the sons of the gods and their allies arc portions of
the gods on earth, while their cousins the Kauravas arc incarnate
dcmons.12 Although this is clearly specified, the epic docs not explicitly
name any character as the incarnation or portion or son of Brahma. To
complete the pattern of the myth, however, there should be present in
the story a pitiimaka of these incarnate gods and demons, and to some
extent he should be reenacting the role of the divine pitamaAa Brahma. In
my view, Vyasa represents Grandfather Brahma much more effectively
and often than docs BhT$ma.
Looking first at the epic's explicit citations of a divine identity for
Bhi$ma, one secs that he is depicted as an incarnation ofDyaus, or Dyaus
Pi tr, the Sky Father of the /J.g Veda." Certainly this is a deity who has
" As in 111.92.; VI.20.5.; XIl.34.13- 21.; and in the descriptions of the conflict as a
"sacrifice of battle' (e.g., V.139.) taking place on the altar of Brahma (III.81.177-78.
and 111.129.22.).
11 Jan Gonda, Asp.<ls of EarlJ Vippiinn (Utrecht: Oosthoelr., 1954).
" Lists ofe pic characters and their divine identities occur in several places in the MB!t,
including 1.61.; Xl.8.; XV.39.; and XVlll.5. On the divine plan to oppose the demons
through incarnation on earth, especially 1.58.25.-1.59.6.
Stt
" In addition to the previously cited 1.91.-93., see 1.61.68- 70.; XV.39.15.; and
XVlll.5.9.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
208
BRUCE M. SULLIVAN
appropriately fatherly attributes to be the divine alter ego of
Bh~ma.
Beyond this, however, the connection between Bhi$ma and Dyaus is
tenuous and not particularly meaningful. There is little mythology about
Dyaus the Vasu with which the character might interact, and
ofBhi~ma
the fact that this motif remains undeveloped in the text indicates that the
epic poets were uninterested in it. The identification of with this
Bh~ma
superseded, retired god Dyaus Pitf seems to be an afterthought, as if
were thought to need a divine figure with which to be associated
Bhi~ma
because each of the other important epic characters already was
associated with a deva or asura.
The case of Vyasa is much more complex. The MBh omits him from
the incarnation lists in which the divine identities of various epic
characters are revealed. However, there arc two references to Vyasa as
an incarnation of Narayai;ia both found in the .Naraya11iya section
V~i;iu,
of the Siinti Parvan.14 Because these two references are not supported by
similar statements elsewhere in the MBh, and because they arc found in
a section of the text which is widely regarded as among the most recently
interpolated parts of the MBh," consideration of these two references will
be postponed until other material has been presented.
Rather than emphasizing the two references which associate Vyasa
with Nariiyai;ia, I see many ways in which Vyasa evokes the memory of
Brahma, and would suggest that Vyasa often represents Brahma in the
MBh. Correspondences between these two figures arc too numerous to
discuss in detail hcrc,16 but examples of the major points may be
adduced. In comparing Vyii.sa and Brahma, one may well begin with the
fact that both arc depicted as brahmins who epitomize the this-world
" The 6nt reference is a one verse statement (XIl.334.9.) which I tranolate as follows:
"Know that Knr;ia Dvaipiyana Vyha is Niriyar;ia the Lord, for who other than the
Lord could be: the author of the Malriibhii.rallJ, 0 tiger among men, and who other than
the Lord could enunciate truly the manifold iiJumnas?" A few chapters later (XIl.337.),
Vyha describ<:s himself as "born a portion ofNiriyar;ia" and as Niriyai;ia's son, born to
divide the Veda and to participate in the Bhirata war. These arc the only two such
references in the critical edition, though three manuscripts have inserted the lines of
Xll.334.9. into the epic's lint book as well; see Appendix I, Nos. 2 and 3 of the Adi
Parvllll volume.
" Anne-Marie E.noul dates the Jlarii,Ja'!iya in the third century A.O., describing it as
among the m0$t recent sections of the MBh, certainly composed after the B"4gauad-Citii,
and as contemporaneous with the HariNtpla; see her .IVara.J"IP)a Pa"""' d• Mahii.bhii.rallJ
(Paris: UNESCO, 1979), p. 3. Much earlier, E.W. Hopkins had commented on this
passage that "by the end of the pseudo-epic, even Vyha Knt;1a was .. . an emanation of
Niriyai;ia . . .. But this is the last word of the Bhlgavatas and not early epic." See his
Epi< MytlllJlog (Strassburg: Triibner, 1915), p. 216.
" See Chapter 4 of my book, mentioned above, for citations.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
209
THE EPIC'S TWO GRANDFATHERS, 8HT$MA AND VY.l\SA
values of ritual activity and dhanna, as opposed to the other-worldly
values of SIZ1!f!ly4ra and mok$a. Brahma is depicted in the epic as the
presiding deity of the religious path of pravrtti, which is characterized by
the performance of Vedic sacrificial rites and the other injunctions of
dhanna and leads to the temporary respite of heaven. This is explicitly
contrasted with the path of nivrtti, presided over by Narayar.ia, which is
characterized by the abandonment of ritual activity for asceticism and
leads to mok$a, permanent release from transmigration." Like Brahma,
Vyasa is strongly identified with pravrtti values and dhanna rather than
nivrtti values and mok$a. The M Bh depicts Vyasa not as a sa11111y4rin
striving for mo/qa but as an ascetic of the forest-dwelling vanaprastha type;
he lives at an ii.frama and serves as guru and priest for the dynastic
family. 18 Another significant point in the comparison of Brahma and
Vyasa is the striking similarity in the relationship each has to the Veda.
In the M Bh, Brahma is said to have created the Veda just before creating
the world with its gods, demons, and men.19 He is depicted in the text
and iconographically as having four heads, one facing in each direction,
each mouth busy chanting Veda.20 Vyasa performs among mankind a role
remarkably similar to that performed by Brahma in mythology. The title
"Vyasa" was given to Knr.ia Dvaipayana for his act of dividing the
unitary Vet/a into four texts.21 He took this seemingly revolutionary step
to make the Veda easier for mortals to learn and retain in the difficult era
of Kaliyuga. Thus, just prior to the beginning of Kaliyuga, Vyasa
disseminated among mankind the Vet/a as he had arranged it in four
texts, which is an epic parallel with the myth of Brahma, at the
beginning of time, creating the Vet/a in four streams, one from each of his
four mouths. With regard to the Veda, Vyasa seems to be replicating the
mythology of Brahma. Certainly Vyasa and Brahma are unique in
having such a relationship to the Vet/a.
Particularly convincing of the correspondence between Vyasa and
Brahma is the fact that each is the grandfather of a family which splits
into two factions that fight for sovereignty, and that they have struc
turally similar relationships to their belligerent offspring. The pattern of
Brahma's actions with regard to the gods and demons is replicated in
" As revealed by Vyasa in a pair of sermons, XIl.327. and XIl.336.
" Although his iiirama is often mentioned, no location is ever specified in the M Bh.
Vyll.sa is the bralim411 (or bralima} priest at the Rijas!iya ritual (Book II.) and is the chief
priest at the ASvamedha (XIV.).
"As in XIl.181.1-5. and Xll.327.30- 32.
"'111.192.12.; 111.275.17.; XII.330.56.; Xll.335.18-25.
" 1.1.52.; 1.54.3- 5.; 1.57.72- 74.; 1.99.14.; etc.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
210
BRUCE M. SULLIVAN
that ofVyiisa's actions regarding the Pa1;u;lavas (who are incarnate gods)
and the Kauravas (who are incarnate demons). At first, Vyiisa's actions
have the effect of aiding the demonic Kauravas to gain ascendancy-he
helps to bring the Kauravas into the world,22 and the Rajasiiya he
supervises results in the exile of the Pai;it;lavas"-which necessitates his
intervention to assist the Pai;it;lavas in overcoming them. The advice and
guidance Vyasa gives the Pii;it;lavas parallels the knowledge Brahma
gives the gods, and has the same effect: the Pai;it;lavas win. In its salient
features, Vyiisa's career in the MBh reveals close correspondences with
the mythology and character of Brahma.
Comparison of Brahma and however, is much less rewarding.
Bh~ma,
Bhisma is not a brahmin, has no priestly functions, and seems closer to
being a sa'!l'!)lasin than does Vyasa-Bh~ma delivers the long discourse
on mokfa that ends the Siinli Parvan, and is a celibate ascetic. Moreover,
Bhi$ma does not share the relationship to the Veda which is unique to
Brahma and Vyiisa; though his lectures on dharma are extensive, they
have very little indeed to do with the Veda, and he has no role in the
creation and dissemination of the Vedas. Finally, though is
Bh~ma
respectfully called pitiimaha by all the Bharatas, he fights on the side of
the demonic Kauravas and dies doing so, which does not correspond at
all to the role of Brahma in mythology. Vyasa's non-combatant neutral
ity toward his contentious descendants, and his survival of the conflict,
accord with the role one would expect of the pitiimaha.
One final parallel between Vyasa and Brahma is noteworthy, and may
provide the key to understanding why we now find references to Vyiisa
as a portion of Narayai:ia in two chapters of the Siinti Parvan. Over the
course of the several centuries during which the MBh was composed, the
status and the worship of Brahma apparently declined.24 By the time the
composition of the epic was being completed, Brahma was conceived by
Vai$Qavas as functioning at the behest of Narayar;ia Vi$QU, and was
pictured as seated on a lotus that emerged from the navel of the
recumbent Vi$Qu; Brahma had become a mere appendage or portion of
" He gave Glndh3rl a boon !hat she would have 100 sons, and when the time came
for the monstrous birth, he prevented her auempted abortion and acted ;u midwife at the
birth (1.107.). Vyisa's creation of the demonic horde of Kaurav;u parallels Brahma's
creation of the asvras.
" Vyisa w;u me prit$t supervising this rite; he chose me orher prit$U involved, and
functioned ;u the bralurum whose responsibility it w;u to oversee the actions of all of them;
see 11.30.33-35.
" The argument is presented convincingly by Greg Bailey in his "Nott$ on the
Worship of Brahma in Ancient India", AM4li dll lnstitMl<J OrintWt di Napoli 29 (1979):
149-70. Sec also his of Bralrmii (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1983).
M~tJioloo
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE EPIC'S TWO CRANOfATHERS, BHT$MA AND VYASA 211
Narayai:ia In a similar fashion and for much the same reason,
V~i:iu.
Vyasa apparently also came to be seen as a portion ofNarliyai;ia, and the
idea was recorded in the .Niiriiylll}fya section of the Siinti Parvan.
Depicting Vylisa as the Bharata pitiimalia, the epic poets evoked in
their audience recognition of meaningful correspondences with the
divine pitiimalia Brahma. The MBh, presenting itself as the "fifth Veda,""
was created by pitiimalia Vylisa as the quintessence and completion of the
four Vedas created by pitiimalia Brahma. In many subtly suggestive
expressions, the MBh reveals continuities between Vylisa and Brahma.
u As in 1.57.74. and XIl.327.18.; sec also 1.1.19.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KIRATA: IUSA AND BHAKTI
IN BHARAVl'S K/RATARJUNlrA
INDIRA V. PETERSON
I. Introduction: Rasa and Bltalcti in tile Kirii14rjuniya
The narrative of the Pa1;u;lava hero Arjuna's penance and his combat
with the god Siva in the guise of a lciriita (wild mountain man, hunter) is
a well-known episode in the Forest Book of the epic MaM.bhi.rata.' During
the forest exile of the Pa1;u;lavas, at the behest of the seer Vyiisa,
YudhiHhira sends Arjuna to the Himalayas, where he practices severe
asceticism (tapas, penance) in order to propritiate the gods and win from
them divine weapons which will destroy the enemies of the Pat;1c;lavas in
battle. Desiring to test the hero's courage, Siva disguises himself as a wild
hunter and picks a quarrel with Arjuna over a boar. Arjuna proves his
mettle as a warrior in the single combat that ensues. Pleased, Siva reveals
his identity; Arjuna bows to Siva and begs forgiveness for his impertin
ence in fighting with God; Siva praises the hero and gives him the divine
weapon (astra) called Pasupata or Brahmasiras. These arc the main
events of the kiriita story as told in the MaM.bhi.rata.2 In this essay I shall
examine the treatment of heroism and divine grace, the principal themes
of the Mahi.bhi.rata kiriita episode, by Bharavi (circa 6th c. A.O.), in his
Sanskrit mahi.kiivya (court epic) Kiriitiirjunfya (Arjuna's Combat with the
1 Malr4blliiral4. Book Ill. Araiva);aparvan (The Book of tk Forest). Kairataparvan (31),
13 through 42 in the Critical Edition. The numbering is somewhat different in other
editions. My references to the Kairataparvan in this essay are from: Tiu MaMbhOrata.
Critically Edited by V.S. Sukthankar. Volume 3. Aran..)'<'Mparvan (part I). Poona:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. For a translation of this episode in the version of
the Critical Edition, seej.A.B. van Buitenen, The Malr4bh0rata. Volume 2, (Chicago: The
Uruversity of Chicago Press, 1975). "The Mountain l\.ian", pp. 244-305.
2 The narrative of the central event begins with tullr.ft.JO 28, in which is related the
beginning of a long argument among the PiiQ4avas. Madeleine Biardeau rightly secs the
episode as being closely connected with earUer events, and with Arjuna's journey to
Indra's heaven in the lndralokahhigamanaparvan, which immediately follows the
Kairataparvan, as being significant to our understanding of the kiriilll episode in the context
of the MaMbhOral4. See: Madeleine Biardeau, "ttudesde mythologie hindoue <henceforth
referred to as EMH > (V) Part JI. Bhakti et avatara", Bullttin dt l'icoltfron;aist d'Extrnne
Oriml 65 (1978): 146- 64 (this section is significantly entitled "Arjuna dans le ciel
d'lndra'•). However, the importance of these connections is minimal in detached vcnions
of the story, such as the KiralOrjuniya of Bharavi, which is the subject of this essay.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
213
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KIRATA
Kirata), the earliest and most celebrated literary adaptation of the epic
tale.' Bharavi's long poem is known as one of the earliest and best
examples of the maJialcal!Ja or court epic genre; it is usually evaluated
according to the aesthetic standards of kal!Ja, Sanskrit classical or "court"
poetry.' At the same time, the theme of the kirala story, as well as the
time and place in which Bharavi lived,$ demand a serious consideration
of the religious dimensions of the poem. I therefore approach Bharavi's
epic from the twin perspectives of kal!Ja poetics and devotional religion,
of ra.sa and bhakti.
Bharavi's KiriiJarjunfya and tlu Poetics of Rasa
Though the theory of rasa (aesthetic experience conceived as mood,
flavor) was not expressly formulated for the analysis of mahakal!Ja, it is
one of the few tools available for determining the aesthetic aims and
' Tiu KiratilTjunfya of Bhiiravi. With tht commtntary (Ghai;i!lpatha) of Mallinltha.
Edited by Pandit Durgaprasad and Kasinath Pandurang Parab. 9th edition. (Bombay:
Nimaya-Sagar, 1922).
' for a discussion of tht characttristics of kiivya portry, Stt Daniel H.H. Ingalls, An
AntMlogy of Sanskrit Court Po<lry: Vidp1Ua's SubhiifitarabuJkofa. Harvard Oriental Strics
Vol. 44, (Cambridge, Ma.: Harvard University Press, 1965). Introduction, pp. 2-29;
and Louis Renou, "Sur la structure du kiivya" Jormial AsiaJique, volume 247 (1959: 1-
113). MaliiiJriioya or saTgabandha is the long stanzaic tpic genre in kiioya po<try. The
classic.al fonn, stylt and thtmcs of the m4ftiik4vya distinguish it from the older Sankrit
epics, the Riimiiya1)0 and the Ma/r4hlr4rata. In this essay I refer to the mllM/cii.vya genre by
the term ••court epic''; the maJ&akQvya has also been called ''literary•• or ''classical'' epic, to
distinguish it from older epic. Bhiiravi's Kiriitiirjuniya is known in tht Indian tradition as
one of the five groat tpics. for a study of the Kiriitiirjwriya as an ext.mplary nuiliiiA:iivya, Ste
my 1976 Ph.D. thtsis (unpublished), under tht name Shetterly: Indira V. Shetterly,
"Recurrence and Structure in Sanskrit Literary Epic: A Study of Bhiiravi's
Kiriitiirjuniya", Harvard University Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Sanskrit and Indian
Studies, 1976. Other studies concerned with the m4ltiik41!JO genre arc: Gary Alan Tubb,
"The Kwnii.rasalflb/uwa in tht Light of Indian Theories of the MaMkiiVJ4", unpublished
Ph.D. thtsis, Harvard University, Department ofS anskrit and Indian Studies, 1979; and
David Smith, Ratniikara's Harauijaya: An Introduction to tlit Sanskrit Court Epic. (Delhi:
Oxford University Press, 1985).
' The KiriitiirjU11iya is the only porm known to have btcn compoocd by Bhiiravi, about
whose life we know very little, except that he Sttms to have lived in the Deccan/
Karnataka area ofS outh India some time before 634 A.O., at which datt ht is praised as
a master-port in an important Chalukya inscription at Aiholc. Information given by the
7th century po<tidan Dao\lin, who lived at the South Indian Pallava court at Kiiici,
suggcsu that Bharavi was connected with the Chalukya court, but was known to the
Ganga and Pallava couru as well. On thtsc and other matter concerning Bhiiravi's dat<,
Stt the discussion in A.K. Warder, Indian Kiivya littr4turt, Volume 3 (Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1977), pp. 198-200.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
214
INDIRA V. PETERSON
effects of the court epic as an extended poetic composition.' There is
general agreement among the theorists that one should speak of the
overall effect of a court epic in terms of mood.7 The later critics expect
the court epic to include all the canonical moods (held to be nine in
number), but to have one of these as the dominant or principal (angi,
pradliana) rasa.• In accordance with the general view of the primacy and
universality of particular moods, the 14th century poetician ViSvanitha
spitulates that a maMkal!J<l should have one of the three rasas friagara (the
erotic), vira (the heroic), and fiinta (the calm or tranquil) as the
dominant.'
The criticism of the Kiratarjunlya from the point of view of rasa is a
relatively straightforward task. The direct experience of the poem leads
the reader to conclude that, among the canonical rasas, vlra (the heroic),
with its basis in the stable emotion (sthiiyibhiiva, "constant" emotion)
utsiiha (energy, action), is the principal rasa of the Kiratarjuniya. The poem
is certainly dominated by the tireless and heroic effort of Arjuna to
achieve of his martial goal of obtaining weapons from the gods. Other
features of the poem point in the same direction. Bhliravi chose for his
poem an explicitly martial theme from the older war epic, and one that
fitted in well with the essentially heroic associations of many of the topics
prescribed for treatment in court epic, such as "councils of war or
political affairs, spies (or embassies), military campaigns, battles, and the
victory of the hero" .'0 Our impressionistic judgment is affirmed by the
critical tradition: we arc fortunate in having a late but excellent
commentary on the first three cantos of the epic, in which the commen
tator, Citrabhlinu, identifies the karya (the ultimate goal or aim of the
action) of the Kiratarjunlya as a heroic aim, and the principal mood of the
' It is clear from the NilJaiastra, the early canonical work on rasa poetics, and from the
history of dramatic criticism, that the theory of rasa was formulated with respect to the
drama. The poetics of ala1rik4ra (figures ofs peech) is best suited to the stanza or quatrain,
which is the standard unit of k4qya verse. The critics did not develop a comparable poetic
appropriate to the court epic as an extended composition, and seem to apply a
combination of rasa and alllllf}cara poetics to thiJ genre. For a lucid and perceptive analysis
""""'*O:oya,
of the hi.story and implications of the application of rasa poetics to the sec
Tubb, 1979. ·
' Sttn in the reference to rasa (mood) as on of the important requirements of a
maMMllJ'4, in the best known early definitions of the genre. Da9.jin, Kioyidarla, 1.18:
"rasablrmlonir/llllllram" ("pervaded by rasa <mood> and b"4ua <the emotional basis of
mood>").
aiiti
' On the doctrine of the principal or rasa, sec Tubb, 1979, pp. 189-192.
' Viivanltha, SO!ii!Jad.irpcuµa, 6.317.
" "mantradutaprayiQijiniyakibhyudayair api". Da114in, Kii,,_,a,Jarla, 1.17.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARJUNA'S OOMBAT WITH THE XIRATA. 215
poem as vfra, the hcroic.11 Citrabhanu's commentary is one of the few
works in which the plot of a mahiikavya is analyzed in detail in terms of
the components and stages of the plot (arthapralcrti and avastha}, as well as
the principal junctures (sandhi), as these arc defined in the canonical
literature with regard to the development of rasa in dramatic works}2 My
own concern in the present essay is to determine and describe in a more
general way the particular strategies which Bharavi employs to suggest,
nourish, and sustain the heroic mood (!lira rasa) as the dominant rasa in
his epic, and especially in its climactic scenes.
Bhalcti in the Kiriitarjunrya
The role of devotional religion in the Kiriitarjunrya is a matter of some
complexity. That the poem has an important religious dimension has
always been acknowledged. In the Mahiibhiirata itself the kiriita-Arjuna
encounter is presented as having both heroic and devotional implica
tions. Even if, along with the Editors of the Critical Edition of the older
epic, we reject as problematic the incidents of Arjuna's ritual worship of
Siva and the long hymn of praise (stotra) with which he addresses the god
upon discovering his identity, we cannot dismiss the overtly devotional
focus of the climax of the tale.15 In the epic episode, after giving Arjuna
divine "vision" ( < dil!Ja'!I > calcsus) with which to behold him, Siva reveals
his divine persona to the hero, who worships him in wonder;14 the scene
constitutes what Alf Hiltebeitel has aptly called a "bhalcti tableau" ,u
11 Xiratarjlllli;14 (I- Ill) with the commentary ofCitrabhinu. Edited by T. Ganapathi
Sastri. Trivandrum Sarukrit Series 63, 1918.
" Stt Gary Tubb's discussion of the question of the analysis of the plots of court epics
according to the sc.hemcs devised for the dramatic genre, and the significance of such a
critical approach for the study of Kilidisa's rnalifik°'!J<a KumarasDl!lb"4N: Tubb, 1979,
Chapters I and V. For a contemporary scholar's analysis ofBhiravi's poem according to
the stnp4Jri-aNStM schemes, sec Warder, 1977, Chapter XXVll.
" Madeleine Biardcau considers these "devotional" passages ~ntial to the meaning
of the kira/4 episode in the Mah4bhiiral4, and condemru the decision of the Editors of the
Critical Edition: EMH (V), 1978, p. 157, n.1. Biardeau's excellent study of the religious
meaning of the kfrii/4 eP.itode has been followed by a complementary study of this epitode
u
in: Jacques Scheuer, SiN da1IS Malriibhiira/4 (Paris: Prc..cs universitaires de France,
1982). .
" This feature occurs in the context of the B"4gava4 Gita as well, where Krishna gives
Arjuna the eakfu with which to sec his Universal Form (XI. 8). Bhiravi omits this detail
in his version of the kirii/4 narrative.
" "Rather than being a patchwork of myths, legends, and historical reminiscences
overlaid with b"4kti, what the narrative builds up to and works around arc a series of
what I would call "b"4kti tableaux", scenes which prncnt images that hold themselves
before the hearer's mind". And "the epic language of images is not, however, simply
visual (or visional). It is also highly intellectual". Alf Hiltebeitel, "The Two Kn\UU on
One Chariot: Upanipdic Imagery and Epic Mythology", Hiswry of Religiims, Volume 24,
Number I, (August 1984, 1- 26), p. 2.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
216
INDIRA V. PETERSON
analogous to the more familiar scene in the Bluigavad Gita, of the
thcophany of Krishna which Arjuna receives along with the god's
counsel on the battlefield in Book VI of the Manab/iarata.16 The powerful
appeal of the tableau of Siva's self-revelation of Arjuna in this episode to
the imagination of South Indian monarchs and sculptors in the period
immediately following Bharavi's composition of the Kiriilarjunf:ya is
evident in the monumental 6th century Pallava rock-cut sculpture
known as "Arjuna's Penance" at Mahabalipuram.17 It was also in the
6th-7th ccnturcs that the kiriila talc became standardized as an illustra
tion of one of Siva's "forms or personae of grace" (anugraluimilrti) in the
ecstatic devotional hymns of the Naya!)irs Appar and
~i!)acampan­
tar, the saint-leaders of the Tamil Saivitc devotional (bluikti)
movcment.18 In a recent study of the kiriila episode in South Indian art
M.S. Nagaraja Rao has shown that, from the 7th century onwards, the
Karnataka region of South India, in or near which Bharavi is said to
have flourished, abounds in temple sculpture and long devotional poems
in Kannada dealing with the kiriila-Arjuna themc.19 It is clear then, that,
rooted as it is in the classicist tradition of kiil[Ya poetry and criticism,
Bharavi's poem is equally deeply embedded in the atmosphere, milieu
and lore of early Saiva bluikti cults and Saivitc religion in general in the
Kannada, Telugu and Tamil-speaking areas of South India. Yet the fact
remains that the Kiriitarjunf:ya is celebrated as a great court epic, not as a
poem in the bluikti (devotional) genre, and it is difficult to precisely
characterize the role of bluikti in this work.20 Moreover, since we know
" Tiu BJui,al104 Gita, Chapter XI.
1 ''Arjuna's Penance'' is a well known rock-cut sculpture in the Mahabalipuram
'
complex in South India, said to have been sculpted during the reign of the Pallava king
Mahendravarman (600-640 A.O.). Among the central images in this sculpture arc thc
figure of an ascetic performing pcnancc, standing on onc lcg, a monumcntal divine figure
bearing a wcapon, in front of whom stands a man in reverent attitude, and a group of
ascctia in front of a shrine with an imagc of a deity within. T.N. Ramachandran has
argued the case for vicwing this sculpture as a depiction of events in thc kirdla-Arjuna
story, and not a representation of the "descent of thc Ganges" myth, as some would have
it. T.N. Rarnachandran, "Thc Kiriil4rj1111!Jam or "Arjuna's penancc" in Indian Art",
ef
]otmUJl tJu /ndUui So<iety of OrimJ4I Art (volumc XVIII, 1950- 51, pp. 1-111). Sec
especially pp. $8-89.
•• E.g., Appar (Tiruniivulliracar), Tiviiram IV.73.3, and ~ii!!acampantar, Tiviiram
I. 75.3, in the South India Saiva Siddhanta Worls Edition. Translated in Indira V.
Petcrson, Ponns to Siua: Tiu H.f"'llS of tJu Tamil Saint.J (Princeton: Princeton Univcrsity
Press, 1989).
" M.S. Nagaraja Rao, Kiriitarjwriyam in Indian .Art (With Sp.ru.J Rifernu:t to Kamala.ta)
(Ddhi: Agam Kala Prakashan, 1979).
'°
Although it might be argued with some justification that the dividing linc berwccn
''bhakta~' and ''non-bh.o..tti'' works can often be uncle.ar, the claMics of the court epic genre
arc treated as kii'!)'<l poems, rather than as works with a primarily "religious" intent.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
217
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KIRATA
very little about Bhiiravi's life, we can only speculate about the role that
the burgeoning Saivite bhakti cults and sects might have played in the
personal religion of the poet and that of his royal patron, and the extent
to which these factors might have influenced Bhiiravi in his approach to
the theme of the Kiriitarunfya, the only work he is known to have
authored.21 Under these circumstances, how arc we to "read" the bhakti
tableau at the end of the poem? How docs Bhiiravi relate the interests of
the heroic rasa to the proper presentation of a scene of devotion and
grace? How docs he let the bhakti tableau emerge without overshadowing
the vlra rasa? To find an answer to this question, we must tum to the
poem itself, considering it in relation to its older epic source, as well as to
its many counterparts in South Indian religious art and letters.
I I. Rasa in the Kiriitiirjrmfya: Structural Consithrations
In the traditional poetics of rasa, the aesthetic experience is seen as
arising from the poet's skilful manipulation of the various objective and
psychological clements of the poem.
The basis of rasa <mood> is the presentation in a play or a poem of
factors connected with the presence ofe motions < bhava > in the characters
portrayed in the work.22 In lay terms, the portrayal of selected emotional
states, in conjunction with the incidents and components of the plot,
poetic conventions, characterization, description, language, imagery,
and other factors, leads to the experience of a dominant flavor or mood
in the poem. In long compositions such as the drama and the court epic,
the plot is the basic frame or structure around which the development of
rasa takes place; and, as Gary Tubb points out, the kiirya, the goal or aim
towards which the principal action of the work is directed", may be
regarded as the central element in the analysis of plot ..." for, in
practical terms, this goal is "the overall meaning that connects the
different parts of a complete work".n Arjuna's attempt to propitiate the
gods is motivated by his desire-<>n behalf of his family- to obtain
celestial weapons with whirh to destroy their unscrupulous enemies in
11 It is probably safe to assume that Bharavi was himself a ~aivite, although, as will be
shown below, scveraljaina authors have treated the kirala theme in their retellings of the
M alt4/J/14ro ta.
" Furr.her, "When a properly qualified spectator or read<r perceives the existence of a
slliiiyibhifoa <stable emotion, the basis of the principal r4So > through the obs<:rvation of the
associated Dibli.D.lJ4S <causes ofe motion>, the resulting experience is spoken ofa s a savoring
(4sv.id4) of the corre>ponding raso". Tubb, 1979, pp. 187-8. material in < > mine. See
Tubb, Chapter VI, for a discussion of the arrangement of rosas in a maJiruuyo.
" Ibid., p. 142 and 150.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
218
INDIRA V. PETERSON
battle. The development of the principal mood in the poem, as well as
the hero's climactic encounter with Siva, should be seen in the context of
this heroic purpose towards which the major action of the poem is
directed.
In his treatment of the plot of the kiriita tale, Bharavi is dearly
influenced by the traditional conception of a mahiiM.1!Ja as a literary work
which should teach as well as delight, and do both on a grand, "epic"
scale. The early poetician Bhamaha, for instance, describes the court epic
as a genre which is "about great things" (mahatam), and "great, that is,
grand and inclusive", (mahat), in its scope:2 specifically, a kavya epic
•
must have a great, elevated theme; it must include all the canonical rasas;
it must refer to the four aims of man's life; and it must be
(pu~iirtha)
replete with as many as possible of the rhetorical and descriptive topics
established by poetic usage and prescription as appropriate for a kiif!Ya
epic.2 The content and style of the mahalciivya together contribute to its
$
aesthetic and didactic aims. In the following outline of the narrative of
the Kiriitiirjunfya, I have tried to show how Bharavi relates the principal
generic requirements of the mahiikiivya with the development of the
principal mood in the poem.
An Outline of the .NarratiiM of the Kiriitiirjunfya
Canto; I.JP• of Content; Aim of life (.pu,,,.iirtha) Rasa
kiivya ll>pic presented
1-111 Argument among the Pa{l<;iavas regarding vira;
rhetorical their course of action. Vyasa sends Arjuna (the heroic)
(speech) to the Himalayas to win divine weapons. contrasted
Aim: Artha (niti, politics) / Dharma with !iinta
(The Law, Right conduct) (the calm)
IV- VI Arjuna and his ya,4a companion enjoy !iinla;
descriptive the beauty of autumn and the Himalaya; enhanced
(in rhetorical Arjuna's penance (tapas). by vira;
frame) Aim: Dharma. srngiira (the
erotic) is
foreshadowed.
VII-IX The erotic revels of the nymphs !r"giira;
descriptive sent by Indra to tempt Arjuna. foil for
,. Bhiimaha, Kavyala'flkijra, J.19: "(Sargabandho mahaltavyam) mahatiirp ca mahac
ca; at1
•.
Sec, for instance, the definition of Dai;ic;lin, Kao/Marfa l.14-22. Translations of this
and other definitions can be found in Tubb, 1979, Chapter Ill.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KIRATA 219
inrerlude; Aim: Kiima (worldly pleasure, sinta and
(No basis in sexual activity). vira.
the MaMhharata)
x
The nymphs fail in their Jr!igiira;
descriptive attempt to seduce Arjuna. explicitly pitted
Aim: Dharma. against !iinta and
vira.
XI Indra quesrions Arjuna's Jiinta and vira
rherorical inregrity and offers him ""'kfa
(ul!imate release); the hero rejects
the offer, and stands by his duty
as a warrior (qatr!Ja)
Aim.s: Dharma and Moqa (liberation)
XII Arjuna resumes his awesome penance; !iinta and vira
descriptive wants 10 propitiate Siva. perfectly balan
ced.
Siva sets out to test Arjuna.
Aim: Dharma.
XIII-XIV Arjuna shoots the boar, which urra.
dcscriprive is a demon in disguise; argument with
and Siva's messenger, who claims the boar.
rherorical Arjuna resists the offer of wealth. Battle.
Aim.s: Artha (wealth), and Dharma
XV-XVII Arjuna fights wirh Siva disguised as utra,
mainly a kiriita. The hero is progressively colored
descriptive stripped of his arms. Aim: Dharma. by bhalcti.
XVIII Climax of combat: In the mids! of a 111ra
mainly wres!ling bout, Siva reveals himself. (and
dcscriprive Arjuna praises him, asks for forgiveness bhalcti).
and rhe gift of weapons. He receives arms
from Siva and the gods, then rerurns to
his brothers, confident of Plh;u;lava victory.
Aim: Dharma.
Comparing the Mahabharata narrative with that of the Kiriitiirjunfya, we
may conclude that, on the whole, the classical poet keeps to the
"situations" presented in the original, amplifying their meaning, and
adding descriptive material which will help him achieve the range
required of a kiivya epic. Yet inclusivity is not all; my brief outline of the
development of the vira rasa in the poem shows that the poet has
successfully put his material to use in the service of the principal mood.
Bharavi invokes heroic action as the central theme of his poem in the
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
220 INDIRA V. PETERSON
argument among the Par.i4avas regarding their course of action against
.t he enemy, in the opening scene of the epic. In these three cantos the
Pir.iQava goal is defined, and the strategy (upaya) for the accomplishment
of this goal is outlined: the Pir.iQavas must restore their lost honor; they
must obtain the means with which to defeat their enemies in war; Arjuna
will perform penance in the Himalayas, in order to propitiate the gods
and win the boon of celestial weapons. Arjuna's penance, his "under
taking", is the main theme of the middle portion of the epic; it is
described in different ways, and at various degrees of intensity, through
out this section (especially in Cantos VI, X, and Xll).26 The mood
suggested here is Jania, the calm, which is ordinarily the antithesis of the
heroic mood. However, as I shall show below, Bharavi uses Jania as a foil
to vira with twofold effect, to sustain and nourish the heroic, as well as to
provide a contrast to it. In the same section, in his arguments with Indra,
his nymphs, and Siva's messenger, all of whom question the integrity of
his endeavor, Arjuna chooses dharma as the aim of life most appropriate
for him in his station and stage of life, rejecting the other three aims
(A:iima, artlia and mQkfa), as distractions from his duty as a warrior, though
they are worthy goals in themselves.,, Arjuna's defence of a hero's dharma
in the context of the scheme of the "four aims of life" highlights the
moral basis of the heroic mood. We are thus prepared for the full
flowering of the heroic mood in the scenes of conflict (Arjuna's conflict
with the demonic boar, his quarrel with Siva's messenger), combat (the
battle with Siva's army, and the combat with Siva himself), and success
(in achieving his goal) in the last six cantos of the poem. In Arjuna's
perseverant courage and activity in the face of every kind of challenge,
we must discern utsiiha (energy, relentless effort toward a goal), the
sthayibhava or emotional constant which is canonically defined as the basis
of the heroic rasa. In what follows I will provide a summary analysis of
heroic themes in the first part of the poem (Cantos I-XI), leading to a
detailed discussion of the rhetorical strategics Bharavi uses to suggest the
heroic mood in the combat scenes. I close with a consideration of the
essential question of bhakti in relation to rasa in the climax of the poem.
" I have discussed in detail the development of meaning through ~peatcd description
in the context of Arjuna's penance in the Kiratiirjuniya in Shetterly, 1976, Chapter 111,
pp. 281-299.
" The tradition d°"s not sec the four aims of life (dluirma, arlha, kiima and mok,ia) as
incompatible with each other, but as complementary ends, to pursued at the proper
~
time and stage of one's life. It is also understood that the other three aims should ~
tempered and governed by dlrarma.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
221
AJljUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE Kl/UTA
Ill Prelude combat: Tht Warrior as rogi ( Kiriitiirjrmfya VI-XI)
to
Among the great mahiikiiuya poets, Bharavi is distinguished for the lofty
intellectualism and depth of meaning of his poetry.28 This description
applies not only to individual verses in the Kiriitiirjuniya, but to the tone
of the poem as a whole. In the first section of the epic, Bharavi focuses on
two themes: the warrior ideal of courage and heroic effort involved in
Arjuna's endeavor, and the apparent incompatibility of Arjuna's non
violent ascetic practice with his militaristic goal. The heroic emphasis of
the former, which forms the topic of argument among the characters (the
Pli.Qdava brothers and their wife Draupadi in cantos 1- 111; Indra and
Arjuna in Canto XI), is explicit. As the underlying theme of the entire
middle section of the poem, the latter deserves comment.
At the beginning of the epic, Draupadi and Bhima try to persuade the
gentle Yudhi$1hira that, since their unscrupulous enemy is flourishing,
the time has come for him to take action against him. As befits the topic,
and as is typical of the kiiuya style, these fiery speeches are delivered in the
form of elegant general statements, in which the qualifications and
conduct of a hero arc defined. Bhima and Draupadi repeatedly invoke
the ideals of (manliness), vikrama (heroic deeds), ttjas (heroic
pau~a
splendor), and pride or honor (abhimiina, miina) .29 The power of Arjuna's
response to Indra in Canto XI derives largely from the many resonances
it has in theme, language and imagery with the earlier debate.'°
In the middle segment of the poem, Bharavi's primary concern is to
sustain the heroic mood in the context of Arjuna's penance, which is
essentially a topic conducive to fiinta, the "calm" mood, the ant.ithesis of
the energetic flavor of vira. Here the poet structures his rhetoric of the
heroic mood· around the incongruous image of Arjuna as the warrior
ascctic. At the end of the third Canto, Arjuna proceeds to the Indralu1a
peak31 on the Himalayas, dressed according to the seer Vyasa's com
mand; he is fully armed, and outfitted with a warrior's attributes, but
also wears the bark garment, antelope-skin and sacred thread of the yogi
" According to a popular vcrsr, the distinctive excellence of Bhiiravi's poetry is
"artluJga•ravam" (depth of meaning).
" Sec Shetterly, 1976, Chapter 11, for a discussion of th~ speeches.
" Ibid., pp. 168- 174, and 215- 222, for an analysis of the poet"s use of the technique
(unusual for maM/ciiuya upto Bhiiravi) off ocusing on a specific concept (here, P••Ulo), over
several verses in a sequence. with many verbal echoes, as a rhetorical strategy in Arjuna's
speech (Kirii.IOrjuniya Xl.37-79).
" The Maliiibhiirata does not idrntify th• Himalayan peak by this namr, which means
"Indra's post or pillar". The difference bctwrcn the location of lndralu1a in Bharavi and
latrr poets is noted below.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
222 INDIRA V. PETERSON
or ascetic who has undertaken a vow (vrata). Arjuna's appearance is
puzzling and disturbing to the foresters and ascetics who dwell in the
Himalayas; they suspect him of performing penance with some evil
purpose in mind, like the many demons who have wrested boons from
the gods by the power of their ascetisicsm, which threatens the gods. As
Arjuna's ascetic practices grow in severity, the heat generated by them
threatens to consume the universe.32 Bharavi makes full use of the
dramatic possibilities of these circumstances.
Indra, his nymphs, and Siva's messenger, who seek to thwart the
hero's purpose by shaking his resolution, suggest that the two sorts of
power Arjuna combines in his Arjuna's warrior-ascetic persona are
inherently antithetical. Indra, who approaches Arjuna disguised as a
brahmin ascetic, poses the problem thus in his address to Arjuna:
Xl.15. Why are you clad in armor,
like a warrior ready for battle?
Ascetics wear only deerskin and bark.
16. And if you are truly detached,
and seek liberation,
why this fierce bow, these two mighty quivers,
on the body of a man
who would harm no living creature?
17. If you are indeed a renouncer,
this sword of yours, as fearsome to mortals
as Death's own arm,
docs not convince me
of your peaceful thoughts.
18. Surely you seek to vanquish your foes!
Where is a symbol of anger, and where are men of peace?
Where is a weapon, and where are renouncers?
The message is clear: men undertake the peaceful vows of asceticism
striving for final release, not for worldly and violent ends such as victory
over enemies; Arjuna's incongruous appearance the incongruity
reflect~
of his means with his ends. In the arguments of Indra and the hero's
other interlocutors, which seem to express the Buddhist criticism of the
brahmanical practice of tapas (asceticism) as a means to achieving
worldly goals," the peaceful way of life is presented as an alternative to
" The rcoult of the enonnow quantity ofheat·energy·powcr (tapas) stored up through
ascetic discipline; the standard effect of extreme tapas.
" See Sheucrly, 1979, Chapter Ill, pp. 305- 341.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KIRATA 223
the violent dJumna of the warrior, and Jania offen a powerful contrast to
the heroic mood.
However, by the end of the segment Bharavi has established that, far
from being incompatible with Arjuna's heroic goal, his asceticism is an
essential component of his nature and endeavor as a warrior. The vi'ra
rasa comes into its own in Arjuna's spirited defence of his dJumna as a
warrior (kfatra-dliarma). The hero explains that his ascetic vow is a
temporary one with a limited purpose; not for him is the dharma of a
renouncer, leading to final release, however covetable that end may be.
As a kfatriya (warrior) who has set out to restore the honor of his king
and family, Arjuna must fulfil his duty by winning weapons from the
gods. Even molqa (ultimate release), which is the ultimate goal towards
which man must strive, becomes a distracting temptation which, if
attained before the proper time, i.e., before one has duly discharged one's
duties (dliarma), will render one's life a failure. Therefore, Arjuna rejects
even the offer of liberation which the god Indra, who is also the hero's
divine father, offen him."
Whatever the nature of his immediate activity, the hero cannot swerve
from his innate (sahaja) dliarma or SIJ(l·d/iarma (own-dliarma), which is that
of a warrior: "Men of self-respect stand by their own-dharma, and do
not transgress it"'$ The arms which Arjuna bean throughout his ordeal
are outward symbols and reminden of his sacred duty as a warrior; this
is implied in the ease with which Arjuna balances seemingly incompati
ble attributes and aims in his person and activity. In his descriptions of
Arjuna's penance the poet portrays the hero as successfully combining
the physical and spiritual attributes of a warrior and an ascetic: the bow
and arrow and the peaceful mien of the hermit, jaya (military victory)
and peace (Jama; this is the stable emotion of the calm mood); the active
power and splendor of a warrior (virya, ojas,jayalak.fT11i), and the spiritual
power of the ascetic (ttjas, tapolakfmi) (e.g., VI.22 and VI.32).M The
theme is sustained through the later cantos, for at the end of poem, the
" Arjuna, Kiratiirjwu)a XI. 76. "Mortov<r, how can I take up renunciation/ before its
due time, /when such a course would violate JMm14? / The ancients teach us I to take the
n"lfes
of life in order,/ and not violate thei.r sequence".
' "svadharmam anurundhante . . . mana.iilina(l". (Xl.78).
• VI.22. "At once he bore twofold splendor,/ one inborn, the other learned,/ a
warrior's superior power,/ and supreme tranquility". "saliaj1tarau jayaJamlul dadhatI
bibharimbabhiiva yugapan mahasi'. Compare: "dhimni tapooir;ya""'.J<114 yukt am"
("yoked with twofold splendor,/ from the white heat of tapas, and intense war might ... "
(XVll.48); also XJl.27.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
224
INDIRA V. PETERSON
jubilant Arjuna is described as representing the perfect synthesis of tapas
and war might:
XVIIl.47. The gods loudly sang the praise
of him who had gained his place above the worlds,
like the sun,
with his own fiery splendor,
and the incandescence of tapas (heat/penance) . . ..
In sum, through his depiction of Arjuna's penance and of the hero's
defence of his warrior-dhanna, Bharavi shows that Arjuna's ascetic
discipline is only a prelude to his final combat with Siva, which, as the
most appropriate arena for the expression of his sva-dluuma, is itself the
highest yoga for him. As for the penance, it is a spiritual discipline
necessary for preparing him for his encounter with God, which in turn
initiates him into his role in the righteous war against his enemies
on "Kuruqetra, the field of Dhanna"." These ideas have obvious
resonances with the Bhagavad CiJ4, where Krishna reveals himself as God
to Arjuna in the major theophany of the MaM.bhiirata, and teaches him
the yoga of war as the highest dluznna of the warrior. Since the ultimate
purpose of Arjuna's penance is to obtain divine weapons with which to
destroy his enemies in the Bharata war, Bharavi's reflections on war as
yoga clearly apply to Arjuna's engagement in the great war as well as to
his heroic-devotional encounter with Siva in the immediate context.38
These considerations bring us to the final combat scenes, in which the
heroic flavor and implications of Arjuna's penance are fully developed.
IV Heroic Action in Bhiiravi's Epic:
Kiratarjunfya XIV- XVIII
of
Bhiiravi and the epic tradition combat description
Though in its capacity as a book of Dharma the Mahabhiirata is a
repository of heterogeneous material dealing with a wide range of topics,
in its essential form it is "Jaya" (Victory), the story of the war between
" BluJgatHU! Cilii I. I, "dharmak"°tre kuruk~etre .. ." .
,. In the combat scenes, Bhiravi often refers to Arjuna as ••mimi"" (ascetic, sage). In
XVll.48, he describes the hero's combat with Siva as a varitty of ascetic discipline: "The
self-controlled ascetic (Arjuna),/ whose endeavor was about to bear its auspicious fruit,/
underwent, in the form of Siva's arrows,/ austerities (lef>t) akin to incantation and
fasting, / as he stood maintaining his ascetic uow of hnoism (oiravralam) / there in th< holy
/rmnilagt of balllt IJ>"'IY•'Q1)Qframaslha/)).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
225
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KIRATA
the Kuru princes.'9 Four of its eighteen Books arc devoted to detailed
description of the Bharata war, with large segments devoted to the
description of large-scale clashes as well as single combat between
individual heroes. The MaJrabharata offers a wealth of material for the
study of battle description as an epic genre, and, along with the
Ramayal}a, it is the primary source from which the later kavya epic poets
draw the inspiration for their own descriptions. Combat description in
the Mahabharata ranges from the depiction of massive battles, as well as
single combat between individual heroes. The great, bloody clashes
(tumula-yuddha) involve footsoldiers and warriors fighting from elephants,
horses and chariots, using bows, arrows, spears and other weapons.4 0
When the scene narrows down to the description of single combat,
besides the equipment of the average warrior, the principal heroes have
recourse to celestial weapons (divyiistra) given by the gods, such as the
Brahma.Siras which Arjuna wins from Siva. In the RamaylU}a, which
makes far greater use of the fantastic than the MaJrabharata, Rama and
the Raqasas fight with supernatural weapons which are capable of
creating magical effects and transformations. Battle description in both
epics is characterized by frequent reference to certain cosmic phenomena
(the sun and the moon) grand images from nature and the animal
kingdom (mountains, lions) and figures in mythology (Indra and Vrtra).
Warriors arc compared to the sun and moon at the end of a cosmic cycle,
or to Aiitaka, the god of Death!' Especially in the generic battle-scenes
of the MaJrabharata, there is an inclination toward the macabre. The
celebrated grisly images in the brief battle-description in Kalidasa's court
epic Raghuva'!lia (Canto VII), such as the headless torso of the warrior
dancing in the battlefield, vultures and jackals wrenching limbs and flesh
off corpses, and the heads of kings rolling on the battlefield like clusters of
,. S.e Sylvain Levi, "Tato jayam Udirayet'', trans. L.G. Khare, Annals of tht
Blrond4rkar Oritntal Rutarch lnstitutt I (1918-19): 13-20; and lrawati Karve, rugiinta; Tht
End of an Ep0<h (Poona: Desmulth Prakashan, 1969)
'°
For details about the art of war and other military matt<r> in the Mah411M.rata,
consult E. Washburn Hopkins, "The Social and Military Position of the Ruling Cast< in
Ancient India as Represented by the Sanskrit Epic", Journal oft ht Amnicon Orimtal Socitt;I
(volume 13: 181-329).
41 E.g., Maliiihhfirata, Goralr.hpur: Gita Press Edition. Dr0f}4panxm 101.
Krishna and Arjuna arc compar<d 10 twin suns released from 1hc mouth of Rahu (the
demon of eclipse), (5), two suns al the time of dissolution (7). thirsty d<phants ( 19).
shining suns (22), blazing with spl<ndor like Indra and Agni (fire, 24), mountains (25),
the sun and the moon (27), tig<rs (30}, and so on.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
226
INDIRA V. PETERSON
lotuses, are in reality refinements on specific images found in the
spectacular combat scenes in the Ma/W.hharata.42
In the Mahabharata the kirata episode is not used as the occasion for a
full-scale battle-description involving the repertoire described above. It is
a unique vignette. At the beginning of the combat, Arjuna and Siva
(disguised as a kiriila) engage in a fierce exchange of arrows, but the
kirala progressively strips Arjuna of his weapons- bow, arrows, sword
and armor, and forces the hero to fight with uprooted trees and rocks,
then with his fists, and finally, to engage in a wrestling bout.43 Bharavi
expands the simpler combat of the Mahabharata episode into a full
ftedged battle between Arjuna and kirata-Siva with all his troops, along
the lines of the war-scenes in the older epic. In cantos XIV- XV Arjuna
faces not kirala-Siva alone, but his entire army ofg lllJ(lS44 Jed by Siva's son
Skaiida, general of the army of the gods. In Canto XVI Siva and Arjuna
discharge magical missiles at each other, creating supernatural effects:
the serpents materialized by Arjuna's serpent missile are vanquished by
the Garuc;la-birds, sworn enemies of snakes, which are created by the
magical formula of Siva's Garuc;lastra, while the terrible fire produced by
Arjuna's Agneyastra is quenched by torrential rain issuing from Siva's
Varui;iastra. It is only in Canto XVII that Bharavi returns to the
narrative according to the older epic, describing the progression from
combat with bow and arrows to the fistfight between the opponents. The
wrestling bout, Siva's revelation of his true identity, Arjuna's prayer and
hymn of praise, the arrival of celestial beings and the lokapala (world
guardian) gods, the gift (from Siva) of the Raudra (Pii.iupata) shaft,
which is the embodiment of the science of weapons, and other weapons
(from the lokapalas), and Arjuna's return to his brothers in the forest- all
these incidents are compressed into the XVllith canto.
" Comparo the following: Kalidisa, Ragluwaf!l.{a Vll.7 and Malt4bMraJa, Drol)ll{HmHUI
97.7 (heads like lotu~); Raglu.. VII.49 and Dr.,,,..97.14 (carrion birds); Raghu. VII.37
and DrotµJ. 97.19 (the clash of matched warriors), and Raghu. Vll.51 and Dro'14. 97.12
(the trunk of a warrior dances on the battlefield). Note that all the parallels occur in a
sin,le Malt4bh4raJa passage. The numbering is according to the Gita Press edition.
· ' Biardeau notes that, in resorting to tree1runks and rocks, Arjuna appears to be using
the techniques his strong-man brother Bhima employs in combat with l/4kfaJa demons.
EMH (V), 1978, p. 156, n.(l). I would add that trectrunks and rock serve as weapons for
the monkeys in their battle with the Raqasas in the Riima.JdtµJ. In both cases the combat
"regr=" to increasingly "primitive" levels; stripped of his weapons, Arjuna must prove
his heroism at the primal level. Sec below for a discussion of the symbolism of the hero's
weapons.
" The gatµJS, Siva's goblin hosts, are transformed into a great army of mountain
hunters who accompany Siva as the kirii/4 chief.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
227
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KIRATA
Considered from the point of mahiikiiDya poetics, Bharavi's treatment of
the combat scenes appears to be yet another instance of the court epic
poet trying to expand the descriptive and topical scope of his poem. In
effect, in the kircita-Arjuna combat, Bharavi provides a combat sequence
which is longer and more complete in every respect than those which
appear in earlier mahiikcil!Jas." However, as before, it is far more
illuminating and productive to study what Bharavi docs with the subject
matter he chooses to include, than to simply note what he includes.
Bharavi's description of the combat is at once replete with concrete
physical detail and abstract to the extreme. Not only the human
participants in the battle, but also inanimate objects such as Arjuna's
weapons function as the emotional and psychological bases of the heroic
mood, or otherwise contribute to the atmosphere of the heroic. The
conventional cosmic imagery of epic battle-description acquires deeper
significance in the contest between the god and the hero. And, finally,
the very modes and terms in which the combat is depicted serve to
illuminate the complex relationship between the Great God and the
divine hero.
Arms and lhe Man: A Warrior's Identity
The imagery associated with arms in the combat scenes in the
Kircitarjunija suggests that Bharavi intends the symbolism of arms and the
hero in this sequence to provide a poetic solution to the riddle posed by
the image of the warrior-ascetic earlier in the poem. In the battle
episodes, Arjuna relates to his weapons as a man would to his close and
trusted friends. When they are not thus humanized, the weapons arc
portrayed as the abstract qualities which constitute a warrior's heroism,
the very qualities which formed the themes of the debate among the
Par;u;lava brothers and between Arjuna and Indra. Bharavi makes
" The life of the Buddha and the union of Siva and PlrvatI, the principal themes of
the Biuldhacaril4 and the Kum4tastvpb/unxi, made extended combat scenes irrelevant in
these epics of Asvagh0$a (circa fint century) and Kalidasa (fourth century A.O.). his, on
the other hand, remarkable that Kalidasa' s Raghuvalflfa, an epic with overtly martial and
heroic themes. • contains only two relatively short, sustained descriptions of combat, and
one stylized description of a campaign of conquest. The great battle between Rama and
Ravaoa, which is so spectacularly depicted in the Ramaya,,.., is treated in a brief and
subdued description in Kilidisa (Xll.84-100)); the focus of the description of Raghu's
campaign, in Canto IV, is on cultural g«>graphy and the mood of victory; the only full
fledged battle description occun in a minor episode, and concerns Aja's clash with the
disappointed suiton of lndumati (VJl.37-03). As I noted above, this is a powerful
passage which includes the entire battle repertoire of the Mahiihhifra14, with specific
paralleb in Dro,,..panH111 97.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
228
INDIRA V. PETERSON
particularly striking and sustained use of these metaphorical strategics at
critical points in the development of the action.
A fine example of the process of the humanization of the hero's
weapons occurs at a crucial moment in the plot, the moment when
Arjuna's tapas is interrupted by the demon Miika, who attacks the hero
in the guise of a wild boar (Canto XII). Arjuna is unaware that Siva,
disguised as a hunter, has arrived on the mountain in order to shoot at
the boar at the same time as Arjuna, leading upto the quarrel over the
arrow, and the subsequent combat in which the god will test and reveal
the hero's prowess. When Arjuna secs the boar charging at him, he
agonizes over his course of action (Canto XIII). It docs not befit him, as
an ascetic observing a vow (urata), to kill any living being. Yet the seer
Vyasa himself has commanded him not to yield to anyone who might
confront him in a hostile manner. Considering the maintenance of his
vow in strict accordance with the seer's command to be his foremost
responsibility, Arjuna decides to resist the boar's attack. Then he reaches
for his bow, which responds to him in the manner of a trustworthy
friend:
XIIl.14. When he had thus thought over (his course of action),
he took up that foremost symbol of manhood called "a bow".
Stringing it, he fitted it with a straight arrow,
which was like an honest counsellor
who knows the enemy's might,
and helps (his king) to act against him.4 6
15. Drawn taut by Dhanaiijaya (Arjuna) with determination
in spite of his physical exhaustion,
the great strung bow bent readily,
though it was so firm as to be unbreakable,
just as a noble friend,
never-failing in his steadfastness, readily responds
when a man who has lost his wealth
appeals to him for aid.47
When, having killed the boar, Arjuna runs towards the animal to recover
his arrow, he treats it with love and gratitude; the arrow, for its part,
" (He took up the) "foremost symbol of manhood'': "prathamaip paurup
cihnam'1.
47 The double meaning in this verse is built around such words as sthira- (firm,
steadfast), git114~al (with a bowstring/ endowed with virtue). The effect of such punning
verses is discussed below.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
229
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE l(/RATA
behaves as a modest and sensitive friend would:
XllI.32. Then Partha ran towards the boar,
wishing to recover that arrow
which had exhibited its prowess,
even though he had a great store of arrows
for one who has accomplished his task
is dearer to a grateful man
than one who merely holds out
the promise of future of deeds.
33. Like a favor done to a villain,
that arrow did not find a foothold
in the (carcass of) the beast,
but vanished into it;
Having shown its prowess,
it nobly faced downward (as if weighed down),
as though such a display of valor
were an embarrassment. ...
34. And it bore its lustre
as through this were its peerless glory.
As Arjuna stood there,
thoughtfully drawing the arrow out,
was he enquiring aloud of its welfare,
or clasping it in the warm embrace of his eyes?
The symbolism of arms as friends is the framework of Bharavi's
description of another crucial point in the action, the moment during the
kiriita-Arjuna combat when Arjuna discovers to his amazement that the
inexhaustible quivers given to him by the god Agni48 are, for the first time,
empty of arrows. The imagery of this long sequence of verses (XVII.36-
47) unfolds as follows: Arjuna dips his hand into the quiver (36); though
the quiver is empty, "like a friend suddenly gone bankrupt", the hand
continues to search (37); the finger gropes frantically (38); Arjuna is
compared to the world at the time of dissolution (39); ignoring his own
misfortune, Arjuna grieves over the emptiness of his quivers, as a good
man would when his benefactors are in distress (4-0); At a loss for a
remedy, his hand parts from the quiver with reluctance, like "a
nobleman from his friends ..." (41 ); and the quivers appreciate being
placed on Arjuna's back because, "when one has failed one's master in
.. These arc the inexhaustible quivers which Agni, the Fire-god, gave Arjuna, at the
burning of Khao<;tava forest (Malt4bhara1a, Book I).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
230
INDIRA V. PETERSON
his hour of need, to remain in front of him is impudence". The
personification of the quivers is doubly effective because of the remark
ably slow pace of the description. In this sustained descriptive segment
which is stylistically unique even in the tradition of court poetry (in
which detailed and leisurely description is the norm), Bharavi more than
describes an event; he paints a portrait of a human relationship, with all its
psychological nuances.
The consistent personification of arms as a hero's friends is only one of
the many threads which link such verses as the above to one another;
martial prowess or valor (paufUia), virtue (gu1J4), steadfastness, trust
worthiness (stlliratva), nobility, greatness (gurutva), all of which are the
qualities of the ideal warrior, are invoked in varied clusters in each verse.
The verbal resonances are multiple and complex: for instance, in
XIIl.32, a specific act of courage is attributed to Arjuna's arrow, which
is said to have "exhibited its prowess" (spliuiapaufUia'f!I saram), while in
XIll.14, the bow is called the foremost symbol of manliness (paufUia).
Both references recall the didactic verses on pa11.n4a (heroism) and pufUia
("a real man") in the speeches of the Pa1;ujavas (Cantos 11- 111) and of
Arjuna (Canto XI). The verses gain in depth and scope through the
double-entendre which Bharavi intends with respect to most of the above
concepts and words. Gul}a is not only "virtue" but also "a bowstring";
guru: "strong, mighty, noble", also "heavy"; and stllira is "firm, hard", as
well as "steadfast, stable". The same words can thus simultaneously
apply to a hero's weapons, to his noble friends, and to the hero himself:
verbal identification effects a metonymical relationship between arms
and the man. Furthermore, the symbolism gains in power and authen
ticity because, as with his other devices, the poet makes sustained use of
such punning words in identical or related contexts, as exemplified in the
following verse from a different scene in the battle cantos:
XIV.28. Some (of Siva's troops)
stood leaning on their strung bows
as they would on worthy friends
who are noble and steadfast
because of their birth in the best of families,
(in the case of the bows, "from the best cane" <va'f!l.fa> ),
and whose strength is tried and true
from long acquaintance.
Here, as in the verses on Arjuna's arms, the words guru, sthira and gul}a
apply to both bows and friends.'9
•• See also XVll.29 (iju1agll1)Q) and XIIl.33 (gurutvat).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KIRATA 231
In the KiratarjU11iya, the likening of weapons to a warrior's attributes is
as frequent as the conception of arms as friends, as can be seen in the
following examples, also drawn from turning points in the combat: The
first verse rounds off a long sequence of connected verses which depict the
first impression Siva's troops get of Arjuna; the second marks the point in
the combat where Arjuna, having lost his bow and arrow, reaches for his
sword.
XIV.37. (Siva's troops beheld Arjuna)
leaning on his bow, his means
for overcoming hostile forces,
as if on his inflexible courage,
adhering to his t.rue nature (courtesy),
and yet invincible, like the ocean
unmoving without a breath of wind.)<)
XVIl.55. Then he grasped as his last resort
a man's ultimate means for achieving his goals,
that which is invincible by enemies,
that treasure-house of war-might,
the mighty sword,
as though it were his pride embodied.
) J
In other verses, Arjuna's arrows are compared to political strategies
(upaya; XIV.52), or to his heroic energy (utsiiha; XIV.57), while the
weapons of his opponents in battle arc likened to the fruit of action
(kriyaphala) nullified by time and fate (kala, krtanta; XIV.51 and
XVl.29). When Arjuna discharges the serpent-missile at Siva, he wards
it off with his GaruQa missile, just as a king counters the divisive tactics of
his enemy with naya (political strategy; XVl.42). In canto XVII, Siva's
attempts to parry Arjuna's arrows are compared, in technical terms, to
the tactics of a general in battle.)2
As embodiments of heroic qualities, a warrior's weapons symbolize his
identity. This is why Arjuna cannot abandon his weapons even during
his penance; having undertaken penance in order to destroy his enemies,
in accordance with his dharma as a warrior, he must continue to bear the
symbols of his identity as a warrior, preserving his heroic persona even in
the context of asceticism. The enigma of the warrior-ascetic is solved in
the multiple identifications in the combat cantos.
)() ''As if on his inflexible courage'': ''dhairya iva anapiyini''.
" "As though it were his pride embodied": "saksad ahalJlkaram iva".
" XVJl.27.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
232
INDIRA V. PETERSON
The imagery of arms in the combat scenes in the Kiriitarjuniya covers
the entire domain of conflict, kin8'hip, and heroic conduct. In these
contexts the description of heroic action turns into a philosophical
contemplation and a psychological exploration of the nature of heroism
itself. When the hero's arms arc humanized, the focus is on the emotional
bases of the heroic; when weapons are likened to combat tactics and
aspects of heroic action, the focus is on the metaphysical implications of
the action. In the latter case in particular, the description becomes
reflexive; action is compared to the thoughts and feelings which motivate
it, that is, action is, in a sense, compared to itself. A sustained abstraction
and intellectualization of action is the hallmark of Bharavi's battle
description; in sheer scope and consistency, there is nothing comparable
in kiivya battle description before him. It is perhaps this quality that
made F.W. Thomas remark that, in Bhiiravi we have" ... a hard
thinking poet, in whom we feel at work a certain intension of will" .)3
Whether this is indeed the essence of Bharavi's style is hard to tell, since
we do not have any other works by him. But this much we can say with
certainty: the poet's unique descriptive style is well suited to his heroic
and philosophical theme, and makes the Kiriitiirjuniya a genuine study in
the heroic mood.
Cosmic lmagtry in the Battle Scenes in the Kiriitarjun'iya
It is not surprising that the Sanskrit poets speak of war, and the general
devastation brought about by war, in terms of cosmic dissolution. As I
noted earlier, reference to the cosmic gods of the Hindu triad (Siva,
and Brahma), and images connected with cosmic dissolution
Vi~i;iu
and recreation (pralaya) are common in battle descriptions in the
Mahiil>hiirata. Madeleine Biardeau and Alf Hiltebeitel have sh...>wn that
the imagery of pralaya (the dissolution at the end of a cycle of cosmic
time) has a special significance in the case of the Bharata war, which not
only rtsemhlts the end of a Yuga, (a cosmic Age), but marks the actual
end of one: "the Mahiil>hiirata, which tells about the end of the yuga
previous toourand involves an avatiira < Krishna>, incorporates a variety of
rich and perhaps very ancient, eschatological symbolism".>< Hiltebeitel
" F.W. Thomas. Review of Carl CappcUcr's Gcnnan translation of the Kirotiirjuniya
(Harvard Oriental Series 15, I 9 I 2), In JouJ'711JI of tht Royal AJialit Socitry ( 1917: 869-77), p.
870.
" Alf Hihebdtcl, The Rilv4l of Baille: KruhNJ in the Mah4bhiuala (Ithaca: Cornell
University Ptess, I976), p. 299. Hiltebeitel discu$SC$ this eschatological symboli5m with
of
reference to Madeleine Biardeau 's work, in Chapter 12 of Tht Ri1U41 Ba11Lt. On p. 310,
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KIRATA 233
has also shown that, in especially "charged" situations in the Mahah
Jiiirala, such as the death of Kan;ia," or the chief episode in the Sauptika
Parvan where the warrior ASvatthaman, possessed by Siva, raids the
sleeping camp of the Pa1;u;lavas, rendering death and destruction on a
mass scale, the cosmic imagery functions as a coherent symbol system,
'6
referring to "background myths", such as the destruction of the three
cosmic "cities" of the demons (tripura) by Siva.)' In such scenes, the
comparison of warriors with Siva, or with Antaka (or Yama, god of
Death) has precise cosmic and mythic nuances. In the Kiratarjunfya,
Bharavi makes sparing use of cosmic imagery in the conventional
manner,'6 but the evocation, in specific mythological and imagistic
detail, of Siva as Destroyer, or V~i;iu in one of his cosmic incarnations, is
reserved for significant moments in the psychological development of the
plot, and is presented with a controlled elegance.
When Siva, disguised as a kirata, arrives on the scene of the boar's
attack on Arjuna, this is how he sees the hero, who is poised to shoot an
arrow at the beast:
XIII.17. Siva beheld him with wonder,
as he stood with bow drawn taut
in a full circle,
as if he were Siva himself,
terrifying his enemies
as he stood poised
to destroy the three cities.
Here Siva sees Arjuna as imbued with his own qualities as the destroyer,
epitomized in the image of himself as the Destroyer of the three cosmic
cities or citadels of the demons, in the most celebrated myth of cosmic
destruction involving Siva. Several levels of meaning are suggested. In
his aspect as the warrior who destroys his enemies, Arjuna is identified
with Siva, the divine Destroyer. In the specific context of the kirata tale,
Hiltebeitel notes that, of the three typ<S of cosmic dissolution (on different scales of
cosmic time) which the Puranas describe, the Mah4bh4rala imagery is concerned with the
naimillikiiJWal'fl'I or "the occasional rcabsorption", n:lated to theyuga cycle. for specific
n:fercnccs and further discussion, sec Hiltebeitel, 1984 ("The Two K11Qas on One
Chariot. .." ), especially p. 7. on p. 310.
" Hiltebeitel, 184, "The Two K11Qas . .."
" Hiltebeitel, 1976, Chapter 12.
" Ibid. Chaptcn 6 and 12. for the myth of the Oc$truction of the three cities, see
Wendy D. O'flahcrty, Hindu Myths (Penguin, 1975), pp. 125-137.
,. E.g., In XIV.50, Arjuna is compared to "the end of the kalpa" (the time of
diJSOlution itself).
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
234
INDIRA V. PETERSON
the very purpose of the hero's encounter with kirata-Siva is the ultimate
destruction of his enemies in the Bharata war. Through this encounter,
Arjuna is to receive the boon of the Pasupata, Raudra (or Brahma5iras)
weapon, which is, as its names indicate, the embodiment of the destruc·
tive aspect of Siva himself, as well as a representation of the cosmic role
of Brahma in conjunction with Siva as depicted in the myth of the three
cities.$9 In his persona as Nara, the human counterpart of
V~i;iu­
Narayai;ia, Arjuna himself forms the third member of the triad of gods
who participate in the cosmic process. Several pointed references are
made, both in the Mahabharata episode and in the Kiratarjuniya, to
Arjuna's identity as Nara of the Nara-Narayai;ia pair, which, embodied
in the partnership of Krishna and Arjuna, directs and effects the action
of the Mahabharata war.ro Thus, in this image of the Great God seeing
"himselr' in the warrior, Bharavi brings together several strands of the
meaning of the kirala story: the cosmic implications of Arjuna's endeavor,
the terrible destruction to come, and the complex relationship between
Siva and the hero.
Yet other themes are brought into play in a sequence of images in
which Arjuna is portrayed as he appears to Siva's troops when they come
upon him standing over the carcass of the giant boar which he has slain
with his arrow.
(The gaT}llS saw Arjuna)
XIV.38. Endowed with the splendor
of the god of Death,
because he had slain the boar
which lay at his feet,
Like Pa5upati, Lord of the Beasts,
standing over the victim (paJu)
placed before him
by priests who have invited him
to the sacrifice, ...
40. Broad-necked,
with the shoulders of a mighty bull
and a chest massive as a stone wall,
" Raudra: "the t<rrific", connected with Siva as Rudra; Pii.Jupata: "rdated to Siva as
Paiupati, Lord of Beasts (and god who dismembers the sacrificial victim < pasu > ?) ";
Bralima.firas: "The Head of Brahma". In the triple ciy myth, Brahma
is Siva's charioteer. On the significance of Brahma's role, sec Hiltebeitel, 1984, pp. 15-
26.
"'Malr4bnarata 111.37.29, 11.41.1, 2, 3. Kiriitiirjuni.J<I VI.19, Xll.33 and 35, and
XIV.41. Sec diS<:ussion below.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
235
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KIRATA
Looking like the Great Cosmic Boar
about to lift up overburdened Earth
out of the great ocean, ...
41. Dark as an emerald, with a noble figure,
surpassing all creatures in splendor,
Like the Primal Person
manifest in human form
like the sun mirrored in water. ...
In XIV.38, a concrete object in the scene, the carcass of the demonic
boar, becomes the pivotal point of the cosmic imagery, allowing the
stereotyped likening of the warrior to the god of Death to unfold into a
foreshadowing of Arjuna's role as agent of destruction in the Bharata
war. The comparison with Pa5upati, Siva as Lord of the Beasts, suggests
the terrible Pasupata weapon, the multiform ofRudra-Pasupati, which is
Arjuna's goal: In the Mahabharata kirala narrative, Arjuna begs Siva to
give him " . .. that divine weapon, the dreadful Pasupata weapon, my
lord, which is called Brahma's Head, gruesome, of terrible power, which
at the horrible end of the eon will destroy the entire world. With it I may
burn down in battle the Danavas and the the evil spirits and
Rak~asas,
Pisacas, Gandharvas, and Snakes".61 Arjuna himself, standing over the
slain boar with drawn bow, is Rudra-Pa5upati standing over the animal
victim at the sacrifice, suggesting that the war itself is a great sacrifice, a
ritual for the performance of which the war-hero has been consecrated
and readied.62 I have by no means exhausted the meaning of this vivid
and complex image, but have noted only those suggestions which seem
relevant here.
A similar process is at work in XIV.40, where Arjuna is compared to
the Mahavaraha, in his incarnation as the Great Boar, rescuing
Vi~r;iu
the Earth from the Hooded ocean, in which she has been hidden by the
demon who has stolen her.63 The actual presence of the demonic boar,
" J
.A.B. van Buitenen, 1975, p. 302.
" On the identity of Arjuna, Pa5upati, and the sacrificial victim in the Molr4bloiiral4
kirata episode, see Biardcau, EMH(V), 1978, pp. 150-151. On Arjuna's encounter with
Siva as ~ii (consecration for sacrifice) for atmo-yajfla (sacrifice of on.,,.,Jf as the victim),
see Ibid., 149, and 155 ff. Alf Hiltebeitel' sheds further light on the implications of
Ar.juna's identification with Siva through his encounter with Siva in the Molr4bloiiral4, in:
"Siva, the Goddess, and the Disguises of the Pai;ic;lavas and Draupadi", History of
Rtligions, Volume 20.1 and 2 (1980:147- 174).
" On the myth of Vi111u's incarnation as the Cosrruc Boar, sec O'Flahcrty, 1975, pp.
184-197. On the symbolism of the boar as the Yaji\avarliha (The Boar as the Vedic
Sacrifice), see Biardcau, EMH (V). p. 151.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
236
INDIRA V. PETERSON
the anti-hero, no doubt suggested to the poet its converse, the Cosmic
Boar as the redeemer ofDharma at the end of the eon. The description of
the Earth as "overburdened" refers to the oppression of the earth by evil
beings such as the demon Miika. Arjuna's act of slaying the boar is thus
established as a prelude to his great heroic acts in the Bharata war, as an
incarnation who rids the earth of evil oppressors and restores Dhanna.
The suggestion of Arjuna's identity as an incarnation is fleshed out in
the last verse, where he is directly described as "the Primal Person
manifest in human form". This could refer only to Arjuna's being Nara,
the human counterpart of the Primal Person, Purup, who is also
Narayai;ia.64 Both in the Malriibhiirala and in the KiriitaTjuniya, Siva
explains the appropriateness of Arjuna's deeds in this episode by reveal·
ing that Arjuna is Nara, the primal hermit-warrior who, along with
Narayaoa, performed penance for thousands of years in the Badari
hermitage prior to taking up arms in order to save the oppressed earth
from the forces of evil.6 1
The effect of such images as the ones discussed above is to reveal the
hero's divine aspect, and the cosmic significance of his actions. The
exaltation of the hero is one of the strategics whereby the heroic mood is
developed in a kiiuya work; the exaltation of Arjuna is certainly beneficial
to the realization of the vira rasa in the final segment of Bharavi's poem,
but its effect on the final scene of revelation can be understood only by
studying the specific details and nuances of the poet's portrayal of the
hero's encounter with the god.
V Points of View: Ignorance and Knowledge in the Kiratarjunlya
Some of the details in which Bharavi's account of the kiriila·Arjuna
encounter diverges from the Malriibhiirala seem to be motivated by
considerations of purity of mood and the interests of kiiuya conventions. I
believe this to be the case with the absence of the Goddess U ma (Parvati)
from the final segment of Bharavi's poem. In the Mahabharata, the
Goddess, also dressed as a huntress (kirali) , accompanies kiriita-Siva to
the scene of the combat, and participates in the divine revelation which
Arjuna experiences; as we shall see below, Uma has an even more
important role in some folk versions of the tale. Madeleine Biardeau
" On Nara-Narayana in the Malr4lllriira10, see Ibid., p. 161; Scheuer, 1982, pp. 24-0-
44; and Hil!eb<:itcl, 1984, p. 6.
" KirOJarj•nl;ta Xll.35. "This man (Arjuna-Nara) and Acyuta (Krishna) have come
down to earth al the behest of lotus-born Brahmi, and live among men in order to
protect the world from being destroyed by demons (asuras)".
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
237
ARJUNA'S OOMBAT WITH THE KIRATA
suggests that the hunter-garb of the Goddess in the Mahabharata episode
indicates that she is appearing in her persona as the war-goddess,
Durga.66 Why did Bharavi omit the lady from his account? It seems to
me that he might have considered the presence of though
women~ven
the woman be the Goddess herself-to be an intrusion of the erotic on
the heroic rasa at an inappropriate part of the tale. My conclusion is
supported by two related facts: Parvati and Siva appear in full glory as
the divine couple in the poet's description of the Himalaya in Canto V;
and Bharavi's decision to provide the kiriita with an army of ltllJllS
disguised as hunters, instead of the horde of kiriita women who accom
pany him in the older epic, must have been based on similar considera
tions. There are a number of points in which Bharavi's inventions and
general approach to the final combat serve to highlight the unique
nature and circumstances of the kiriita-Arjuna combat.
An overview of the battle scenes leading upto the final combat in
Bharavi's poem reveals that, even though the poet seeks to establish
Arjuna as the ideal warrior-hero, and his encounter with Siva as the
perfect situation for the manifestation of the heroic mood, the structure
and tone of these scenes introduce other feeling-complexes into the
action. For one thing, Bharavi emphasizes the unreality of the combat in
a far more pronounced fashion then the older epic. We have seen that
the large-scale battles and the combat with supernatural weapons in the
Kiriita'ljunfya have no counterparts in the Mahabharata episode. Apart
from using these additions as occasions to compose fine descriptive verses
on spectacular topics, Bharavi puts them to good use in underlining the
superhuman and illusory quality of the combat. We are struck by the
absence of the carnage which characterized the real-life battles of the
Mahabharata. What might be called the main attributes of human, down
to-earth battle arc relegated to the position of becoming the subject of a
wistful, hortatory speech made by the general of Siva's army, when the
troops flee in the face of Arjuna's valor. As if to stress the hypothetical
character of the scenes portrayed in this canto, the speech is couched in
verses of the citra-kall)la type, in which the reader's attention is focused on
verbal and visual riddles, puzzles and patterns, and nuances of meaning
arc of incidental interest.67 The only person to mention and describe a
bloody battle is Arjuna, but his speech turns out to be a parody of epic
battle description, for he wonders why physical injury and bloodshed of
the sort one would expect are not occurring in a battle of this mag-
" Biardcau, E/\1H (V), 1978, p. 159.
" Se<:, for cxampk, A'iratifrjunf1·a XV.JO, 12, 14.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
238
INDIRA V. PETERSON
Finally, the extravagantly beautiful images in the fight with
nitude!~
supernatural weapons-ofs kies crimsoned by the fire born from Arjuna's
missile, and covered by golden-winged Garuc;!a birds created by Siva's
astra--also serve to highlight the unreal, illusotry nature of the battle.
The wonderful (adbhuJa} rasa created in these passages, a rasa which
enhances and nourishes the development of other rasas, both here and
elsewhere in the Kiriitarjuniya,69 is also clearly an important component of
scenes and situations of divine revelation, such as the one with which this
epic ends. Here, perhaps, is one of Bharavi's bridges between the heroic
and the devotional points of view. Throughout the action, Arjuna
plunges into combat with a vigor, sincerity and manly courage (virya}
which make the "hair stand on end" for the many human and celestial
spectators, even for "sages who know the true nature of things" (and,
therefore, must know that Siva intends only to test the hero, not hann
him).10 Arjuna's heroism is in no way called into question by the
understanding that this is not really a fight between equals, nor a fight
unto death. Bharavi makes it clear that the combat is simultaneously a
ma,
gmuine test of Arjuna's valor, and an instances of divine sport, on
Siva's part; he ensures this double vision for his reader by strictly and
carefully controlling the perspectives from which both actors and
audience view the events of the combat. In Bharavi as well as in the epic
episode, the power ofS iva's revelation depends on the delicate balance of
ignorance and knowledge on the part of Arjuna, Siva, and the audience.
In the Mahabharata, right from the beginning of the episode we know
through the seer Vyasa's speech to Yudhisihira-that Arjuna will receive
celestial weapons from Siva, Indra and the other lokapiila gods. By
contrast, Bharavi keeps Siva's role concealed both from Arjuna and the
reader till the end of the Xlth canto, where, after Arjuna has ably
responded to the god's challenge, Indra commands Arjuna to perform
penance in order to propitiate Siva. In the Mahabharata, when the
Himalayan ascetics, disturbed by the great heat generated by Arjuna's
intense asceticism, approach Siva for help, the god merely assures them
that he knows Arjuna's purpose, and will help him accomplish it. In the
XI Ith canto of the Kiriitiirjuniya, Bharavi uses the same context to reveal
the divine plan in its entirety to the reader: Siva gives the sages a
.. Kirat4rj1111iya XVI. 1-16.
" For instance, adbhuta enhances fanta and vira in Cantos VI and XII, and Jriigara in
Canto V.
10 Siva has invited the Himalayan sages to witness Arjuna's heroic deeds. These
a.sc<tics arc rather like sage-narraton of the Mahahhiirata, whose thirst for heroic talcs
seems to ~ boundless.
Google Original frcm
01girized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
239
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE K/RATA
detailed account of Arjuna's divine identity as the warrior-ascetic Nara,
and foretells the precise manner in which he, Siva, will test the hero's
courage, using the boar as a pretext. 71 He ends his speech by inviting the
sages to come and watch Arjuna's heroism manifest itself in combat with
the god in disguise. The seers, the gods, and the reader become knowing
witnesses to the events which follow, culminating in the boon of the
knowledge of the Pasupata and other weapons.
In the older epic, the hero fights with sincerity because he does not
know that he is fighting with God; it is precisely this sincerity which
pleases Siva, and compels him to reveal his identity. The MaJrijbfriirata is
well aware of the importance of Arjuna's ignorance; but Bharavi goes to
great lengths to preserve it till the very end of the combat, reshaping
even minor details to suit his purpose. For instance, Bharavi changes the
content of a brief sequence in the MaJrijbhiirata, in which Arjuna wonders
whether his opponent might be Rudra; in Bharavi's version, the hero
does suspect that his opponent is a superhuman entity, but no mention is
made of Rudra.72 Bharavi's careful use of epithets for Siva during the
combat sequences is equally illuminating, for here his purpose is to pit
Arjuna's ignorance against his own, and the reader's, knowledge of
Siva's identity. While the MaJrijbhiirata text refers to the god both by the
standard names and epithets of Siva (e.g., Mahidcva, 111.40., v.49), and
by reference to his identity as a kiriita (verses 45, 47), Bharavi refers to
Siva exclusively in his divine persona, as "the Lord" (Tsvara,
XVII.22), SalJ'lbhu (XVII.27, 51), Siva (XVIII.3), Smarari (XVII.30),
and so on. From the XVth canto onwards, there arc only three verses
where Siva is called "the kiriita". Significantly, these are the only three
verses in which we see kiriita-Siva through Arjuna's 9ts: XVI. I and 18
mark the beginning and the end of Arjuna's speculation about the unreal
nature of his combat with the kirii.ta. In XVII.25 the hero views with
misgiving the "kiriita chieftain" advancing towards him, "twanging his
bow to the left and right, as a mahout who has lost control over a wild
elephant would view the beast as it advances, flapping his ears in
alternation". We arc to understand that, to the hero, his opponent is
never anything other than an arrogant mountain man, albeit one with
superhuman powers, while, to us, the knowing witnesses, the "kiriita" is
always Siva, the Lord.
" Kiriit4rj""iya Xll.33-39.
" Mahiill/riira/4 111.4-0.28-31. Kirii1arj1111'i)la XVI. I ~25. Arjuna ends his speculation
with a reference to Siva as ••this savage, battlc·crazrd fellow''!
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
240
INOJRA V. PETERSON
What of the perspective of Siva, who is the director of the drama, as
well as one of its principal actors? As if Siva's omniscient speech in the
Xllth canto were not enough, at every stage in the combat, Bharavi
makes us privy to Siva's intentions and his reactions to Arjuna's deeds.
In this he departs quite radically from the MaMbhii.rata account of the
combat, which we see primarily from the point of view of the bewildered
Arjuna. In these contexts, Siva is portrayed quite unambiguously as the
gracious God of the bhakti tradition. We should recall that Siva's plan is
to demonstrate to the world Arjuna's "unparalleled, innate (physical)
strength" (XII.39 "sattvavihitam atulam bhujayor balam"). In accor
dance with this intention, throughout the combat Siva takes measures to
protect the hero from genuine physical injury, as in XIV.48:
Wishing to show that his opponent's valor
was quite invincible,
Siva shot a harmless arrow
at the mighty warrior
who stood parrying hundreds of arrows ... .
At the end of the XVth canto we are reminded that Arjuna's valor is
both genuine and a function of Siva's grace:
XV.53. As they watched the valiant deeds
of splendid prince Arjuna,
which were thus displayed by Siva
even sages who know the true nature of things
were thrilled, and felt the hair on their limbs
stand up on end.
Siva himself receives the fiercest of Arjuna's assaults with supreme
indulgence, love, and delight. Two verses in Canto XVII reveal Siva's
feelings at the height of the combat:
XVII.13. The Lord of the gaTJ(ls
experienced great delight
at his extreme heroism,
just as the Himalaya mountain
welcomes the unbearably powerful thrusts
of Indra's elephant
when it rams its tusks against its slopes.
XVIl.14 Then he endured defeat for a long time,
though he is himself
the origin of all origins;
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE /(//UTA 241
it was as though he wished to extend to the hero,
in the form of mighty deeds,
an arm fit for bearing all his burdens.
The above verses arc followed by Siva's reflections on the absolute inner
necessity of a hero to prove himself in combat; the vignette ends with the
god's resolve to further engage Arjuna in furious battle, in which neither
opponent would have a clear advantage-all in the cause of Arjuna's
glory, which is here likened to the white crescent moon on Siva's own
head.
XVII.18. Wishing to create, among the hero's enemies,
a reputation for him
white as the streak of moon on his own head,
Sarpbhu proceeded to engage
in a systematic pattern of combat,
in which each experienced
victory and defeat by turns.
In the next stage of the combat, Arjuna unwittingly experience the
effect of Siva's love.
XVIl.33. The hermit found Siva's arrows delightful,
like the kind counsel of good friends,
for they were sent with his welfare in mind,
and did not wound him
in any critical spot.
At the end of this canto Arjuna has been stripped of all his weapons,
including his bow, and has resorted to rocks and tree trunks in his efforts
to ward off his opponent. The loss of weapons implies the ultimate crisis
of identity for the hero. Finally, in despair, he strikes at Siva's chest,
which is like "a golden rock'', with his bare fists. The final verse in the
canto likens Siva's reaction to an indulgent father's re.sponse to the
childish anger of an only son:
XVII.64. As a father indulges even rude acts
on the part of his dear son,
an only child who has climbed up on his lap,
so Smara's enemy endured
even the impertinence of the Pa1;u;iava,
who had come to him seeking a warrior's prowess,
a means to fame and royal glory
beyond the reach of his foes.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
242
!NDIRA V. PETERSON
This verse reminds us of the imagery of early (5th-6th centuries A.O.)
Tamil Saivite bhakti hymns, in which the saints call out to Siva as the
loving father who forgives their transgressions." In the context of the
Mahabhiirata narrative, there is also an implied contrast between the
paternal pride Indra feels in Arjuna's valor when he passes Indra's test
with flying colors (Kiriitarjunfya, cantos VI and XI), and Siva's fatherly
pride. Indra is, after all, Arjuna's natural father, and though he is
himself a god, his feeling for the hero is of a mundane order. Siva, on the
other hand, is the bhakti God who loves his devotee like a son.
In Bharavi's poem, as in the Mahabharata, the climax of Arjuna's
heroic activity prompts, and coincides with, the complete revelation of
Siva's love for Arjuna as his devotee. The moment is captured in three
verses early in the XVIIIt h canto.
XVlll.12. When the Conqueror of the Three Cities
took a flying leap into the sky,
Arjuna of the monkey-banner
swiftly leaped up after him,
depressing the earth with his feet,
and seized the god's feet in mid-air.
XVIll.13. Astonished by that deed,
the Highest person, Ender of all deeds,
at once gathered into his arms the peerless hero,
who was about to throw him on the ground,
and pressed him to his chest
in a tight embrace.
XVIIl.14. Not with his penance was the Lord as pleased
as with his boundless courage.
How much more valuable is inborn courage
to a good man
than a host of learned virtues!
The significance of Arjuna's gesture in the first verse is obvious: by
grasping the Lord's feet (carlll}llgraluuµi), Arjuna unwittingly assumes the
position of the devotee or suppliant who has taken refuge (.faratµ'igata,) in
the Lord. In the theology of bhakti devotion, God, by definition, bestows
his grace upon any devotee who seeks him as his sole refuge.7 4 In
" E.g., Tirwnucai XI (South Indian Saiva Siddhanta Works Publishing Society
Edition), AC.P•tat TirulNltltiiti, 70; and Appar, Ttvarom, IV.15.11.
" Krishna teaches Arjuna the doctrine of refuge in the B/uJgavad Citii. See especially
Gitii XVlll.62-66.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
243
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KIRATA
Arjuna's case it is clear that the gesture of taking refuge, though
unconscious, is a genuine one, since it is the culmination of a steadfast
vow of yoga and penance directed towards Siva, as well as of resolute
action according to his own dhanna (sua-dhanna), both of which are
pleasing to God. Here is a bhalcti tableau which causes the Lord himself to
react with wonder (vismaya); the impact of Arjuna's act is captured in
verse 13, which begins with the word "vismita", and is marked by a
sudden change of meter." In verse 14, it is revealed that Arjuna's
heroism in combat is the direct cause of the Lord's pleasure, confirming
the equation of battle with dhanna and yoga for a It is only with
k~atriya.
this fact firmly in mind that we are allowed to witness the moment in
which Siva reveals his true identity to Arjuna, who immediately bows to
him in worship. At the same time, the hero sees himself fully restored to
his former glory, with all his weapons intact, affirming the fact that his
innate heroic splendor has never been in serious danger of being dimi
nished; it is his turn to display wonder (vismaya).16
In the presence of the celestial beings (including the lokapala gods) who
have arrived on the scene, Arjuna sings a rich hymn of praise (stolra), in
which he describes Siva as the supreme Deity (XVIIl.21-41). He ends
the stotra with two verses expressing his own concerns and wishes. The
first of these is a plea for forgiveness:
XVIIl.42. 0 Lord of all Knowledge,
Please forgive this misdeed
which I have committed in ignorance!
For you are the sole refuge,
even for wicked men
who seek shelter with you,
having opposed you when they were deluded.77
In the next verse, Arjuna asks for the means for victory in battle, the
ultimate goal (karya) of his penance. Siva and the World-guardians grant
him the Pasupata and other weapons. Towering over the world, ablaze
with the double splendor of asceticism and war-might, and commanded
" The venc begins thus: "vismi141} sapadi tena karmal)i . . . . " The use ofa single meter
as the carrying meter in a canto is the standard practice in m4'10kiivya. Kilidasa, Bharavi,
and poets after them do have one or more cantos in which they use a variety of meters, as
docs Bhiravi in the final canto of his epic, immediately following the scene of Siva's
rtvclation. However, it is unusual for a poet to sustain a meter for thirteen verses, and
then suddenly change to a plethora of meters, as Bhiravi don here.
" Visma)'Q is the stliii.Jiblt1JV4 (stable emotion) of the marvelous (adbhuta) raso.
" "upiyayau vismayom", XVlll.16.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
244 INDIRA V. PETERSON
by $iva to go and conquer his enemies, Arjuna returns to his family in
the forest (XVlll.47 and 48).
of
VI Climax: The Moment Revelation in tlu Kiriitarjunfya and other Versions
of
the Kiriita T alt
The precise nuances of the rasa-bhalcti configuration in the Kiriitarjum)a
are thrown into relief when we compare Bharavi's treatment of the
moment of $iva's revelation with other accounts of Ihis situation in the
kiriila talc. In the Maliiibhiirata text according to the Critical Edition,
when Arjuna is forced to engage in the wrestling bout with $iva, he
rapidly loses strength. The Lord crushes and mangles his body, till the
hero is rendered unconscious, and his body looks like a ball of flesh
(pitµJa).
The Great God got a good grip on Arjuna and assaulted him mightily and
furiously, stunning him out of his wits. And so, Phalguna, looking like a ball of
flesh with his limbs mangled by the God of Gods, 0 Bharata, lost control of
his l>ody. Subdued by the great-spirited God, his breathing stopped and ht
fell down unconscious. And Bhava was pleased.
The Blessed Lord said:
Phalguna, I am pleased with your gallantry and endurance. There is no
Bho~, bho~,
baron < ktatriya > like you! Your splendor and miru, and our might, have been matched
(samam) Wday, prince sans blame. lam pleased with you, strong-armed bull
among men, set eyes on me! I shall give you eyesight, wide-eyed hero!"
In the above account, as in Bharavi's, $iva responds specifically to
Arjuna's heroism, rather than to any devotional acts, including his
penance itself. In the Mahiibhiirata he explicitly identifies the source of his
pleasure as Arjuna's "gallantry and endurance" (viryel}iinma dhrtyii ca),
and declares that Arjuna is the ideal warrior-hero, a prince whose
heroism in the kiriita combat has rendered him equal to $iva himself in
splendor and might (ttjas and ulryam). By undergoing the test of heroism,
by persevering in the face of the loss of all his own weapons, Arjuna has
become qualified to receive $iva's mighty weapon of destruction. In
spirit, Bharavi's interpretation is very close to the older epic on these
points. Why, then, docs he change the details of the specific act which
triggers $iva's revelation? It seems to me that the kiil!)la poet's interpreta
tion of the event is different from the Mahiibhiirata's in a subtle, but
"J.A.8. van Buitenen, 1975, P. 301. Biardeau, 1978, and Scheuer, 1982, see the
reduction of Arjuna to a pi'14a (embryo)·like state as an integral part of the initiatory and
sacrificial symbolism of this episode in the Maliiibloiuata. Scheuer, pp. 232- 7, and
Biardeau, p. 150- 1.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
245
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KJ/IATA
significant way. The MahAbhiirata hero is reduced almost to a ball off lesh,
stunned out of his wits, deprived of bodily control and consciousness; in
short, he is subdued, if not soundly dtfealld, in combat by kirata-Siva.
Bhliravi's Arjuna, on the other hand, is not only fully conscious at this
critical moment, but also tireless, uninjured and vigorous; he has all but
gained the upper hand in the battle, for, having seized his opponent by
the feet, he is about to dash him to the ground. In terms of combat, the
near-devotional gesture of foot-grasping actually signifies a potential
victory for the hero; it is only after this moment that Siva reveals himself,
and Arjuna is allowed to assume a thoroughly devotional attitude. As the
archetype of the invincible hero, Arjuna is not allowed to be defeated,
even though his opponent is Siva himself.
The text of the Critical Edition is not entirely representative of the
treatment of the critical moment in the Kirata episode in the MahAbhiirala
tradition, for the editors have rejected some explicitly devotional
material found in several important groups of MahAbhiirata manuscripts.
79
At the point in the narrative, at which Arjuna becomes unconscious,
these manuscripts contain a passage describing Arjuna worshipping Siva.
In these versions, the hero lies unconscious for a short while (mulriirlam},
then, regaining consciousness, quickly makes a stha1}t/ila, an altar of earth,
at which he offers ritual worship to Siva.80 When in the course of his
worship the hero places a garland of Bowers on the sthaTJt/ila, he finds that
the flowers are miraculously transferred to the kirata's head, revealing
that the kirata is none other than the Great God himself.
Whatever be the truth concerning the textual authenticity of the
above-described sequence, it is clear that to include it would mean
altering the flavor of the passage considerably. In this case, an act of
conventional and ritual devotion is interposed between the warrior's
heroism in combat with the god, and the god's revelation of his identity;
Siva's response is not as immediately related to Arjuna's "gallantry and
endurance" as in the Critical Edition or the Kiratarjunfya. This version of
the sequence appears to be an effort to make Arjuna's deeds more
compatible with the behavior of the ideal bhakta (devotee), and to
subsume the climax of the episode under a type of plot common in the
later accounts of divine revelation in the lives of bhakti saints, particularly
" These include mamucripts from the North-western, Central and Southcm reccn·
sions of the MaJrabhii.rala. Sec Critical Edition, critical apparatus undcr 111.40.51.
" In early texu, a stltm]4i/a is supposed 10 signify an altar made of earth. The later
tradition assumes tha1 Arjuna wo,.,hippcd a linga. Sec below.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
246 INDIRA V. PETERSON
as found in the South Indian tradition.81 The result, however, is not
particularly convincing, since the purpose of the kiriita episode is to test
Arjuna's commitment to his heroic cause and way of life, whereas even
the most dramatic of the tests of saints such as the sixty-three Niiyaoars
of the Tamil tradition, arc intended to test their fanatic devotion to Siva,
especially as revealed in their commitment to the ritual worship of Siva
or his devotees. This is vividly illustrated in the case of the hunter-saint
Ka1;11;iappar, who plucked out his own eyes and offered them to the
image of Siva when the latter made his eyes bleed in order to test the
saint's devotion. Few of the bhaldi saints direct their acts against Siva,
even unwittingly, as Arjuna does, and all their actions arc motivated by
a complete, exclusive, almost fanatical devotional love for Siva.82 And
yet, while Arjuna does not fall under the category of the bhakti saint,
neither is he typical of the antinomian bhakta,83 the reformed sinner of his
own description: "the wicked man" who, "having opposed Siva when he
was deluded" (mohiid virodliya; in Kirat.iirjunlya XVlll.42, quoted above),
ultimately turns to him for refuge. Far from being the product of
arrogance or mundane delusion, his temporary clash with Siva is a
positive instance of divine ma, desired and brought about by the Lord
himself. The kirata story is far more powerful as a tale of heroism, ma and
grace, without the intrusion of ritual devotion at the climactic moment.
The folk versions of the kirata story endorse this judgment, demonstrating
that the heroic clements of the narrative, which arc so prominent in
Bhliravi's version, arc indeed the very soul of this talc.
Tiu Kirata Tale in SouJh Indian Art and Literature
In an essay published in the Journal of the Indian Socie!Y for Oriental Art,
T.N. Ramachandran suggested that Bhiiravi's poetic description of the
kirata-Arjuna episode was the inspiration for the many sculptural dcpic-
" Such as tho liva of the sixty-three Saivite Niyaoars, retold in tho Tamil Ptriya
P111iit/1Jm of CilWJlr (12th century).
" For a summary of the story ofKa1;11;iappar and other Nlyaolrs, see Yogi Suddhan
anda Bharati, Tht Craru/ Epic of S.ivism (Madras; The South India Saiva Siddhanta
Works, 1970). I have discussed the significance of some of these revelatory scena in my
Poems to Siva. Among the Tamil Saivite narrativa the kiriita story is closest to the
1
''conversion"' ofCuntaramiirtti, who quarreled with ~iva, who lated him in the guise of
an old man, and ultimately revealed himself.
" Such as the many demons of later Hindu devotional literature, who arc redeemed
by taking refuge in the Lord, even if it be for the wrong reasons. Sec the discussion in
Wendy D. O'Flaherty, Tiu OriginJ of E•il in Hitu!M Mytlioloo (Chicago: University of
Chicago Pras, 1976), Chapters 4 and 5.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KIRATA 247
tions of this episode in South Indian art from the 6th century onward."'
While it is likely that individual sculptures like the famed Arjuna's
penance were directly inspired by the KiriWrjWliya narrative, Bharavi's
version of the talc appears to have had very little impact on the majority
of sculptural representations. Nagaraja Rao has shown that many of
Ramachandran's examples from the Andhra and Tamil countries
appear to follow the Mahahhiirata version of the story.as Even more
surprising is Rao's finding that, at least in the Kamataka and Andhra
areas, the sculptors diverge significantly from both Bharavi and the
Mahiibhiirata in their depiction of the narrative, especially in their
portrayal of the scenes surrounding Siva's revelation. According to
Nagaraja Rao, they arc based on a local, folk version of the kiriita talc
which must have had strong currency in the Kamataka area for several
centuries after Bharavi.86 The salient points of this version are as follows:
Parvati, having heard that Arjuna was invincible because of an auspicious
mark on his back, expressed a desire to see this mark of Arjuna. This could
be done only when he was defeated and turned his back. This was
impossible, as Arjuna was invincible. So Siva thought of a plan. ..."
Disguised as a kiriita, Siva goes to lndrakTia mountain,17 where Arjuna is
performing penance; he also sends the demon Miika to the mountain,
instructing him to attack Arjuna. The kiriita and the hero quarrel over
the boar, and begin to fight.
During this fight, Siva purposely ftll in such a way I/rat Arjllllll came OM' him,
and Parvati, standing behind Arjuna, could see the back of Arjuna, with
broad shoulders and auspicious mark. She t/zm indicaltd to Swa I/rat she has
sttn the hack and IJU$fJicious mark hy raising her rig/rt /rand. Tlrtrt11.pon Siva rt~ald
his ltw form and Arjllllll htggtd his pardon for his ignoranct and I/rt consequent fight.
Siva bestowed the boon of Piilupata and Pirvati, the ailjaliwtra.•
According to Nagaraja Rao, a number of narrative sculptures of the
story depict the following sequence of frames for the concluding events of
the tale: Arjuna sits on top of Siva at the end of the wrestling match,
" Ramachandran, 1950-51.
" Though the influence ofBhiravi may b<O detected in a few details, the emphasis is on
the Moh4h/z4raJa version. See Nagaraja Rao, 1979, Chapter V, and plates.
" Ibid., Chapter V, p. 85. Consult plates and discussion concerning sculpturcs in the
Kcdiicrivara (Ha)ebid), Mallikarjuna (Basari)u), Siriviila Tivara, Kacjilr, and the
Piiganiitha and Viriipak~a (Panacjakkal) temples in Kamataka.
Nagaraja Rao, Chapter II, notes the identification of particular hills in Kamataka
and Andhra Pradcsh as Indralu1a. Bharavi might have combined a local lndraklla
tradition with the Himalayan location of Arjuna's penance in the Malz4hh4rala.
• Ibid., p. 18.
Google Original frcm
01gitized by
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
248
INOIRA V. PETERSON
while Parvati, dressed as a kiriiii, peers at his back. Both Siva and Parvati
appear in the final scene, and Parvati is often depicted as holding an
astra. As Rao points out, these scenes are perfectly in accordance with the
folk version of the tale, while there is nothing in the Mahii.bhiirata or the
Kiriitiirjunlya versions to support them.8 9
The element of filii, or play, is prominent in this version of the tale,
and the playful relationship between Parvati and Siva motivates the
action here, as it docs in many stories in the Puranas. However, the
revelation of Arjuna's heroism clearly stands out as the central theme
and goal of the narrative. After all, it is because the invincible hero will
never turn his back to anyone, that Siva has been forced to stage the
fight. As the gracious bhalcti god and goddess, Siva and Parvati take
equal delight in the revelation and vindication of the hero's reputation,
if
even it means letting him gain tJu upper hand in tJu fight. And here we have
the fundamental difference in the climax of the tale as told in the several
versions we have looked at so far. In the Mahii.bhiirata version, Arjuna
seems to have lost the fight when Siva reveals himself. It is not clear
which way the combat would have gone in Bharavi's version, had Siva
not revealed himself. But here, in the folk version, Arjuna has all but
overcome kiriita-Siva at the moment of revelation. Arjuna is port
rayed as the victor in his wrestling match with Siva in some of the
Kannada literary versions of the tale as well. In his Kannada epic
VikramarJunavijaya (10th c.A.D.), Pampa actually depicts Arjuna as
throwing Siva down, and attempting to throttle him, till he catches sight
of Siva's third eye, and realizes his error.90 Nagaraja Rao suggests that
there is no reason to attribute Siva's defeat to Pampa's Jaina sectarian
prejudice against the Hindu gods, since it is most likely that Pampa was
simply recording a version of the kiriita episode which was popular in his
time, and which is also reflected in the sculpture of the period.g'
Finally, we find in the Karnataka area several literary works in
Kannada dealing with the kiriita theme, some of which are bhalcti poems,
literary works whose primary intention is the celebration and expression
of devotional religion, while the others are epics or poems with a bhakti
tone and secretarian point of view. The most important examples of the
bhalcti tone and sectarian point of view. The most important examples of
the bhakti genre are: the Kirata-fila portion of the Sivatattvacintiima11i of
Lakka1;11;ia Da1;u;lesa (a 15th century poem) and of the Channahasavapurii11a
" Besides his analysis of individual sculptures, see the Epilogue, p. 90.
"' Ibid., p. 6.
" Ibid., pp. 89- 90.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
249
ARJUNA'S COMBAT WITH THE KllUTA
of the Vira5aiva poet Pa1,u;lita {1585 A.O.); and the
Viriipak~a
SabaraJairkaravilasa of another Vira5aiva, Sha<;laksharadeva (17th cen
tury), whose work is devoted exclusively to the kiriita story. All these
works closely follow the version of the story as found in the manuscripts
of the Southern Recension of the Mahabhiirata, adding a few details, such
as the identification of the location of Arjuna's penance as Indralu1a, and
the gift of a weapon (here called anjanastra) from Parvati. In all three
works, at the end of the wrestling scene, Arjuna loses strength, blood
oozes from his mouth; he decides that he must have committed some sort
of error in his daily worship of Siva (the term used for "error" or
"offense" is iiviipariidha, a technical term in the South Indian Saivitc
sects, signifying an offense of commission or omission, especially in ritual
conduct, against Siva). Then, as in the Mahabhiirata, he quickly fashions
a stluuµJila-according to these texts, a liilga image made of earth92-and
offers worship to it. As in the epic narrative, the flowers he offers to the
liirga arc miraculously transferred to the kiriita's head, whereupon Arjuna
recognizes Siva; when Arjuna has asked for forgiveness and praised Siva,
Siva and Parvati grant him weapons.n
Conclusion: Rasa and Bhalcti in Balance
When we recall that the Deccan/Maharashtra/Karnataka area is the
region where Bharavi must have flourished, it seems all the more
remarkable that so many variants or interpretations of the kiriita-Arjuna
story have persisted in the native land of the celebrated kiivya poet. The
fact that Bharavi's poem became known as a masterpiece docs not seem
to have induced Karnataka poets and sculptors to accept his
"Kiratarjuniya" as authoritative. The Kannada poets who interpret the
climactic scene according to their conception of the story as a narrative
of "devotion rewarded" obviously belong to the tradition of poets who
must have reworked this episode, to suit the devotional atmosphere of
their times, in the Southern manuscripts of the Mahiibhiirata. At the other
extreme are the local artists, who stress the heroic role of Arjuna to such
an extent that he is allowed a hero's victory before he becomes the
privileged recipient of Siva's grace. Bharavi seems to stand midway
between these two groups, allowing neither combatant to achieve a
decisive victory before the moment of truth.
In the final analysis, Bharavi's approach to the climax of the kiriila
Arjuna combat satisfies the demands of both rasa and bhakti. In the
97 The /iirga is drpictcd in somr sculptural representations.
" Nagaraja Rao, Chaptrr I, pp. 7- 13.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
250
INOIRA V. PETERSON
Kiriitiitjunfya rasa and bhalcti are in a symbiotic relationship. Each needs
the other for its fullest manifestation, and neither prevails at the cost of
the other. As the quintessential hero and springboard for the suggestion
of the vlra rasa, Arjuna cannot lose the fight, even in a battle which has
been "staged" by God, lest the rasa experience be disturbed. The hero
must win Siva's grace only in the heroic idiom, by a sustained exhibition
of valor. As the Great God who in effect accomplishes the hero's pur
pose for him, Siva too must remain exalted, his glory undimi
nished even by a pretended "defeat". Seen in th.is light, Bharavi's
climactic scene emerges as being no less a bhakti tableau than the scene of
Siva's revelation in other versions of the tale. In spirit Bharavi's vision of
bhalcti is closer, on the one hand to the Bhagauad CiJii, and on the other, to
the folk tradition of the relationship between heroes and gods, than to
traditions of "devotional" literature, for he chooses to portray the bhalcti
God as one who looks for integrity of character rather than an attitude of
abject submission in his devotee. So Arjuna must grasp the Lord's feet, as
a bhakta would, but he must be completely ignorant of the devotional
implication of his gesture. Siva, on the other hand, can and does
immediately respond to this gesture in both its heroic and devotional
meanings. The heroic-devotional tableau of Arjuna grasping Siva's feet
in mid-air is an apt metaphor for Bharavi's approach to rasa and bhalrti in
his poem: in this visual pun the poet achieves a creative suspension of the
two themes.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THEJAINA MAHABHARATA
J.
B.N. SUMITRA BAI ANO ROBERT ZVOENBOS
]aiM MahabhDratas in Sallskrit, Prakrit and ApabhramJD
(B.N. Sumitra Bai)
I. Early Forms
Popular legends of ancient heroic figures like Knr;ia and the Par;i<,tava-s
have entered into all the three major religious-literary traditions ofa ncient
India.' Thus we have Buddhist,Jaina and the widely known Brahminical
versions of these legends.
The Buddhist interest in these stories seems limited to a few anecdotes
which we come across in Jataka tales,' and their chief aim is to preach
some moral or the other. Originally, the Jainas too seem to have had a
similar attitude. Their earliest existing literature, viz. the Ardhamagadhi
canon, contains stray episodes from the Knr;ia-PaQ<,tava cycle of stories.
Here they are centred around the twenty-second
Ari~taneminatha,
Tirtharikara. The whole of the Yadava clan and the Par;i<,tava-s are
depicted here as his followers. Though we have here the earliest form of
the jaina Mahabharata, the purpose of these stories is to illustrate some
aspects of the Jaina theories of karma and metempsychosis.'
The Brahminical works, on the other hand, laid great stress on the
stories about the Par;i<,tava-s, exploiting their narrative contents to achieve
sectarian influence over the masses. Thus Vyasa's MaM.b/Wrata, its
supplement the Harivarr;tfa and other pural}IJ-s relied upon the
Va~r;iava
popularity of the stories of childhood and the Par;i<,tava stories as
Kr~r;ia's
bits of living folklore to gain immense popularity among the masses for
centuries together.• This popularity reached its peak in the Middle Ages.'
' Bhandarkar 1927 and 1965, Ray Chaudhuri 1936, Barnett 1977 discuss the
development of Kma tales into sectarian literature.
' Chatterjee 1940:37-40.
' Upadhye 1943, Introduction.
• Farquhar 1967:144--45 and Hazra n.d.: 109-14.
' Vaidya 1924:197-98.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
252
B.N. SUMITRA BAI AND ROBERT J. ZYDENBOS
2. LaJer Jaina HariV4fCl/a liurature
It was also during the Middle Ages that Jainism reached its heyday.
Especially in the southern and western parts of India long-standing
patronage from various royal dynasties made it possible for Jaina authors
and artists to produce great cultural achievements.• In this period many
Jaina authors, through their religious zeal and artistic genius, enriched
their literatures. The popularity of the Brahminical MaliiibharaJa and
Harivatpfa may have made these authors feel the need to provide thejaina
layfolk with their own versions, for we sec a large number ofjaina works
with Mahabharata themes emerge from the Middle Ages onwards. These
are the works which arc usually referred to as "Jaina Bharata-s" or "Jaina
HarivaqiSa-s", and they show an original way of narrating the Knr;ia-Pa
r;ic;lava stories in relation to the biography of the Tirthankara
Ari~tancmi.
All the popular figures of these stories are made to fit the Jaina
mythological molds of the Jalalcii.punqa-s, of whom Knr;ia is the ninth
vii.suMva, Balarama the ninth baladeva and Jarasandha the ninth prativii.
suMva.' Along with these biographies, stories of V asudeva, Kaqisa,
Pradyumna and others are narrated incidentally. All these characters arc
described as belonging to the different offshoots of one principal lineage
called Harivarpsa, named after the Vidyadhara prince Hari.8 The
Yaduvarp§a is a major branch of this Harivarp§a, and the stories of the
Par;ic;lava-s are introduced here as they are related to this varpsa. Such
works are called Neminathacarita-s if they deal only with Nemjnatha's
story and Harivarpsapural)a-s if they describe the biographies of other
ial.ii.kii.punqa-s as well. Whether they are purii.l}a-s or carita-s, they are
harmonious literary works, usually composed by single authors, unlike
the Brahminical purii.1J4-s. They show all the conventional features ofo rnate
mahalcii.vya-s.
3. Tiu Dtvtlopmmt of Jaina Harivarrzia Literature
As mentioned above, the Ardhamagadhl canon contains a good deal of
this kind of narrative material, characterized by the typical didactic and
' Saletore 1938 discusses in detail the po&tion ofJ ainism in India during the Middle Ages.
' Jaina mythology is mainly concerned with the biographies of sixty-three great men
or JalOkijpunqa-J. They are the 24 Tirthankara-s, the 12 cakravartin-s, the 9 vastuhva-J, the
9 baladrva-J and the 9 JWativasud<va-s.
' In the BrahminicaJ venion the Yaduvarpsa is called Hariva111!ta because Hari-Vi11;1u
K11i:ia took birth in that lineage. It has in fact been a tradition in India to name a lineage
after a penon of historic achievemenu. It i$ strange that the Jaina authon name the
lineage after someone of whom nothing is known but his name, whereas all the prominent
characters like Nemi, Ko\'la, Vasudeva, Baladeva etc. are just the descendenu of this
11Hari''.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
253
THEJAINA MAHABHARATA
edifying outlook ofthejainas. The narrative portions dealing with Nemi
and Kni;ia must have led the way to the later purii.tµ1 works.
(A) The Samavafariga gives a list of fifty-four Jalilifiun4a·s in which the
names of Arisiancmi, K111Ja and Balarama can be found.' Of course
Jarasandha's name is not found here as the work does not take into
account the nine praiiiatru-s.
{B) The Kalpasiitra gives the lives of four Tirthankara-s in a shortened
form. Here we get a glimpse ofNcmi's life: his birth, parents, renunciation,
tapas, nirviil]a, the number of his disciples etc. are mentioned here.10
(C) In the Uttariidlzyayanasiitra the section titled Raha,,nnijjam narrates
the events leading up to Nemi's renunciation (especially his compassion
with the victims for the wedding feast). RliJ'imati's devotion to Nemi and
her retirement from worldly life also form part of the subject matter of
this section. The relationship between Ncmi and the Yadava-s is dearly
stated in this story. 11
{D) The Nii.yii.dhammalcah.ii.o'2 relates the episode ofDraupadl's previous
life. Nagasri offered poisoned food to a Jaina monk and thereby caused
his death; as a consequence, she was born as a sickly poor woman named
Sukumarika who, not being sufficiently liked by any suitor, becomes a
nun. The sight of a harlot kindles passion in her, and she develops a
craving for amorous satisfaction in the next life. First she becomes a
harlot of gods, then she is born as Draupadi and is married to the five
Pai;i<;lava-s. Padmanabha of Amarakanka robs her, instigated by Narada,
but Kni;ia defeats him and returns her to the PaQ<;lava-s. After listening
to the accounts of their previous lives from Arisianemi, the five Pai;i<;lava-s
became monks and after severe penance attained liberation. Herc the
relationship between K11i;ia, Nemi and the Pai;i<;lava-s is stated. Here we
can also sec an effort on the part ofthejaina authors to make the Draupadi
story acceptable to their layfolk.
(E) In the Antagatfadasii.o" we find information about the destruction
of Dvaraka and about the Yadava clan. On being asked by Kn1Ja, Nemi
foretells that Dvaraka will be burnt to ashes by the anger of Dvipayana
and that wine will be the cause of it. He also reveals that Kni;ia, when
he is lying in the forest after escaping from the city, will be killed by his
brother Jaratkumara. Immediately after his death will be born in
Kr~i;ia
' Samavii;tiirigasiitra, sutra 246- 272 and 132.
" Kalpasiilra pp. 276-9.
" Uttaradhyaµnasiitra, upadt!a XXI I.
" !Vafa.d"ammakahao, ch. 16.
" Antaga4adaJiio and AnuJtarovava!;>·adasao, ed. M.C.:. Modi. 1932. Law 1949:36-49;
Upadhye op. cit. pp. 21-2.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
254 B.N. SUMITRA BAI AND ROBERT J. ZYDENBOS
the third hell. This story brings some mythological concepts of the Jainas
·to light. Being a viinukva, Kor.ta is bound to his karma: he cannot escape
from his fate by renouncing the world. He is also told that through loss
of karma he will become the twelfth Tirthailkara in the next ulsarpU,I era.
We find another story related to Kor;ia in this text,•• viz. the story of
Gajasukumara. Prior to Ko1.1a's birth, Oevaki had given birth to six male
children; through the divine grace ofHarinaigamdi, they were transferred
to the womb ofSulasa. When they had grown up they entered the order
of ascetics. When Kor.ta visited Oevaki after six months and she was
suffering because none of her sons was with her, Kooa propitiated the
same god, by whose grace Dcvaki gave birth to a son named
Gajasukumara. The story further tells us how this youth exhibited great
heroism and forbearance in penance.
In other chaptersu the canon mentions many personalities of the VoQ.i
race, such as Andhaka V11i:ii, Kuna, Madri, Pradyumna, Samba,
Aniruddha a.o. From these references we may conclude that by the time
these agama-s were compiled ( c. 5th cent. A.O.) all the major elements
of the K11i:ia story and some aspects of the PaQ<java talcs had entered
into the corpus ofJ aina narrative literature. No doubt KoQa Vasudeva
stands out as a prominent figure in all these stories; but nowhere do we
find the sort of deification which we find in Vyasa's MaM.bhiirala and
Harivaf!lia.
These stray episodes form more or less essential parts of later literary
works in both the Oigambara and Svetambara traditions.
4. Literary Works with the Harivaf!lia Theme
It is believed that Bhadrabahu wrote a work titled Vasudevacarita, but no
such work has come down to us. The earliest work that gives us a
comprehensive notion of what the Jaina Harivarp5a is is the Prakrit prose
work Vasudevahi114i of Sailghadiisa- Oharmadasa (c. 6th cent. A.O.), but
this work, as the title already indicates, deals mainly with V asudeva, and
the biography of Neminatha comes only in second place.16
Vimalasiiri, the author of the first Jaina RamayaQa, is referred to by
some as the author of the first Jaina Harivarpsa as well, but this is a
doubtful matter, and no such work of his is available now."
" Law, op. cit. pp. 49-50.
" Ibid. p. 51.
••J.C. Jain
1961 :#.
" Premi 1956: Upadhye 1969: 105 n.4; Chaudhuri 1973:39.
113~;
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
255
THEJAINA MAH1BH1/UTA
Svayambhu, the author of the Pa11tn1JCariu, has written a work known
as the Ril(Jumemicariu between A.D. 756 and 783 in Apabhramsa. This work
gives a complete biography of but it was later developed into
~ianemi,
a HarivalJlsapurar;ia by Ya .Sal)kirti. 11
The first independent work that presents a complete version of the
Jaina Mahibhirata/Harivalllia is the HarizJarpiapuriitµJ ofJinasena (of the
Punnita Sangha), in Sanskrit." It is an enormous work of 12,000 fwka-s
divided into 66 cantos. Both in the eminence of its subject matter and
the majesty of its form this purir;ia was intended as a formidable
alternative to the Brahminical Mahibhirata-HarivalJlsa pair, and thus
it set a model for later authors. Hence it may be not improper if we take
this work as representative of the essential Jaina Mahabharata.
The gist of the main story of Jinasena's work is as follows:•• In the
YaduvalJlsa were born two brothers, Andhaka Vnr;ii and Bhojaka Vnr;ii.
Andhaka Vnr:ii, who ruled over Sauripura had ten sons, of whom
Samudravijaya was the eldest and Vasudeva the youngest. Kunti and
Midri were their sisters. Bhojaka Vnr:ii had three sons, viz. Ugrasena,
Mahisena and Devascna. Vasudeva's love for adventure made him leave
home on some pretext. He wandered through many countries performing
many heroic deeds and married a number of uidyiidiuua damsels. On the
occasion of Rohir:ifs soaya'!lvara, he met his brother Samudravijaya on the
battlefield. Two reunited brothers happily returned to Sauripura. Vasudeva
had a son with Rohir:ii, who was named Rima and became the ninth
baladtva of that period.
At Sauripura, Vasudeva taught the sciences of arms to many princes,
among whom was one. Actually, KalJlsa was a son ofUgrasena
Ka~
who was forsaken as soon as he was born, hence he was brought up
elsewhere. On one occasionJarisandha, the sovereign of the Migadha-s,
made the announcement that whoever would conquer his enemy SilJlha
ratha would have his daughter as well as a desired part of the kingdom.
Vasudeva guided Ka1J1sa to achieve this end. Before giving his daughter
in marriage, Jarisandha found out the truth about KalJlsa's early life.
KalJlsa was filled with hatred towards his father and overthrew him with
Jarisandha's help. To show his gratitude to his teacher, KalJlsa offered
his sister Devaki (Devasena's daughter) to Vasudeva. Later KalJlsa came
to know, through the sage Atimuktaka, that Devakfs son would turn into
an enemy and cause his death. He kept Devaki in his palace and planned
" Premi 1956:383.
" Sumitra Bai unpubl.:147-493.
20 Pannalal Jain 1978, cantos llH;4.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
256 J.
B.N. SUMJTRA BAI AND ROBERT ZYDENBOS
to kill all of her sons as soon as they were born. Dcvaki, in the course of
time, gave birth to twins three times consecutively. Each time, god
HarinaigameSi replaced them with still-born twins, thus restoring all the
six sons of Dcvaki, who later became monks. With the fourth delivery
Dcvaki gave birth to a brilliant-looking son, Knua, who had all the
auspicious marks of a great man. Vasudeva and Baladeva took the boy
to the house of Nanda, brought back Nanda's newly born daughter and
kept her in Knua's place. KaQlsa was relieved to find a baby girl instead
of a boy, but he damaged her nose, lest any mighty man would marry
her in future.
Knua grew up in Nanda's village and performed a number of special
feats, exhibiting his superhuman powers. KaQlsa heard about this,
suspected that he was his secret enemy and tried several methods to kill
him, but failed. Finally he invited both Rama and Knua to Mathura on
the pretext of a duel with two mighty wrestlers: in that fight Koi;ia killed
Cauiira and Rama killed Munika. Kaqisa then rushed towards Koua
to kill him, but was instead killed by him.
Jarasandha was very upset by the murder of his son-in-law and came
with a mighty army to attack the Yadava-s. The Yadava-s, however,
knew that bloodshed now would be untimely and unnecessary, so they
secretly fled from the city of Mathura and went to the western coast.
With the help of gods they founded the city of Dvaravati and there they
dwelt peacefully. There king Samudravijaya and queen Sivadevi had a
son named Arinanemi, who was to become the twenty-second Jina.
Once the Pa1;u;lava-s, who were KnQa's relatives on his mother's side,
came to Dvaravati as refugees. They had a long quarrel with their cousins
the Kuru-s, who had cheated them at a game of dice and exiled them.
On their way the Pal)c;lava-s had experienced many adventurous situ
ations, of which Arjuna's winning of Draupadi in the svayarrivara was one.
KoQa welcomed them and granted them the favour of allowing them to
reside in his city. By that time had married eight princesses, of
Kr~i:ia
whom Rukmiui had given birth to a son called Pradyumna, who turned
out to be a great hero.
Jarasandha heard of the Yadava-s' well-being at Dvaraka, and in order
to punish them for their earlier crimes he declared a war against them.
All kshatriyas were divided into two groups. The Kuru-s sided with
Jarasandha while the PaQc;lava-s fought for the Yadava-s. The great battle
took place at In that battle KoQa killed his pralifatru
Kuruk~etra.
Jarasandha and established himself as the ninth nariiyat}a of that period.
Then he conquered in all directions and became the cakravartin of half of
Bharata.
Once Draupadi was abducted by a king named Padmanabha of
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
257
THEJAINA l>IAHABHifR.ATA
Amarakanka. Koi;ia went there along with the Par;iQava-s, defeated that
enemy and brought back Draupadi. On the way home Koi;ia was highly
enraged by a practical joke played on him by Bhima; he reprimanded
the Pai;iQava-s for their act and ordered them to leave his kingdom
immediately. Accordingly the Par;tQava-s left Dvaraka, went southwards
where they founded another city, and resided there.
Once the Yadava-s wanted to know who was the mightiest among
them. Koi;ia challenged Nemi's power but found himself a weakling, who
could not move a single finger of Nemi.
Koi;ia and the other Yadava-s had gone to Mount Raivataka for
recreation; there Nemi was chided by the wives of Koi:ia. He became so
enraged that he performed many superhuman feats, and the Yadava-s
were stunned by his power. Koi;ia thought that the usually dispassionate
Nemi had now turned passionate, so he arranged Nemi's marriage with
princess Rajimati. One day, when he was out in his chariot enjoying the
beauty of the forest while the wedding preparations were going on, he
saw a number ofa nimals bound together in one place: they were trembling
with fear and screaming helplessly for their freedom. He asked his
charioteer the reason why they were there, and thus he came to know
that they were meant for a feast of kshatriyas who had come for his
wedding. Feeling pity for the poor animals, he immediately ordered their
release, and he felt disgust with the kshatriyas' craving for worldly
pleasures. He understood that such a life would lead to nothing but
self-destruction and decided to follow the path ofr enunciation. He entered
the order of ascetics and performed tap as. After severe penance on Mount
Orjayanta he attained omniscience and then travelled to many places,
teaching the right path of dharma to the masses.
When he came to Dvaravati, the Yadava-s too sought his instruction.
After a detailed exposition of dharma, many of them heard their previous
lives from him and became ascetics. Then Baladeva questioned Ari$fanemi
about the time and manner of the destruction of the city ofDvaraka and
who would be the cause of Koi;ia's death. Nemi replied that after twelve
years Dvaraka would be burnt to ashes due to the anger of Dvipayana,
and that wine would be the cause; Koi;ia, while lying in the forest of
Kusamba, would be killed by an arrow shot by his brother Jaratkumara.
Depressed by this prophecy, Jaratkumara left the city and went to the
forest. Dvipayana too renounced the world and went to perform tapas,
resolving not to return until the fateful period would be over. Koi;ia
banned all drinking and preparation of arrack in his kingdom: the people
took out all their stocks of wine and poured them into a stonepit outside
the city. Delusion filled Dvipayana's mind; he returned to Dvaraka that
very twelfth year and stood outside the city performing penance.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
258
B.N. SUMITRA BAI AND ROBERT J. ZYDENBOS
Some Yadava princes, who had gone for an outing, felt thirsty, found
the wine in the stonepit, thought it was water and drank it. Intoxicated,
they wandered around, saw Dvipayana, remembered that he would be
the cause of their destruction and stoned him to death. With his last
breath the sage uttered a curse that would destroy the Yadava-s and
their city. Koi:ia and Balarama pleaded with him in vain. He died, was
reborn as a fire-god and began burning the city. Koi:ia and Balarama
could not succeed in saving the people.
Having lost everything except their lives, the two brothers, now
destitute, went southwards in the hope of joining their relatives the
Plii;ic;lava-s. When they reached Kusamba forest, Koi:ia felt immensely
thirsty and Balarlima went in search of water for his brother while Koi:ia
was lying under a tree. Jaratkumlira came there hunting, saw at a distance
something lying under a tree, and thinking that it was a spotted deer he
shot an arrow which pierced Kr$i:ta's foot. Koi:ia understood that it was
Jaratkumlira who had shot the arrow and that his time had come, and
he sent Jaratkumlira off to the Pai:ic;lava-s to convey the news to them.
Balarama returned with the water, and deluded by grief he wanted to
believe that his brother was still alive, hence he took Koi:ia's body on
his shoulder and wandered thus for six months. The Pai:ic;lava-s came to
console Balarlima but could not persuade him to part with the dead body
of Koi:ia; finally he was brought to his senses by a god, whereupon he
became a monk and performed tapas.
Then the Pai:ic;lava-s went to offer their respect to Nemi. He told them
about their previous lives, they gave up worldly life and after severe
penance they attained mok1a. Neminlitha too attained mok1a after severe
penance on Mount Orjayanta.
This is the framework on which different authors have based their works.
Though in essence it is always the same, smaller differences may appear
due to differences of sect, sangha, or oral tradition. The differences in the
writings may be found in the order of events, in the stories relating the
previous lives ofd ifferent characters, et cetera. Furthermore these authors
took the liberty to enlarge or alter, or blend in parts of earlier works.
5. Differences Between tlu Jaina and Brahminical Versions
Three main themes, viz. the biography of Neminlitha, the life of Koi:ia
and the story of the Pai:ic;lava-s, arc fused together in the Jaina version.
Nemi's biography more or less occupies the middle position, and before
and after his story the stories of prominent persons of the Harivarpsa arc
narrated. Here the stories of the Pai:ic;lava-s arc brought in. In Jinascna 's
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
259
THf.JAINA MAHABHARATA
work we see that by the time of Nemi's birth, Knt;ta and Balarama are
already established heroes among the Yadava-s. Ample space is given to
Vasudeva's adventures and to the stories of Knt;ta's childhood. It is only
after Nemi's birth that the great battle at takes place, where
Kuruk~tra
with Nemi's moral support Knt;ta is established as a suzerain. 21
The court episode where Ncmi is depicted as a powerful man helps to
establish his physical superiority over the Yadava-s, especially over
Knt;ta. 22 The story ofhis renunciation demonstrates his spiritual sublimity.23
Among the Yadava-s, those who follow in Nemi's footsteps attain
redemption, whereas those who do not arc destroyed.24
(A) The J aina way of presenting Knt;ta's character demands our
attention. Though he is recognized as a great hero and has been given
the position and dignity of a faliilciipurtLfa, the stories about his previous
lives try to show him as a crude and lowly type of human being, who
through his own righteous deeds attains the blessed state of a niiraya1µ1.
He enjoys immense power and all the pleasures that accompany such a
status. He is a mighty hero, an affectionate husband, a lovable father, a
bounteous and kind relative; yet his life is not whatjaina authors project
as a model, for such a life leads to karma and bondage. 2
•
(B) The Pat;tc;lava-s in these Jaina versions arc not the glamorous and
domineering characters that we find in the Brahminical versions. The
central battle, which in Vyasa's work symbolizes the eternal struggle
between good and evil, has been turned into a conventional fight between
a niiraya11a and his enemy, a pra1iniiraya1JQ. This shift enhances the position
ofJ arasandha, who is not so prominent in the Brahminical versions, but
drives the Pat;tc;lava-s into a completely insignificant position. Their
relation to Knt;ta is more or less like that offeudatories to their overlord.21
(C) The stories of Vasudeva and Balarama's affection for Knt;ta are
peculiar to the J aina Harivarp.$a-s. Vasudeva, who in the Brahminical
versions is an insignificant character, becomes a romantic hero, in the
imitation of Naravahanadatta of the BrhatkatM..2 The Jaina versions
'
become more attractive on account of these stories. Baladcva's story lays
more emphasis and depth to that character and brings more emotionality
into the Knt;1a story.28
21 Jinascna cant05 !">0-54.
"Jinascna canto 55:1-12 and 59-67.
"Jinascna canto 55:72- 127.
" Jinascna cant05 61~5.
" Jinascna canto 33:96-14-0.
,. Jina.cna canto 54:4--74.
"J.C. Jain 1977:1- 155.
" Jinascna canto 63.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
260 J.
B.N. SUMITRA BAI AND ROBERT ZYDENBOS
(D) The most important difference between thcjaina and Brahrninical
versions is the difference between the two world-views. The chief aim of
the Brahminical works is to instruct the people in achieving the four goab
in life (d llarma, artka, kiima and mok.fa). All these four need to be achieved
within the lifespan of a human being. Koi;ia, through his mundane form,
demonstrates this achievement in these works, and hence his lifestyle is
honoured, eulogized and upheld as a model. The Jainas, on the other
hand, uphold mokfa as the only goal in life, and this can be achieved only
through renouncing the world, as is demonstrated by Ncmi's life. His life
thus stands for the niurttimiirga, whereas Kni;ia's stands for the praurttimiirga.
Ncminatha had the ideal opportunity to lead a princely life, but he
renounces life in the prime of his youth. To him the cry of a few bound
animals sounds like the cry of all the souls that arc bound in satpSiira, and
just as he sets those animals free, he leads other souls to liberation. In
serving this greater cause his determination and perseverance elevate him
to the position of a leader of people, but the Yadava-s (who arc affected
neither by his way of life nor by his achievements) end their lives in
misery, as symbolized by the tragedy that befalls Dvarakli and K11i:ia.
This opposition between the praurtti and niurtti ways of life forms the core
of the Jaina versions. 29
6. Antiquiry of the Jaina Version
Scholars differ on the question oft he antiquity ofthejaina version. Alsdorf
thinks that the original Jaina reception of the Kni;ia- Mahabharata saga
has not come from the literary sources of the Brahminical version.50
According to him a really original Jaina version existed independently
of the Brahminical one. P.C. Divanji, who considers the Jaina version as
old as Vyasa's work, says that "the charge that the Jainas have made
out their puranic works from the Bhagavata sources on twisting facts so
as to suit their purpose must be dismissed as unfounded''." The fact that
the Jainas had their own versions of the Mahabharata since very early
times cannot be denied. But we should not forget the typical attitude
that Jaina authors have shown time and again: they brought into their
own religion whatever they found attractive in other religious systems. 52
•• Sumitra Bai unpubl.: 124-39; Divanji 1917-42:107-25.
'° L. Alsdorf as quoted in Upadhyc 1943:86.
" Divanji 1917-42: 120.
" Bruhn 196l:S-10.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THEJAINA MAHABHAIUTA 261
Some mediaeval poets, like Svayambhu and Dhavala,59 who wrote mainly
for laymen, openly express their gratitude to Vyasa's work. The works
ofS anskrit poets likeJinasena and Subhacandra,,. who wrote for pundits,
show a remarkable influence of both the Brahminical Mahabharata and
·the Harivatp./a. Two instances from Jinasena's work seem to presuppose
the Brahminical version:
(a) When describing Draupadi's svaya11wara, Jinasena writes: "When
Arjuna won the stake, Draupacfi put the garland around his neck. Because
of the blowing wind that garland blew over the other too.
Pa1.1~ava-s
Then a convictionless fellow cried aloud that Draupadi married all the
five brothers. But actually she was the dutiful wife of Arjuna: toward the
two elder brothers she behaved with respect as she would have done with
her father-in-law. She treated the two younger brothers as her brothers
in-law. Men may share their wealth, but not their wives. This is true of
even baser men; how can the noble behave otherwise"?"
The Svetambara tradition accepts that Draupacfi had five husbands,
but the Digambara writers either say nothing about this or will try to
modify it, as Jinasena has done.
(b) Similarly, Baladeva's question about the destruction ofDvariivali
and Knr;ia's death seem too artificial to be original. Questions like "after
what time will this city of Dvaravati be destroyed? Will it sink into the
ocean by itself, or will there be some cause for its destruction"?, "Who
will cause Knr;ia's death at the end of his life"?, et cetera'6 can be asked
only with a foreknowledge of events. As soon as we read this passage we
are reminded of another version, where the city sinks into the ocean.
(C) In the story of Karpsa, at the time of Knr;ia's birth, in the episode
with Kicaka Muni and other such passages we can easily recogni:z:e efforts
at what we may call "Jainifying" non-Jaina elements of the narrative.
Ghatge's opinion that these traits of the Jaina version may be "rather
due to the criticism of the Mahabharata itself and not due to anything
more original"," still seems reasonable.
Some efforts have been made to establish as a historical
Ari~1anemi
person,38 but nothing substantial has come out of this.
" (i) lrulnuz samappiu ooyaranu rasu bharahnp VIUtl!' vittharanu (Ri/(luuJnniUJriu of Svayam·
bhu); (ii) Hari J>411t/avQiia kahii caumuha vauhirp bhasiyarp jamha I taha virayami loyapiyO jf1)4 :JO
114sti damsat)ampauram 11 (Harivarpiapuriif)IJ ofDhavala)-quoted in Prcmi 1942: 172 and 392.
,. Doshi 1961:9-10.
" Jina~na 45: 135- 160.
" Ibid.
" Ghatgc 1950:43.
" Radhaltrishnan 1923:287; Sastri 1961:3; Zimmer 1961:225; K.C.Jain 1974:8.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
262 8.N. SUMITRA BAI AND ROBERT J. ZYDENBOS
7. A Survey ofJ aina Harivatpfa liUraturr•
(A) San.skrit UJ()rks
Apart from Jinascna's work many others with the title Hari'Oarri/apuriilµJ
have come down to us, written by Sakalakirti (A.D. 1464), Srutakirti
( 1496), Dharmakirti, Ra~r;ia, Snohii$ai;ta, another Srutakirti,J ayasigara
and another Sakalakirti.
Works dealing primarily with Ncmi's biography have been written by
Siiracarya (1053) and Udayaprabhasiiri (13th century), titled ){emiMlha
carita. Kirtiraja's work oft he same title (1438) as well as the NnniMlhacaritra
ofGut;1avijaya ( 1611) and many more bearing the same title arc available
now.
Among the works that narrate Ncmi's biography in the larger context
of the sixty-three faiakiipuru,a-s, the Maliapurii1Jll ofJ inascna-Gur;iabhadra
and the ofHcmacandra arc prominent.
TriillftiJ~acaritra Mall~r;ia
(I 04 7), Candramuni, Vimalasiiri and V ajrascna have written works titled
MaliapuriitµJ.
Brahmanemidatta's Neminathapurii,,a, Vagbhata's Neminirvii1}Qkiiuya and
Hcmacandrasiiri's Nemidvisandhanakiiuya arc of the maMA:iivya type.
Works dealing with the Par;icjava story titled Piit#avacarita have been
written by Vijayagar;ii, Dcvaprabhasiiri, Subhavardhana, Hcmacandra,
Snohii~ar;ia a.o. Subhacandra's PiiTJ4avapuriilµJ ( 1550) paved the way for
similar such works by Vadiraja and Vadicandra. Jayacandra wrote a
work titled Pii1J4avacaritoddliiira.
(B) Prakrit Works
In Prakrit, Silanka's Cauppannamaliiipurisacaria is a prominent work, written
in 869. Maladhari Hcmacandra has written a work titled Nnni,,aluuariya.
Also Udayaprabhasiiri's Nnninirvii1}Qkiiuya is remarkable.
(C) Apabhramsa Works
After Svayambhu's RitlluuJnnicariu or Harivarri.Japurii,,a, a large number of
works of the same type have been written in Apabhramsa. The works of
Dhavala (10th- I Ith century) and Ya.iaJ:ikirti's work arc of significance.
Haribhadrasiiri wrote his Nnnil}Qhacariu in 1159. Pu$padanta's work
TisaUimaliiipurisagw}iilaitfciiru is famous as a Apabhramsa Mahapiiral)a
(959-965).
" This surv<y is bas«! on th< information found in H.D. Vtlankar'sJiMratnako!a, vol.
l, Poona 19'4-0.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THEJAINA MAH1BH1/UTA 263
The biography of Pradyumna, which is an interesting part ofthejaina
HarivaqiSa, has inspired a large number of poets. Works with the title
Prad.Jllmnacarila have been written in Sanskrit, Prakrit and Apabhramsa;
Prad.Jllmnacarita-s have been written by Bhogakiti, RollaQa,
Ra~iddha,
Vadicandra, Soma.scna, Saltalakirti, Ratnacandra, Subhacandra,
MallibhiipQa, Mahisenicirya, Somakirti, Jine5varasiiri, Ravisigara,
Raighupa1;u;lita, Y aSodhara, Samayasundara a.o. The Ku1J1Uarila of
Devendrasiiri deals with KnQa's life.
From this survey it is amply clear that the theme gained
Harivaqi~a
popularity during and after the media:val period; in fact, according to
one assessment, the works with the story ofNcminitha exceed in number
those devoted to other Tirthankara-s.
Some Notes on the Jaina Mahiihhiirala in Kannada
(Robert J. Zydenbos)
The oldest specimens of literary Kannada are found in inscriptions,
±
beginning with the Halmidi inscription ( 450 C.E.); but by the year
850 C.E. the Rashtrakuta king Nrpatunga writes his Kavirajamarga, a
work on Kannada poetics which provides us with many valuable
quotations from older authors whose works are no longer available, and
with this we suddenly find ourselves in a highly sophisticated literary
landscape.
In this period, though the religious composition of the population of
the region is quite varied, we see that Jainism is firmly established as the
foremost Hochreligion.•0 Royal patronage gives ample possibilities for Jaina
culture to express itself in architecture, of which still much exists, and in
literature: as far as we can see, Kannada literature was a purely Jaina
affair at the time, with other religious groups, beginning with the
Vira5aiva-s, taking up Kannada literature as a serious vehicle for their
thoughts only in the twelfth century.
Nrpatunga's work gives Kannada the distinction of being the living
language with the second oldest literature in India, second only to Tamil.
Unlike Tamil, Kannada has undergone Sanskritic influence to a much
greater extent, in its phonetic system and its vocabulary, and we see this
stronger mingling ofc ultures also in the influence which Sanskrit literature
had on that of Kannada. We see this influence already at the very
0 A nice study of the period in which Jainism flourished in Kamatalr.a, 500-1200 C.E.,
•
is Singh 1975.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
264 B.N. SU:l.llTRA BAI AND ROBERT J. ZYDf.NBOS
beginning of Kannada literary history in the Jaina pural]a-s, all of which
show, to some degree, a dependence on Sanskrit models. The relationship
between Sanskrit and Kannada throughout practically the whole of the
literary history of the Kannada-speaking region (which for the sake of
convenience I will refer to as "Karnataka", though the present-day state
of this name is smaller than that linguistic region once was) can be
compared with the relationship between Latin and the Germanic
languages of northern Europe from the middle ages to the 19th century;
and just as much of the best writing in later Latin was done in northern
Europe, Sanskrit language and literature were highly cultivated in
Karnataka-the names ofKa.Jidasa and Sayar;ia immediately come to mind
here. But however much Sanskritic learning was appreciated, the Indo
European language with its literature remained alien in their pure forms.
Jainism had its origin in northeastern India and was first communicated
through a form of Prakrit, hence theJainas ofKarnataka too held certain
ancient Prakrit texts in high esteem, but the independent creation of new
works in Prakrit was practically non-existent.•• Apabhramsa was not at
all used in southern India. Dravidian culture expressed itself, of course,
mainly in Dravidian languages.
The first complete literary work in Kannada is by Pampa (941 C.E.),
who was a Jaina, and though his ViA:ramarjunavijayam (also known as the
"Pampabharata") is a complete Mahabharata in Kannada, it does not
follow the pattern of the Jaina Mahabharata-s that were already in
existence in Sanskrit and Prakrit at the time, but that of the work ascribed
to Vyasa. In the poem, which is a campii (a composition in which verse
and prose passages alternate), Pampa identifies his patron, King Arikesari,
with Arjuna, and the obvious reason why he chose to follow the Vyasa
version, apart from his literary appreciation of that work, would be that
his patron was not a Jaina but a Hindu.
Yet being aJaina, there are things in his treatment of the Mahabharata
story which upset modern Hindu authors. R.S. Mugali seems unable to
appreciate Pampa's portrayal of Knr:ia, whose "personality as a hero on
the side of the good and as a crafty fellow is shown more than his nature
as the Supreme Being".42 B.M. Srlkar:iihayya goes still further and says,
referring to Pampa's Hindu ancestry, that when it came to the depicting
of and the Bhagavadgita episode, "a struggle arose between his
K~r:ia
" Sas try I 976:898.
" Mugali 1971:176.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
265
THt:jAINA MAHl.BHl.llATA
Jaina faith and the Vedic sa1!1Jkara0 of his ancestors, innerly Pampa's
mind was tom, and an impediment arose which must be said to have
decreased his poetic vision and enthusiastic tone to some extent" ... This
sounds rather exaggerated to me, and also to G.S. Sivarudrappa, who in
his article on Pam pa's treatment of the Bhagavadgita0 argues that it is
not necessarily a sign of disrespect that the Gita has been reduced to a
single stanza of four lines preceded and followed by only a few lines of
prose. It must indeed go against the grain ofa poet with a strong tendency
towards realism to have a lengthy religious discourse take place in the
middle of a battlefield, just when the battle is about to commence; and
in spite of the sharp reduction in space, Sivarudrappa writes, nothing
that is essential in the message of the Bhagavadgita has been left out.••
The Pampabharata remains a literary masterpiece, and still today
Kannada authors look upon Pampa as the model poet who demonstrated
the literary potential of the Kannada language.
Much the same can be said about the Siihasahhimauijayam of Ranna
(993 C.E.), which is also known under the name Gadayw.ldha. Here too
we have aJaina poet who follows the general pattern of the Mahabharata
ofVyasa and who identifies his patron, King Satyasraya, with one of the
heroes of the story, this time Bhima, who becomes the main character.•'
Ranna does not mention Pampa or other earlier Kannada authors in his
work, though we may assume that he was to some extent influenced by
them when he wrote it, just as he shows the influence of the Sanskrit
works Urubhanga by Bhasa and Vtl}isa'!lhQra by Bhananarayal)a; he does
mention Vyasa, ValrruKi, Kalidasa and Bal)a.0 He too is considered one
of the classical Kannada poets of what is thought of as the golden age of
Kannada literature, but G.H. Nayak points out that as Ranna was living
in what is called the uirayuga or "heroic age" and wrote in the style of
that age, there are passages in the work which may repel today's reader
because oft he pompousness, anger, gruesomeness, violence, and coarseness
of language of the protagonist. 49
•• A salf'Skara is usually undrrstood as a trace of a person's karma, which inftuences
one"s individual behaviour; here Sn1'a1nhayya sees it as something quasi-genetic, as though
religion is inherited or bound to race and an indi,,.idual is unable to de\clop his own
1
beliefs and sentiments. This mentality is quite common among conscrvati\•t Hindus.
" Thus Snla91hayya on pp. 518-19 in vol. 2 of the Univrrsity of Mysore"s Kannai/a
kaipUji, quoted by Sivarudrappa 1972:19 n. 3.
" "Pampanalli Bhagavadgitc", Sivarudrappa 1972: 18-29.
" Ibid., p. 27.
" G.H. Nayak 1976:642.
" Ibid., p. 620.
" Ibid., pp. 642-43.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
266 B.N. SUMITRA BAI AND ROBERT J. ZYDENBOS
After Ranna we come to the Kannada renderings of the Mahabharata
which we can call specifically Jaina in composition. Just as is the case
with the works in Sanskrit, Prakrit and Apabhramsa, the narrative
acquires its typical Jaina colouring by being interwoven with the story
of the Tirthankara Ari$fancmi / Ncminatha. Thejaina tradition of south
India is that of the Digambara-s, and the story ofNcminatha as we found
it in the Kannada pw-at,a-s generally follows the pattern set in Jinasena's
HariMtp.iapuriil'J(J and the Mahiipuriil'J(J of the other Jinasena and
Gui;tabhadra, rather than the Svctambara pattern which we see in the
works of Silanka, Haribhadra and, most importantly, Hemacandra. It
may be noted that the difference between the two traditions is in any
case very small, the main events of the story being the same and differences
occurring primarily in the stories of Ncminatha's previous births. so
The NcminathapuraQa-s are basically like other Jaina purat,4-s insofar
as their composition is concerned, and their authors devote much space
to the pamalcalyiil'J(J or five especially auspicious occasions in the life of the
Tirthankara, viz. the descent into the womb, birth, renunciation of
worldly life, the attaining of omniscience and liberation. On all these five
occasions the gods come to adore the Tirthankara, and they offer the
authors scope for praise of the Tirthankara and for elaborate descriptive
passages in which they can display their poetic abilities to the full. Two
things set the Ncminathapurai;ta-s apart from other Jaina purii,,a-s: (a}
The connection of the story of Ncminatha with that of the two M'flSd-s in
the Mahabharata; this makes them more attractive for the
readers/listeners and also "gives them more importance and scope". (b)
st
The events which make Neminatha decide to renounce the world are
particular for his story and arc given great importance in the puriil'J(J-s.0 2
Later we also come across works which have the separation of princess
RaJimati from her fiance Neminatha on account of his renunciation as
their theme/5 just as also other characters from the J aina Hari
va!Jlsapurai;ta start leading lives of their own in other works, such as
KoQa, Pradyumna and The story ofKoQa begins with his
Vasudeva.~
birth and is usually spun out elaborately; the story of Pradyumna is
usually mixed in with it."
0 Sas try 1973: 10-18.
'
" Ibid., p. 18.
" Ibid., pp. IS-19.
" Ibid., p. 19.
" Nagarajaiah and Kulkarni 1981:14-15.
" Ibid.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
267
THEJAINA MAHABHARATA
The first Kannada Hariva1J1sapura1,1a was written by Gu1,1avanna (the
±
first known author of that name in Kannada} in 900 C.E., but is now
known to us only through fragments which have been quoted in later
works. He must have been considered an influential writer, for bis
Harivarpiap,,ra,,a is mentioned by Parivapa1,1c;lita in bis Par!vanatlulpuTiil}a
( 1222}$e and his other known work is quoted by Abhinava Vadividylinanda
as late as 1533. s7
With Gu1,1avarma's writings being lost, the first available work in
Kannada containing the Ncminatba- Pa1,1c;lava story is the
Trif~fi!aiiika­
pu""facarita (978) of Cavu1,1c;laraya (also written 'Camu1,1c;laraya'}, more
popularly known under the name Cal!IUµ/arayapuriitµl. This is the first and
only Jaina mailapur41]a, dealing just as its Sanskrit and Prakrit counterparts
with the lives of the 63 ialakapu""fa-s,"" and a particular feature of the
work is that it is written practically entirely in prose instead of being a
camj>U like the other Jaina pura,,a-s. Cavu1,1c;larliya was a remarkably
many-sided person, a military commander for the kings of the Ganga
dynasty and a student of Jaina philosophy, for whom bis teacher
Ncmicandra wrote the Gom11144aSara, a work on Jaina thought of major
importance ("Gommaia' was Cavu1,1c;larliya's nickname, and
Cavu1,1c;laraya wrote a Kannada commentary on the work}. If this were
not enough to earn him everlasting fame, he also ordered the sculpting
of the famous statue of Blihubali, who in Jaina mythology is the first
siddJia or liberated one of our era, on the top of the larger bill at
Shravanabelagola; to this day the statue is known as the GommatiivaTa or
"lord of Gommata". Though the Cal!IUµ/arayapur41]a is historically import
ant because of the inftuence which it had on later works, it is itself not
considered a literarily great piece of writing; it is perhaps what one could
expect from a person whose interests arc more philosophical and religious
than aesthetic. The author mentions that in writing the work be relied
heavily on a work which he calls Vagarthasa1(tgraha by one
Kaviparamc~Jhi
or Kaviparamc5vara: this person must be Kiicibhat1liraka or Srinandi,
both of whom wrote Sanskrit mailapurat,a-s that are no longer available. '9
" H.M. Nayak 1976:360.
" Narasimhacharya 1972:26.
" The various classes of JaWciiptmJ.[a-s are listed above, n. 7. A /4Jiif.ii, according to
Monier-Williams' Sanskrit dictionary, is a small stick or rod, or a piece of bamboo borne
as a kind of crcdcntial by mendicants, but I fail to see how this is relevant in the cue of
emperors etc. It seems not unreasonable to see in the word JaJiM a re-Sanskritization of
Jliigliii, "praise" or "commendation", which through a possible Prakrit fonn such as•s iliiAii
entered Tamil aa caJiif.ai (Tamil uxicon, vol. III. Univ. of Madras, 1982, p. 1329) and
may hav;: done something .imilar in other languages as well.
•• Prasad 1976:519-20.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
268 B.N. SUM!TRA BAI AND ROBERT J. ZVDENBOS
The Viig11Tl/ias!J1flgraha was a gadyakallu, a prose work, which Jinasena and
Gul)llbhadra refashioned in Sarulrit vcne and Civu1;1c;lariya later ren
dered in Kannada prose. Bcca11tc some smaller subsidiary episodes in the
C4uulJ4ariiyapuriJ]a arc not found in the MaMp.riJ]a of Jinasena and
Gul)llbhadra, T .V. Vcnbtachala Sastry remark.a that it is not a pure
derivative of the Sanskrit work, and D.L. Narasimhachar suspected that
these Civur;ic;lariya-cpisodcs were borrowed from the older and now lost
prose work.00 Similarly verses from Jaiisi111hanandylicarya and Kavi
paramcsvara were borrowed into this work, and Civu1;1c;laraya quite
soberly and honestly says so."
CavuQc;larliya's work is very summary, dealing with much narrative
material in a relatively short work; also much that it is not absolutely
essential in Jinascna and Gu1;1abhadra's MahapuriJ]a is simply left out.
±
With Karvaplirya ( 1160) we find the first full-size Ncminathapurir;ia
in Kannada, of which three more would follow. The expert on Kannada
Ncminathapurlil;la-s and thejaina Mahlibharata-s is indisputably Professor
Vcnbtachala Sastry, whose dissertation "A Comparative Study of
Kannada Ncminatha Purlir;ia-s"82 runs into 548 pages. He also has a
monograph on Jaina Bhlirata-s and Bhagavata-s to his credit.15 In his
dissertation he gives the following list of work.a in Sanskrit and Prakrit
relating to our topic, which may be of interest to the reader: there arc
13 NcminathapuraQa-s and-aritra-s in Sanskrit, 5 in Prakrit; 11 Sanskrit
Harivarp5apui:ai;ia-s, 3 in Prakrit; 9 in
Trif~iisalakapuru$acaritra-s
Sanskrit, and 3 in Prakrit.•• Nagarajaiah and R.V. Kulkarni, on the
other hand, give lists of 11 NCminathapurliQa-s in Prakrit, 11 Hari
vaQ15apuriQa-s in Sanskrit and 22 Sanskrit NcminathapurliQa-s.0
Karvaparya was not a great poet, but rather a pundit who admired
Pampa and Ranna and tried to rival them by a display of learning. In
writing this first Kannada Nnniniithapuriil](J he drew from Sanskrit and
Prakrit sources, mainly GuQabhadra, and his learnedness also showed in
his too frequent use of Sanskrit expressions, which at times arc quite
lengthy and make his language pedantic.•• Also he could not impose any
limitations upon himself, like Cavur;ic;laraya couJd.67
~' S.tSll'\' 1973:1~15.
" Ibid .• p. 52i.
•• Sastry 197:!.
" Sastry 1980 .
.. sa. .r y 1973:27 ·45.
" i'<a11;arajaiah and Kulkarni IY81:20··22.
"' Sujata I Y77:4:lti.
" Sastr~· l!l7~:5J2. 5·12.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
269
THEJAINA MAHABHARATA
But in spite of his shortcomings, Karl)aparya started something new
in Kannada, and the first consequence occurred in his own time, when
Ncmicandra (not to be confused with his namesake, who was Cavu1:u;ia
raya's guru) produced his Ncmicandra was a very
~nniniithapurii.IJQ.
different personality: he was a gifted poet who felt that he was not bound
to tradition if he did not like parts of it, and he simply dropped many
episodes which arc found in the works of his predecessors for apparently
no other reason than that they did not appeal to him.68 R.S. Mugali,
who is concerned about Knr;ia, writes: "Though he may have seen Sanskrit
and Prakrit models, it seems that he has mainly followed the
Cii.vul}qarii.yapuriifJa. He has shown an independent spirit in dropping some
of the details, changing some, and giving prominence to the story of
Knr;ia. The obscurity of the story oft he previous births and the missionary
tastelessness are not found in this part"." Ncmicandra earned the title
for his mastery of Kannada, Sanskrit, Prakrit and
caturb~~aA:ravarti
perhaps Apabhramsa as the fourth language, and in the two works which
he wrote we read sprinklings of Sanskrit and Prakrit verses, which he
may have composed himself.'° From the point of view ofc haracterization,
descriptive ingenuity and style in general, Ncmicandra's work is consider
ed the best of the Kannada Neminathapurar;ia-s71-dcspite its being
incomplete, for which reason it is commonly called the Ardhanimipurii.IJQ.
The work ends with the slaying ofKarpsa by Knr;ia. At times Ncmicandra
tends to overreach himself in wordplay and fantasy, but he remains
suggestive. 72
Not long after Karr;iaparya and Nemicandra comes Bandhuvarma
( ±
1190), who wrote his Hariva'!l!ii.bhyudaya, the first Kannada Harivarli
sapurar;ia which has come down to us complete. Qua personality
Bandhuvarma is more like Karr;iaparya, but he keeps himself in check:
his language is not so highly Sanskritized as that of his predecessor.
Numerous technical terms from music and dance appear in the work; he
elaborated much that is short with Karr;iaparya, but his characters remain
suggestive.,. Another noteworthy feature of the work is the appearance
of satire of Hinduism, which is no doubt the reason why he was praised
by his notorious ro11ten1porarv Hrahn1asiva."
.,.,. l/i11/., j). .i :i:'>. -.+:t .
.... ,\ l11e,,1li ;•J71.J -i
•. "\,1 .. 11\ 1'1:'7·11-1! ;~11
- "'·'"'I\ I' I; ( -,
i '\
- • ."'i.-1. . 11 \ I 'I;" 1r1 :·,
' :O-.:i11ltl I~•;; 1111.1, !11 .. ·• l!IBll
~1 /h,,/ ll Jflf1t1. f-111 ;'" i111r•Ml11r 1i1•11 111 1111· f1i..:f()fit·.dl\ hi1•hl' '"*'''• , .., ..,. ,,•,r;.•
Rraf1n1;i.;j,-,1, .. ,.,. j',,1. . ,,,,,,. . l'J}U,
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
270 J.
B.N. SUMITRA BAI ANO ROBERT ZYDENBOS
Bandhuvanna in turn became a model to be emulated by a few later
and less prominent authors. Mahabala wrote a .Nimin4tliapura114 (1254)
displaying his wide reading; in certain episodes he clearly let himself be
guided by the corresponding episodes in Ranna and Kan;iaparya."
Around 148571 or 155077 Sa}va, who also wrote two works on poetics,
wrote his Jrnni!varacarilt, which is a complete Jaina Mahabharata and
hence also known as the Sii/MbhiiTata, in sixteen books. In roughly the
±
same period ( 1500) Mangarasa, the third and best known poet of that
name, who also wrote other religious works and a remarkable cookbook,
wrote his .Nemijinilasaligali in 5138 siingarya verses. 71 Based on Mangarasa's
±
work is the Jinabhiirala of Brahmananka ( 1800), in which the author
also praises divinities like Sarasvati, Jvalamalini, Padmavati and Brah
madeva, 19 thus refiecting the tantric religious elements which by that
time had entered southern Jainism.
Finally, this survey of the Jaina Mahabharata in Kannada would be
incomplete without mentioning a book by L.R. Hegga<;\e, published in
1974.10 This "dhiirmika brluulgrantha" gives a modern Kannada prose
version of the Jaina Mahabharata as found in the older works of
Nemicandra and KarQaparya, but more material has been drawn from
supplementary stories in the Sanskrit work by Kicaka; also other Sanskrit
works, the PalJ4avacaritra of Devaprabhasiiri and the PiitµJavapuriitµJ of
Subhacandra, "were a bit useful. But Draupadi's being married to five
husbands has entered into them".11 The inspiration for writing the book
apparently arose out of the author's anger at seeing that "the great scholar
Winternitz, who wrote a history of Sanskrit literature in English [sic]"
wrote that thejaina authors had in some cases "completely changed and
spoilt [some of the stories in the epic] .. . in order to give them a Jainistic
appearance" .12
What strikes one immediately about the book is that besides a photograph
of the author, a picture of-not surprisingly- an image of Neminaiha
and pictures of three Digambara monks, there are photographs of 34
people from across Karnataka by whom or in whose name financial
" Sannaiah 1977a:xxviii. Excerpts from the works, showing the parallels, arc given
ibid., pp. xxix-xxx.
" Nagarajaiah and Kulkarni 1981:19.
" Narasimhacharya 1974: 194.
" Nar;uimhacharya 1973: 132.
,. Nara.simhacharya 1974: 147.
00 Hcgga(lc 1974.
" l"d p. ..
ut ·t XJJ.
12 Quoted without reference in Hcgga(le 1974:xi.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE JAIN A MAH1BH1JU TA 271
contributions towards the publication of the book were made. The
inclusion of such portraits is in itself not unusual in modern Jaina books
(the traditional act of faslTadana or the spreading of edifying literature is
still considered very meritorious in the Jaina community), and on p. vi
we find a list of20 people who pledged to donate 25 copies to others; but
that such a large number has come forward in this case demonstrates
that the Jaina Mahabharata still has a function in Jaina society today.
From Hcgga<;lc's remark, quoted above, and remarks of a similar nature
in the miileya miilu or introduction to the series in which the book appeared
by the editor, we sec that for the Jainas their Mahabharata is an
instrument, to put it in pithy German tcnns, of their Stlhstdtustellung and
Stlbstbehauptung. Through their opposition in the case of certain issues in
the Mahabharata (such as their aversion to Draupadi's polyandry and
their favouring of the nivrttimarga rather than the pravrttimiirga, as we have
seen above) the Jainas, using the same mythological narrative material,
show that they have a Wcltanschauung which differs in some ways from
that of the predominantly Hindu society in which they live. And not only
that: by collectively bringing out such a book, they publicly assen their
distinctiveness and refuse to accept certain values that arc expressed in
the Hindu version. It is no doubt for this function that the Jaina
community, as one of the prefaces in the book has it, is indebted to the
author."'
Bibliography
PRIMARY LITERATURE
AntagafQdasiio and Anultaro..Uyada.siio. Ed. M.C. Modi, 1932.
Jinascruo: HarivalfliafJuriilJa. 2nd ed., ed. Pannalal Jain. Varanasi: Bharatiya Jiianapitha,
1978.
KalpasUlra, tr. H. Jacobi in Jaina Siitras vol. I. Sacred Boolu of the East Series vol. XXll
(Oxford; repr. Delhi).
Karvapirya: Jrtminii"'4 f!uriilJam. Ed. H.P. Nagarajaiah and R.V. Kulkarni. 2 volJ.
Bangalore: Kannada Sahitya Parishat, 1981 (in Kannada).
Mahibala kavi: Jrnninii"'4 JMiilJam. Ed. B.S. Sannaiah. Mysore: Inst. of Kannada Studies,
Univ. of Mysore, 1977 (in Kannada).
SECONDARY LITERATURE
Barnell, L.D. (1977): HinJu Gods and Htrots. Delhi.
Bhandarkar, R.G. ( 1927): Col/ecud Works, ool. 3. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute.
- (1965): Vais/wJuism, Saiuism and Minor /UligW..S Syslmu. Varanasi.
" Ibid., p. x.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
272
B.N. SUMITRA BAI AND ROBERT J. ZYDENBOS
Bruhn, Klaw ( 1961 ): /"'1o0eli«< lo ~uariya of Siltutl<o, ed. A.M. Bhojak .
.A hmedabad: Prakrit Text Series.
vo1.,,,,,
Chatterjee, S.K. (194-0): "ltihasa, Purana andJataka", in WoolntrCommnnoro1ion
uol. VIII. No place given.
Chaudhuri, B.C. (1973): J.U.. sillilya ta b{liod ili/W4, pi. 4. Varanui (in Hindi).
vo1.,,.,,
Divanji, P.C. (1917-42): "Origin ofBhagavata andjaina Religions". Sil-]•biltt
B.0.R.I., pp. 107- 25.
Doshi, J.C. ( 196 l ): /"'""'"'!Um lo P"'"'-' IYllM of Slbib.Wondro.Jivarajajaina Granthamala.
Sbolapur: Jaina Sanukrti Samraksaka Sangha.
Farquhar, JN. (1967): An OMl/iot of tlu ReligioMS Litno"'1t of India.
Gbatge, A.M. (1950): /ntrodw:tion lo Kakarµiyatigam. Kolhapur: Bharat Bookstall.
Hazra, R.C. (n.d.): SllulUs iii llu Upo/JllrllMS, uol. I. Calcutta.
Jt#M
Hegga4e, L.R. (1974): Makabluzrila. Gudibande (Kolar Di!n.): Vivckooaya Gran
thamilc (in Kannada).
Jain, J.C. ( 1961 ): Prafrrta SOltitya ta itihiiso. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Vidya Bhavana (in
Hindi).
- (1977): Th Va.rrultoa/tiluli-tm ArUJrmti& Join Vtr~n of Br"4tkallo4. Ahmcdabad.
Jain, K.C. ( 1974): Lffrd MaM:iraOIUi His Times. Delhi/ Patna/ Varanasi: Motilal Bananidass.
Law, B.C. (1949): Somt ]aituJ Canoni«tl S111ras. Bombay: B.B.R.A.S.
Muga.li, R.S. (1971): l\11111111'4 siiltit.Ja eoritrt. 5th ed. Mysore: U~ Sahityamile (in
Kannada).
Nagarajaiah, H.P. and R.V. Kulkarni: "Prastivane'', in Kamaparya, pp. 1-43.
Narasimhacharya, R. (1972): KanJ4(4':a kauicaritt, vol. I. 2nd ed. Bangalore: Kannada
Sahiya Parishat (in Kannada).
-(1973): Ka,,,a(4J:o "4uicarilt, vol. 2. 2nd ed. Bangalore: Kannada Sahitya Parishat (in
Kannada).
--(1974): Kani4jo"4 "4uicarilt, vol. 3. 2nd ed. Bangalore: Kannada Sahitya Parishat (in
Kannada).
Nayak, G.H. (1976): "S1ihasabhimavijaya", in Nayak and Sa.ttry 1976, pp. 620-51 (in
Kannada).
Nayak, H.M. (1976): "Guuavarma", in Nayak and Sastry 1976, pp. 359-365 (in
Kannada).
Nayak, H.M. and T.V. Venkatachala Sastry (eds.): K""""4o Adhyayona SOlflSlMya K11111111'4
S4Jiitya Caritrt, vols. 3 (1976) and 4 (1977; pt. 1 containing pp. 1-864, pt. 2 containing
pp. 865-1832; in Kannada).
Prabhu Shankar (1976): "Vikramlrjuna Vijaya", in Nayak and Sastry 1976, pp. #7-72
(in Kannada).
Prasad, K.G. Narii.yaoa (1976): "Cii.muodarii.ya purioa'', in Nayak and Sastry 1976, pp.
517-28 (in Kannada).
Premi, Nathurlm (1942): Jaina siiltitya "'"" itihiiso. Bombay (in Hindi).
Jama
-(1956): silli!Ja aora itiMsa. 2nd ed. Bombay (in Hindi).
Radhakrishnan, S. (1923): Indian vol. I. London.
Philo~y,
Ray Chaudhuri, H.C. (1936): Maltri41 for tlu Stwiy of Early History of tht Vaisnava Sect.
2nd ed. Calcutta.
Saktnrc. B.A. ( 19:11\j: Alrdi.ri•nl Jainism. Bnnth.w.
Sa11r•aiah, B.S. t l9iia:: "Pi~l1ikc.· ll11trc>Cit1fti(1r1J. .. i1• .\lal1;1l>.1J~1 111 K.lnn.1(i.i1.
· (19i71,,: "~f.1l1.:il>al~··. i11 ;\',,,·.1k a11d S.1:-.lr~ l!lii', 1>1>. (f1J•) <~J.
Sa111a. c:.~. ; 1977 :: .. B;.l11dt1u\·ar1ni'~· 1ti,·r1ti. Harl\ ari1~a1,t.~·t1tlaya''. ir1 ~avalo; a1:1I s.,. . rr\
1977, pp. 105:1-82 tin Ka1111aria\,
Sas t ri, K aila~ac and ra { I Y6 I •: .J11111fl I Jhtlrma. Ji ,.a rajj.\. I ; .ti 11a Gra 11 t h:t r11;;a I;,, .Sl)11!.\~)1) 1 .• J : l 11? '
Samskriti Samr;\k~aka S:trtj?fta 'in K~11111a<la ·.
Sastr~+. 'J'. \:. \.' t' 11k;\tacl1al a ' I !) i 3 ~: A' t111nat/r1 . \ inulfiilhfl pu1ri~1ae,11(r. tn11/n,,·;J.,1 ,·1,/J; 1 ·:~r:·1.1.
~·t rsorc•: Inst. 11f Kann;lda Stu<lic-s. L' 11iv. <.>f' ~I y~orc· : In K.1n11acla "
·· - • 1976j: "\·'aiSi~~~''· ....t dha11e· [vi:t. l)I 1'..11111d<.ltt litc·ralurc. l11•l\o,t'fll Uj1)··l l:1(• l .. l-..1·'.
i11 :'\ayak ancl S;1li1r~ 1!•70. l'I> Jin; 1Jt>7 11t K.11111;i<t:1 •
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
273
THEJAINA MAHJBHifRATA
- - (1977): "Neminitha [of Nemicandra)", in Nayak and Sastry 1977, pp.
pu~a
1003-31 (in Kannada).
Jai""
--(1980): B/riigtwa/4 BMralaga/•. My>0tt: Ta. Vem. Smaraka Granthamale (in
Kannada).
u,a
- (1981): Mm uunikf•tol"- Myt0tt: Sihityamile (in Kannada).
Jainism
Singh, R.B.P. (1975): in Early Mldinal Karnal4ka. Delhi/ Varana..; /Patna: Motilal
Banarsidass.
u,1
Sivarudrappa, G.S. (1972): Pllri.filaa. 2nd ed. My>0tt: Slhityamlle (in Kannada)
Sujlta, H.S. (1977): "Ncminitha (ofKan;iapirya]", in Nayak and Sastry 1977,
pur~a
pp. •H 7-37 (in Kannada).
Piua.,,.-a
Sumitra Bai, B.N. (unpubl.): JinaslN2's HariNlfl.f• st"4y. Unpublished Ph.D.
dUs<rtation, Dept. of jainology, Univ. of Myt<>tt.
Upadhye, A.N. (ed.) (1943): BrlUllJ:allrak;iJa. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.
- (ed.) (1969): Kuoalayamala of Ud.10lasttri. Kolhapur.
Vaidya, C.V. (1921-26): History of Mttlinal HitulM India, vols. I, II, III. Poona.
Vclankar, H.D. (1940): JW.ral1ullcoia, vol. I. Poona.
Zimmer, H. (1961): Th Pltihsopltiu of India. 7th ed. New York.
Zydenbos, RJ. (1986): "Jainism Endangered: the view of the medieval Kannada poet
°"
Brahmaiiva", in H. van Skyhawk (ed.). "Milooriliu" Tlimuelws (- SD<dlt Asian
Digut of/ UgiotUJI Writi"I, SADRW , Heidelberg) vol. 11 ( 1985 ). Stuttgart: Fr. Steiner,
1986, pp. I 7+-86.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
RITUAL AND PERFORMANCE IN THE
P~J;>AVALlLA OF GARHWAL
WILLIAM S. SAX
Tiu Mahabhiirata in Performance
... instead of continuing to rely upon texts considered definitive and
sacred, it is essential to put an end to the subjugation of the theater to the
text, and to recover the notion of a kind of uniq uc language half-way
between gesture and thought". (Artaud 1958: 89)
When nights grow long and cold and winter snow begins to fall in the
Himalayas, drums echo through the mountains of Uttarakhar;u;I. Wrap
ped in homespun blankets or huddled around fires for warmth, peasants
assemble at their village squares for a nightlong entertainment. They
come to learn of the deeds of ancient kings and usurpers, to see the
battles of gods and demons enacted upon the rough stage, and to dance
away the bitter cold along with their friends and relatives. They come to
see the Par:u;lavama, a local drama in which the Mahabharata is 'danced'
or 'played'' by amateur performers for an audience of fellow villagers
and guests. 2 In this essay I hope to show that in U ttarakhar;u;I, the
"subjugation" of theater to text of which Artaud complained cannot
exist, since the Mahabharata is thought of as a kind of performance, and
not as a book. Here is an example of a text that is emobodied in people
and their memories-as Pa1:u;lavama, the 'play' of the five Pandava
brothers. Whether or not this embodied text can be understood as
"sacred", is a question to which I shall return at the end of the essay.
Uttarakhat;i<;l is the locally preferred local name for the high-altitude
regions ofGarhwal in the central Himalayas in the north Indian state of
1 Throughout this essay, I use single quolation marks (") for direct translations of
native terms, and double quotation marks (" ") for extrinsic terms that do not have
precise translation equivalents.
' I would like to thank the Fulbright-Hays Commission and the National Science
Foundation for generously funding my doctoral mearch io 1983-1986, when I attended
several Pil;lc;lavalila in Uttarakhai;ic;I. I would also like to thank my friends at the South
Asia Graduate Seminar at The University of Chicago for their insightful critidsms of an
earlier draft of this essay, and the Ira Kukin program at the Harvard Academy for
International and Area Studies, under whose aegis I have written this essay.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
RITUAL AND PERt'ORMANCE IN THE P~~AVALTLA OF CARHWAL 275
Uttar Pradesh.' It is bordered by Tibet on the north, Kumaon to the
east, the lower-altitude districts ofGarhwal on the south, and the state of
Himachal Pradesh to the west. Throughout this predominantly Hindu
region, the "most extensive body of folklore is that based on the
Mahiibhiirata tales" (Chandola 1977: 18). As an oral, pcrformative tradi
tion, Pai:ic;lavama resembles the kind· of genre from which many scholars
believe the Mahabharata developed. Goldman for instance hypothesizes
that the epics were
delivered and consumed orally in the discrete performance units over a
period of time as is indicated in the Rarnayar,ta. My suspicion is that when
one conceived of a text like the Mahabharata as a whole, if ever one did, it
was not so much as a book but as a whole body of literature from which
specific characters, incidents, or scenes could be adduced from memory to
illuminate questions in social life, etc. ( 1986: 19-20)
Change the tense from past to present, and one has a serviceable
description of the Pai:ic;lavami of Uttarakhai:ic;t. It illuminates social
issues, and informs local culture more, perhaps, than any other text.4 The
Mahabharata is constantly cited to explain almost everything, from the
nature of polyandry to the origin of warts.
The concept of lilii is an important one in South Asia, but difficult to
translate. Although it bears some superficial resemblance to Christian
"miracle plays", /I/ii is at the same time a "theological", "mythical", and
"pcrformative" concept that has no apparent analogue in the Judaeo-
Christian-lslamic traditions. Theologically, it relates to an old problem:
if the Supreme Being is self-fulfilled and desireless, what could possibly
motivate him to create the world? Badarayana wrote in his Brahma-Siitra
(11.1.33) that creation is a "mere sport" (lilii kaivalyam) to Brahma, the
Creator. This 'sport' or 'amusement' is what is called /llii, a kind of
cosmic game in which the Supreme Being indulges, with no desire for the
fruits it may bring. It is this desirelessness that prompted J.A.B. van
Buitenen to suggest that /llii is the opposite of karman, since "in creating,
sustaining, and resorbing the world God has no cause to effectuate and
no end to achieve" (1956:192 n. 83). Lila also refers to Krishna's
mischievous antics as a child in Braj, and to his amorous dalliances with
' The wider region within which Uuarakhal)(j is situated is usually called "Garhwal",
though the checkered administrative history of the area makes this a somewhat
ambiguous term (stt Berreman 1972:11-14). My informants generally preferred the
name Uuarillat;u;t, said 10 be employed by the Skanda Pura1,1a to designate this region.
• EthnogTaphe11 have for the mOlt part remained silent about PiQdavalDi and the
peculiar prorrunence of the Mahabharata in the Central Himalayas (though sec
Chandola 1977:18-21, and Nautiyal 1981:127-46).
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
276
WILLIAM SAX
the Gopis, both of which have been represented countless times in the
artistic traditions of South Asia.
Finally, /Wis arc enactments of events in the lives of incarnate gods
such as Rama and Krishna, folk dramas characterized "by a heightened
use of many media of communication and a charged and expectant mass
participation" (Tambiah 1985: 126-7) in which the gods themselves
become present on the stage. As such, llliis have been important
performance genres for centuries. By far the best-known such traditions
arc Kor:iafila and Ramlila, which have recently been the subject of
much scholarly research and writing (e.g. Hein 1972 and 1987, Hess
1986, Kinsley 1979, Lutgendorf in press, Sax 1990, and Schechner and
Hess 1977). By contrast, little has been written about Par:i<;lavama in
Hindi, and almost nothing in English. However, like K11Qama and
Ramma, Par:i<;lavama represents a kind of folk theatre in which "ritual"
and "performance" are inextricably intertwined.
There are many forms of PaQ<;lavama, or p411¢av nrrya (the Pandavas'
'dance') as it is sometimes called. It usually occurs during 'the dark
months' (andlurt gii mau,ii) of miirgaffr/a and paU<a, roughly mid-Novem
ber to mid-January, a time associated with animal sacrifice, exorcism,
and the worship of Shiva and his fierce henchmen. However this is not
an absolute rule, and one-day llliis during the hot season are not
uncommon. People tend to relate occasions of performance to the
movements of the stars, saying that llliis are sponsored by that person or
village whose astrological sign corresponds to the initial date of the
performance. Llliis may last for three days, or for a single afternoon. The
first performance I saw was in remote Sutol village, a two-day walk
from the nearest road. It lasted nine days, and occurred three years after
the previous one in that village. The second lllii I sav.., in Bhatgwali
village, lasted thirteen days and was occurring after thirty-five years.
Longer performances are often called by the name of the chief episode
enacted in them: there arc for instance the cakravyiiha or 'Circular Array'
which enacts the capture and death of Arjuna's son Abhimanyu; the
kamalavyiiha or 'Lotus Array', about which I have no information other
than its title; the Jami tree lllii whose culminating episode is the uprooting
and establishing of the tree which protected the Pandavas' weapons
while they were in exile; and the gaiTJl/ii or 'Rhinoceros', the culminating
episode of which is the hunting of a rhinoceros so that its hide may be
obtained for use in the mortuary rites of the Pandavas' father, King
Pandu. Different areas tend to specialize in one or another such ll!ii, but
despite variations, all Par;i<;lavamas have this in common, that they are
recitative, musical, and dramatic 'showings' or 'dancings' of the Maha
bharata.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
· ~~ . . •. .. ,_ '·, , i ... .'.:> 1 -.: . ~.,· =-·t • 't0 ' \ I .\ .' l.!• ;t ,. _: (' ,° , tl.. ... ,! :• .' p- \., 'I_,, , \ \ ' -· ·•· - ·• ' \,' I t \.;.\;.\_~'.\ \.:.. .,--
. . c:d h . -· - \I . . .
·-J·- f": •-, .-..·. •_• .l;n. •·..'..·.-,. ..l• 1.•e rn.Jt <ntt. ~'< .I· ~· r· t ".r t" ..•. .I.s ... ...'.' t ...' t ._._.._ ( ...•. .! ·.•. "• - ~· "t",-.t " \ r• ;:,r \
;~ ·l ~·· ~· . \.·· , ; 1 n· 'J" " ". '. '.. ' '~ °!' \:· I ., • .. . .. ._. ., . , t.· ,:· .,.· . tt' • r· ·~" " !-r· ..• .. ~ .. ,. . . n r-. ..l urr \: 1· ·: • •• · J~ , ~y·- · ~··· ~1 , ..· .. · ,· .\. .; , !· -l' . ,· \., r· .•" l . 1·• • 1 ( '• .· { "
~~:-~ t~•J b.irC~. ~h~) (t:k.'~'('ract:\1 ir1 rt"\.'t.'l:::r:~1~ t!':c: ~l..i!~.lt·h.l:·.i:..l. lc1
Btj:~.; .i~i b" (c)r:rr'J..St. (i.ir1'-·ir1!;! ..in'"'i r._-,·?c.11:,\rt ''~!"t" tx~th. '-·1..'rt!t ..' ~~~t:\t>:
o.ii:"'i •Jt rr..ik d.in,·<'1'$ "'hv h.id "''111<' fn>rn th<" ' :::.1>:..-,. ,, ..
;u~:'l.'l:r:,::::>( ,.,~
(:.l:!..O. 0nc: p.i:r .11 a tim<'. tl> d.itKt' tht' b.u:k bt't"<'<"" .\ c·un.i .inc! ""'
:;t)n :\..ti?:irjun.i. This d..in'-·t: '-'as ~~rt~'rttlC"\f 1_\\ C'r .i:1J '-... ' er C'' C'r' rt~~!1t
until h.id act B..i:·t.!s
e\~f"\.,)OC' r~t.~t·1,·~d t.\~"f}llrtt111tt\ t\\ '-°'-"r!~:."('."~t". .J~~,
(!1.i.:it'n>:ed one: .inL't!lc:r tc> rt'c.ill de1:.til; ,,f th<" '.\l.1!'..1:<-. . l~·..1:.i $!1.•r' . ..1::..: :f
,·.,J
the b.i.rd ch.ilk n>:ed tiikd tl> r«n1cn1bt'r. ht' ,:.;!i:..1:t',! .
;o ".l> ,.,,,:;:,: ..
. \ lrc:mati\·el~·. one' b..trd (t.\trld ~1Ltl d.,.1,. .· n •.i t:ft,i ·.i(·r~: ..ltt. ..' t~<~ ~' :!·~~!':'"..:~~c ...
inll his recit~ti1:in ,,._·ith a. l~t.lrrct.·ti1.111.
Two pert;>rm.inc..-s in Bh.ui;wali w.-ro:- l>f :'.".<' ... ,._
>l~i.11 int«~'°": E'::~
Ct'ros and th<' i'ami tr<'<' r::;is. Th.- Rhinc-...·t'rl>; is .1!"·.1,s . ::: ::·.<'
t'<':·:~·:··"n'.
middlt' Ch.indpur rc.-1ti,>n n<"~lr Bh:.tt~•·ali. in brief h.ilt'-<!.1' .7 ;;. .i; " <"· · .c;
the one and two-wet'k perti>rn1an,·,.,; th.11 aro:- tht'nt:«'l' n- ,·.1::,.,_: ~.: ,,: ::.
Thou1th immo:-nsdy popular in Chandpur Par.1c;i.1varil.ls. t!l<" ,·:·
;:,·~' :~~
hunting of the rhin<x-eros i;. tc> dt<' bt'st l>f n1v kn''"·lt'-i!!<'- u:i~""":: :::
1he Pune edition of the epic In thi; ri:.:;. a pun1pkin i; dn·vr.11ni t,,
:,,_.~
like a mus1a:;.:hio.-d rhint><Tr<)S tt-w c>f tht'S<' lllllUntain l><'a:<.1n1s h.1, .- '"' ,·r
•'II
seen a rhino<:eros. so th« rt'prt';entatic>n is a bit odd . and st'""i !~'t:r
le~ made of cut bamboo. in a n>nt«r of the dancing squarc. T his '°''rtl<'r
represents the serpent und1-rworld 11iigi/,1k whcre it liv<";. Bhirn.1
.11hi
:\rjuna go searchinl( ti.ir the rhino<"erO$. al·n1n1panied bv a rornir ti~un·
calle-d the na/ or using the English word·. jt•k(f. whos<" rowardh
reluctance to stalk the rhirHKt-ros contrasts with the Pandavas· own
warrior-like courage and dt'trrmination. After se,·eral false: start;, the
Panda,·as bribe their cornpanion with golden ornaments. and finally the
three of them confront the rhinoceros. which Bhima kills with his club.
In the more elaborate version pt•rforml'd in Bhatgwali the entire army of
the Pandavas went in pro<'<'>..<ion to a spring-fed pond, confronting and
destroying en route several demons fashioned from pumpkins. The
slaying of the rhinoceros was lollowed by the mortuary rituals of King
Pandu, performed by a local Brahman priest. That afternoon in the
main dancing square, a live goat representing the rhinocero; wa;
beheaded, and later cooked and distributed as the powerful pm.wid or
'edible grace' of the Pa1.1(ia\·alila.
Another popular lilii is that of the Jami tree, the story of whi«h
corresponds for the most part to written versions of the J'vlahiibhiirata. It
is said that when the Pandavas left for their exile, they were requir«d
under the terms of their agreement with the Kaura\·as to kavt' th«ir
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
278
WILLIAM SAX
weapons behind. They sought a place to hide them in Vishnu's heaven,
in the mortal realm, and at Krishna's fortress-city ofDwaraka, but no one
was able or willing to keep them. Finally the fami tree, which was
growing in a cremation ground, split open its own stomach and hid the
weapons inside. But it named a condition, saying "I will protect your
weapons, but later you must protect me". The Pandavas left their
weapons in the tree and proceeded into exile. Hence when the fami tree is
carried to the Pandavas' dancing square and joyfully erected, par
ticipants say they arc fulfilling the agreement made between the original
tree and their ancestors, the Pandavas. In the fami tree llla, a pine tree
with no blemish is selected and carefully uprooted, enlivened through the
priitµz-pra/4/hii (literally 'establishment of breath') rite, dclimbed by
Bhima with his club, and carried to the dancing ground where it is
ma
proudly erected. Bards sing to it, weapons from the previous are
placed at its base, and on the final day of the llla, both weapons and tree
are 'buried' at a nearby water source. It needles are distributed amongst
all villagers as the true prasiid of the Pa1:u;iavama.
ma
Perhaps the most humorous I saw depicted the Pandavas' exile:
when they reach the court of King Virata incognito and apply for work,
they are given job interviews by his secretary. "What work can you do"?
the secretary asks Arjuna. "Well", replies the latter, "I can teach singing
and dancing." "Singing and dancing", replies the secretary. "Hmmm.
Things are pretty tough these days. Tell you what: don't call us, we'll
call you." Seeing the gods of the universe thus treated like ordinary
hillbillies, the audience in Sutol responded with howls of laughter.
Every day in Suto) at about three p.m., two members of the diis caste
would play their drums, summoning villagers to the dancing square,
variously called the piitµJau cauk, mmµ/a1J, or dyokhii/.) The reciter of the
Mahabharata, called a pa111wa/, would welcome the guests and then
introduce the major characters of the drama-the five Pandava brothers,
their wife Draupadi, mother Kunti, and so forth-one at a time. After
each introduction, always chanted in a particular style (called pa'llwiit]I),
the bard would tell the drummer to 'call so-and-so present', then play
the character's distinctive drum ryhthm (bol) while reciting a powerful
invocation.6 The player dancing the part of the character thus sum-
' The character ! represent.$ the inter-dental lateral of spoken Garhwali, not normally
re~resentcd in transliterations of Hindi and related languages.
birad, possibly from Sanskrit urtld/ii, 'growth'.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
279
RITUAL AND PERFORMANCE IN THE P~l;>AVALll.J. OF GARHWAL
moned would evince characteristic signs of possession: rolling of eyes,
initial stiffness of limbs followed by uncontrollable trembling and rapid,
deep breathing. These symptoms would become more intense as the
invocation reached its climax, upon which the player, now fully "posses
sed" by the character, burst into the square and began dancing. In this
way, the Pandavas and their entourage were summoned and caused to
dance singly, then collectively. Along with certain other rituals discussed
below, this constituted the afternoon's performance, which lasted about
two hours. Afterward, villagers and their guests returned to their homes,
rested and ate, then about eleven p.m. the drums sounded again. The
afternoon sequence was repeated, and for the remainder of the night,
from perhaps two until seven a.m., group dancing by the Pandavas and
their 'army' alternated with discrete liliis, episodes or vignettes selected
from the Mahabharata and often dramatized in a humorous manner.
In Suto! village there were only two bards, but in Bhatgwali there
were many of them engaged in competition. In one recorded example, a
bard was challenged by another to answer a specific question, and this
was his cue to take over the recitation:
Come forth, my son!
into the assembly of Dharamaraj awhile;
and sing the Pandavas' praises;
come into the assembly of Dharmanandana Yudhisthira!
Such is the dharma of those who live on.
Man dies, but the Pandavas' tale remains;
the bird Aies, but the summit remains.
Blessed, oh blessed is a human birth;
and blessed, oh blessed, is a vision of the Lord!
Unions are at pilgrims' places, Badari and Kedar;
unions are in festivals, in this moonlit silver square.
And how many reunions in the parents' loving lap!
Yayati, Puru, lkshvaku, Mirag,' Muchkunda, Pratipa,
Mahabhish, the woman named Ganga ....
Oh my bumblebee messenger,
How many kings from diverse countries have come today!
How did Mother Ganga become the queen of King Shantanu?
' This name does no1 seem 10 belong in 1he lis1. 1'1y recording is less 1han dear a1 this
poinl.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
280
WILLIAM SAX
How did King Shantanu receive the boon
that his woman would be named 'Ganga'?"
The bard who was challenged answered in the polite language charac
teristic of these exchanges.
Thank you, 0 Vyas, for the wisdom that
has emanated from your mouth!
In the mortal realm of diverse creatures this conference of gods,
this conference of men, has been established.
What a happy day it is, there are cheers in the assembly
of Dharmanand, praise, praise to the Pandavas!
Blessed be the lineage ofVyascs, who have learned the entire Veda
and put it in their hearts;
the four Vedas that Brahma spoke with his four mouths.
You spoke the Vedas with four mouths,
you told the fundamental truth.
You examined the matter to its very root,
and told us the fifty-six lineages.
He next began to tell the story ofShantanu, and also of Parasara. Note
how the audience is drawn into the performance, being explicitly
likened, sometimes to an assembly of men, sometimes of kings, and
sometimes of gods. Before completing Shantanu's story the bard quoted
above addressed his audience:
Oh brothers, are you listening?
It is such a long, long story,
• IM"ii b•/ii, hajuri ai jiil}o!
ma
dhantUJriij kl paff IJfltiU sahha o
h gluv/i be/ii, parµ/P01(1 kl sltdi
ma
dhantUJnandtJ111J yvdhi./tltir kl sabha hQjuri hvai
ja~!
raifa'l' batyii1(1go ""4ram .J4ll h~.
"""'4fhi mar jiil}, (lln!IVira rai jiinii
uq
pailchi jiVii, 4Ju>fa rai jiina
dlian_,a ho dlian_,a ho, """"'V"' tin
dlian_,a ho dlian_,a ho, luuidarJtJ111J!
kit bhe/ ba"4ri kuliir ...
h~i
ma
kit bhe/ tiratlto1(1 barlo1f1
h~i
ma
cholii ciinfi cauk mi1(1, biipo1(1 kt god m.i1(l
_,afali, fiUrii, ikfiiku, mirag, rruakwula, pratip mahabi.s,
gaiigiiniim sin. ..
mfar bhail.vdr iij ayii1(1 koala !hf ddom ga Mrtla tuma
tk gaiigii nam stri gaiigii m.ii kan riijii JOJilaml ki riVii hvat?
riijii JOJitanu nt ka/r41f1 pa. Nradiin?
lei 1m· stri gaiigii nim ""41<?
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
281
RITUAL AND PERFORMANCE IN THE PXNOAVALTLA OF GARHl'IAL
and the frost has reached our knees,
on this star-filled night, in this assembly of men,
even the Pandavas who won the Mahabharata are shivering!
As the Pa1:u;lavaffia progresses, it becomes more "polished". Initially,
the dancers in Suto! struck me simply as farmers dressed in their
workaday rags, inelegantly whirling about the square to the beat of a
drum. Even their fellow-villagers showed little interest in the first few
days of rehearsal. But after two or three days, dancers' movements
became more graceful and coordinated, and they began to wear cos
tumes, long flowing robes that drew my eye into the orbit of their steps.
People began to arrive from more and more distant villages for each
night's performance, until the crowd had grown into the hundreds.
Every day additional characters were summoned, more members added
to the Pandavas' army. They began to wear makeup, and then came the
crucial day when the last player had been summoned, and the village
god distributed weapons to the Pandavas (see below). As time went on,
other elements of the performance became more sophisticated as well. At
first, entrances had been a bit ragged: sometimes the proper dancer
wasn't there, sometimes he or she would not be in the mood to dance.
But by the end of the ffiii, after the drummer summoned some character,
just as newcomers in the audience began to look about to see where he or
she would come from, the character would 'come over' his or her player,
who would suddenly leap into the square and began dancing, to the
delight of the crowd.
Inexorably, life in the village came more and more to center around
ma.
the Days were rather listlessly spent eating, socializing, or surrep
titiously sleeping, while each evening's drumbeat signaled that the 'real',
focal activity, the Pa1:u;lavafila, was about to begin. People were disorien
ted from lack of food and sleep; the normal world was de-emphasized,
while in its place the world of the Mahabharata was constructed anew
each night.9
Pa1:u;lavama is in one sense performed for the sheer fun of it, for
'entertainment' (manora,Yana). People in Uttarakhar.u;l call it a kautik, a
'spectacle', and having returned from a Pa1:u;lavalila one is not asked
"Did you enjoy the lilii"? or "Was it a good piijii''? but rather, "How was
the kautilc"? Singing, dancing, recitation of dramatic stories, the presence
• Cf. Hess (1986), who writes that Ramlila, like the Ramacaritam4na.ia ofTulasi Da.s
upon which it is ba.std, "forces an experience" of the world a.s m<ifa and/or {I/ii., through
the disoolution of the boundaries it initially sc:ts up between the play and the world, and
between actors and spectators.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
282 WILLIAM SAX
of the gods, elaborate drumming, visiting with friends and relatives,
an engrossing competition- all of these factors combine to make
Pa1:u;lavalila one of the most popular entertainments in UttarakhaQQ..
ma
However it is much more than that. After one was over, I asked
villagers why they had gone to so much trouble and expense to sponsor
it. After some group discussion, they gave me a rather formal summary
of the purposes behind it, to wit: (I) it is a corpmendable form of worship
of their personal gods (4tadtvata), the Pandava brothers; (2) they learn
the Mahabharata story, and also learn about religious and moral matters
from performing and observing PaQQ.avalila; (3) it 'closes the circle' of
their relations, providing an opportunity to visit with distant relatives
whom they rarely have a chance to meet; and (4) they stage the lila out
of self-interest (svarlh), since from doing so they obtain some benefit
( fayada) with regard to the health of their crops, avoidance of disease
and calamity, and general well-being. In what follows, I would like to
elaborate on this answer, explaining the assumptions and presuppositions
that lie behind it, as well as suggesting how we can best understand the
juxtaposition in PaQQ.avalila of social event, ritual, and performance, in a
mutuality that is though of as uniquely powerful and efficacious.
lnlerpreting ParµJavalila
PaQQ.avalila is a social event involving intra-caste visiting, commensality,
and other transactions; within this event is a ritual directed toward
ma
specific ends; and at the core of this ritual is the playful per se,
characterized by the pre.sence of gods upon the stage. Although boun
daries between social interaction, worship, and play are fluid and
changing, these three kinds of action are nevertheless thought of as
ma
distinct, and participants in the orient themselves differently with
respect to each. In paying especially close attention to local understand
ings of PaQQ.avalila as ritual, we are enabled to make some inferences
about the cosmology that lies behind it. This leads in turn to some
ideas about how best to characterize that cosmology, and especially the
nature of the "sacred" beings who inhabit it. For all these questions, the
advantage of privileging native exegeses is that by doing so we are not
limited to our own, extrinsic questions. By paying close attention to what
participants say and do, we are also enabled to address those issues that
are of greatest importance to them.
It is a point of honour among the Rajputs of UttarakhaQQ. (who
comprise roughly eighty per cent of the local population) to bear the
expenses of PaQQ.avalila, and to feast as many friends and relatives as
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
Rll"UAL ANO PERFORMANCE IN THE PA~I;>AVALTLA OF GARHWAL 283
possible during its course.10 After the first Pai;ic;lavafila I witnessed (a
simple one-afternoon affair) a local bard announced his plans to sponsor
a nine-day 'Rhinoceros lilii' the following month. Bystanders expressed
doubt that a single man could bear the costs of such a project, and
suggested that he open a small teashop during the Lila to help cover his
expenses. He took great offense at this, and insisted that he alone would
bear all expenses. He would die, he said, and become nothing (iiinya),
but his name would live forever because he had sponsored this Pai;i
c;lavalTia singlehandedly.
For the Pai;ic;lavalTia, as for all spectacles in Uttarikhai;ic;I, the par
ticipation of all villagers, and hence the unification of the village, is
deemed essential. Men working elsewhere return for the festivities,
quarrelling factions declare a truce, and every household contributes
labor and materials. Among the most important guests are village
daughters (disa-dhiyaT}i) and their families. Because of virilocality, these
women nearly always live elsewhere with their husbands. Thus they are
simultaneously treated as non-resident members of the village and as
honored guests.11 When they arc invited to their natal villages for such
occasions, they must be given at least one item of clothing, as well as
some 'dowry' money, before being sent back to their husbands' places.
Ula.
Villagers' maternal and paternal relations are also invited for the
This pattern of feasting was very significant in Bhatgwali, where villagers
sponsor a performance only once each generation. In 1985 the lila
occurred after a thirty-five year hiatus, and lasted thirteen days, during
four of which I was the guest of Vishnu Singh. On the first two days
Vishnu Singh and his family fed about thirty-five people twice daily, and
on the last two days the figure jumped to about one-hundred. Vishnu
Singh's case was typical: he calculated that each village household spent
Ula,
seven to eight-hundred rupees on the including supplies for its own
members and guests, contributions to the collective stores, clothes and
sweets for all the village daughters, and a parting 'mark' or 'gift'
(pi(hiii711) of one rupee to each guest. Eating guests were almost
exclusively limited to members of the Negi subcaste, since there would be
difficulties if other Rajput castes attended, to say nothing of Brahmans.
The local people took pride in their lila, and confidently asserted that no
•• The precise origin orthc Rajpuu orUuarlkhai:id is a complicated and controversal
question. Herc it is enough to say that in Uuarakhaoi;t, 'Rajput' rcrcn to any membtr
or any of the castes of the K~atriya ll417JO.
11 Sec Sax 1991 for an extended discussion of the place of the dliifa11i in Garhwali
culture and society.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
284
WILLIAM SAX
one could feast their castemates in such quantity, or with such quality
foods, as could the Ncgis.
Local persons cite two precedents for such feasting from the Maha
bharata. It is said that after Bhima killed the demon Bakasur, King
Naganjit in whose dominions the demon had been wreaking havoc
rewarded him by feeding him r01J/, pW/i, pakot/D, kh4ja, diidli, ghi, and
makkluun. 12 This is virtually a paradigm list oft he "food off easts" (Marriott
1968), properly fed by Raja Naganjit as an inferior to Bhima his divine
superior. A second precedent is even more interesting. It is said that once,
Duryodhana sent Durvasa and all his disciples to test Mother Kunti's
sat, her 'goodness' or 'authenticity'. The Pandavas had finished eating
when Durvasa and his entourage showed up." What to do? They'd
finished and there was nothing left. Krishna saw that there was only one
rice grain remaining, instructed Kunti to cook it, and told Durvasa and
his disciples to go and bathe in the river while their meal was being
maya,
prepared. Through Krishna's they all felt as though their bellies
were filled at the river and began burping and farting. When they returned
to where Kunti had cooked up the single grain into a pot full of rice,
they protested that they had no more room in their bellies. Thus Krishna
saved Kun ti's sat, even as he'd previously saved Draupadi's. 14 The point
is that to be able to feed others is more than a matter of honour and
prestige; it is a reflection of one's sat, of the truth of one's being, and thus
of one's most fundamental nature. To be unable to feed others is to be
profoundly inauthentic, and to lack the resources to do so, humiliating.
On those rare occasions when Brahmans stage a Pa1:u;lavalila, their
transactions are strictly limited. They invite neither friends nor village
daughters, and no feasting occurs. A Brahman Pa1:u;lavalna is, as one of
my Rajput friends succindy put it, a 'matter of false impersonation'
(r/hakosalewali bat), since the lila is thought to be more properly done by
Rajputs. When the (mostly young, male) residents of the Brahman
village where I normally resided sponsored a PaQ<;lavama, they invited
12 Bread sweetened with jaggery and fried in ghee or oil; plain, deep-fried bread; gram
flour cakes stuffed with vegetables and deep-fried in oil; pounded, dry-fried grains; milk;
clarified buuer; buuer.
" In local venions of the Mahabharata, Kunti accompanied her five sons on their
forest exile.
" Another venion has it that it was Draupadi who was tested: she had a basket from
Surya Bhagawan that magically filled with food once each afternoon. The Pandavas had
finished their daily meal when Ourvasa and his disciples came: Krishna through his m<iyti
saved her honor, even has he'd saved it at the cfr-"'2r411.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
RITUAL AND PERFORMANCE IN THE P~(>AVALTLA OF GARHWAL 285
no guests. There was some exchange, but it was all directed inward, to
fellow-villagers. In the Brahmans' Pa1;u;lavafila, preliminary dancing
began one evening, and on the next afternoon they 'danced' the
Pandavas' weapons at the village goddess' temple, and sought her
permission to perform the filii. On the remaining three days, the same
sequence was repeated in every courtyard in the village. Each house had
prepared a platter with red powder, flowers, yogurt, an orange, and
some raw, husked rice grains. A four-legged stool was placed in the
middle of the square, and Bhima held his club upright on it. The village
goddess's Brahman priest poured yogurt and then water over the club,
and marked it with red powder. Then the red powder offered by the
household was mixed with that in the platter brought by the Pandavas,
and this was used to mark all the weapons and drums. Dancers, priest,
and visitors were served tea, then left. The village was divided into three
sections, and this kind of worship occurred in each house of a section,
successively on the three final days of the Pal)Qavama. Local people told
me that it was done to ensure good crops and weather, and general
prosperity. They also stressed the mixing of the red powder from each
household, which brought about the union of Brahman and Rajput
residents of the village.
No Brahman caste-fellows from outside the village were invited, and to
do so would have seemed ludicrous, since the Pal)Qavama. is thought
properly to be a Rajput rather than a Brahman tradition. In fact, aside
from this single example, all the Pal)cjavaffias discussed here occurred in
villages whose population was ninety to one-hundred per cent Rajpat.
When the Rajputs ofBhatgwali processed through the Brahmans' village
on their way .down to cut the Jami tree, and later while carrying it back
up, they were offered no hospitality whatsoever by their Brahman
neighbours, with whom they were otherwise on good terms. The Rajputs
were angry about this, and asserted that although it was perhaps true
that the Brahmans had no duty to fete them as Rajputs, it was certainly
the case that as the Pandavas, they were worthy of respect and even
worship, and that by failing to provide the minimum of tea and biscuits,
the Brahmans were guilty of a significant omission.
In general, then, Pai;icjavama is sponsored and performed by a
community ofRajputs for their caste-fellows. In the process of sponsoring
a performance, the village is constituted as a unity. As the men in
Bhatgwali told me, Pai;icjavama 'closes the circle' of relations, so that
distant relatives may be briefly united in its context. Large expenditures
of wealth and effort to uni1e a wide-ranging group are characteristic of
the maximal strategy predicted for the K~atriya vanJa by Marriott
( 1976: 125- 26), as is the pseudo-aristocratic reluctance of the Bhatgwali
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
286
WILLIAM SAX
Negis to feast Rajputs of other castes (though they were willing to feed
Brahmans). Hence the Pa1;u;lavalila is bound up with conventional caste
identities and their associated transactional strategies. This is hardly
surprising, since it is evident that most Hindus think of the content of
their everyday social relationships as determined by transactions among
persons and other beings. What is significant about the Pa1;1e;lavalila
and for that matter about feasting and public spectacle generally in
India-is the reflexive nature of the transactions involved. By uniting,
and in that sense defining, the persons and communities considered
necessary for their performance, such spectacles create the social condi
tions of their own existence. Moreover they occur "on stage", as
dramatic, foregrounded objects of attention, so that, in principle, both
participants and observers are party to the creative processes involved.
Pa1:u;lavalila is also understood as a ritual. Observers and participants
explicitly identify it as a form of worship (piijii) of the Pandavas, their
relatives and allies. A successful PaQQavalila generates not only group
unity, but other fruits as well. In Bhatgwali, I heard a drummer remark
"Wherever there is a PaQQavalila, good crops and prosperity follow in
every house". Recall that commendability of worship of the Pandavas as
personal gods (ifladtvalii), health of crops, avoidance of disease and
calamity, and the fastering of general well-being were all given as reasons
for sponsoring PaQQavalila. What sort of world is it in which the dance of
the Pandavas can achieve such positive results? What is the relationship
between dramatic performance and ritual, or- which is not quite the
same distinction- between Illa and piijii? What native term or concept
am I glossing as 'ritual', and how is this related to Pag(iavalila?15
Because the efficacy of ritual depends upon ideas about the nature of
the universe, cosmology can (to some degree) be inferred from ritual.
And since rituals are directed to specific ends, those who perform them
are careful to follow their procedures with some exactitude, so that the
" In addressing these qutstions, I have been greatly influenctd by Stanley Tambiah's
"perfonnative approach", in which he boldly assays a "working dtfinition of ri1ual", to
wit: "Ritual is a culturally constructtd systtm of symbolic communication. It is
constituttd of pattemtd and ordertd stquencts of words and acts, often expresstd in
multiple mtdia, whose content and arrangement are characteriztd in varying degrtt by
formality (conventionality). stereotypy (rigidity}, condensation (fusion). and rtdundancy
(repetition). Ritual action in its constitutive featurts is performative in these three sensts:
in the Austinian sense of performative wherein saying something is also doing something
as a conventional act; in 1he quite different sense of a stagtd performance that uses
multiple mtdia by which the participants experience the event intensively; and in the
third sense of indexical valuts-l derive this concept from Peirce- being attachtd to and
inferrtd by actors during the performance" ( 1985: 119).
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
287
RITUAL AND PERFORMANCE IN THE P~l,)AVALTLA OF GARHWAL
desired ends might be obtained. Fail to observe the rules, and you don't
get the results. Taken together, these ideas go far toward accounting for
the contrast between the serious, rule-bound Pai;iQavalila viewed as a
lilas
ritual, and the playful, irreverent included within it.
What actions are necessary for a properly-performed Pli.QQavalila, and
how do they so effect the world that positive fruits result? Bricfty, three
sets of actions arc important here. The first ensures the relative purity of
the environment in which the Pli.QQavalila is to take place. The 'four
passes' (to the village) arc 'bound' (caukhii/ii biindhiijiitii hat) before the lilii
begins, so that negative and inauspicious begins or forces may not enter.
A bamboo workbaskct is torn into four pieces, each of which is filled with
equal parts of squash, yellow pumpkin, 'seven-grain mixture' (salami;),
green and yellow powder, and an uncooked mixture of rice and lentils.
Four men then take these basket-shreds (caiigtira) to the village periphery
and fix them to the ground at the four cardinal points with cut lengths of
bamboo and split nails fashioned from iron plough heads. These offcring
fillcd baskets placate any malevolent beings who might be tempted to
disrupt the lilii, and also bar their entry into the village. The 'piercing
arrow' ritual (blud-biit)) is performed at the beginning and end of each
night's performance to chase away disruptive beings and counteract the
potentially harmful effect of the wind, which is said to make people
unconscious (behof). Arjuna (or, more rarely, another character) takes a
lit brazier of incense in his left hand, at the same time grasping grains or
a lemon in his right. He approaches the fire which remains burning in
one corner of the dancing square throughout the lilii, illuminates and
honors (iirati kamii) it and the other three cardinal directions, and spins
rapidly in a circle, with the brazier dramatically shooting off sparks and
smoke. He then places the brazier on the ground and spins about again,
hurling handfuls of grain into the air. Each time after hurling grain, he
pounds the fist in which the remaining grain is clenched into his other,
open palm, 'closing' the direction and thus keeping beneficial energies
inside the village as well as inauspicious beings out. I was told that a
mantra accompanied this action, but was unable to learn what it was.
These actions are formal, stereotypical, condensed and redundant
rituals in Tambiah's sense (see note 15). Moreover, since they are
performed at temporal junctures (beginnings and endings) they serve to
mark off the "ritual phase" of the Pli.QQavama within its larger, "social"
context. This ritual phase is attended by a great deal of seriousness.
People are concerned that the proper procedures be followed, in order
that the Pli.QQavama may bring about its desired results. There are yet
more procedures to ensure that negative and/or polluting beings do not
participate in the li/ii: for instance singers, dancers, drummers, their
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
288
WILLIAM SAX
drums, and visiting village gods are marked with the five 'purifying'
products of the cow butter, curd, dung, and urine) as
(pallca-ga~milk,
they arrive in the square, and this is thought to drive off any polluting or
disruptive substances or beings that may be 'adhering' to them.
Theoretically, anyone is allowed to dance in the Pai;idavafila except for
polluting beings such as dogs, untouchables, menstruating or post-par
tem women and those in contact with them, whose presence might
invalidate the performance.
Local gods are perhaps the most effective removers of pollution. In
Sutol village, the goddess Uluga Mai, a form of Kali, was especially
fastidious about keeping the lilii's environment pure. I recorded one of
her outbursts, which went like this:
There's no sugar for the tea, the rules arc not being followed! Pollution
(chiuu:hut) has fallen in your courtyard. Don't blame me, and don't blame
the Pandavas! ... There's no order in this Pandavas' exercise (iik1144ii). The
god of your land (hhW..i k4 malik) can sec all that you're doing, you'll have
to answer to him! I cannot bum the blood of the transgressor. Promise me,
promise me-I tell the dliaram to all. . . . I am not a (blood-) sucking
goddess; demand the oath of your old established (village) gods as well!
Dance! Play! Perform your filii!
Kali's accusations were borne out the next day when it was discovered
that the wife of the man who was dancing the part of Krishna had given
birth to a baby, so that all those affected by the consequent birth
pollution had to stop dancing. However it was not to this event that
Kali's remarks were understood to have referred, but rather to the likely
onset of menstruation among some of the female dancers.
Disruptive entities appear even in the most carefully choreographed
performances. In Bhatgwali for instance, I was seated precariously on a
rooftop watching the lilii in which a goat representing the rhinoceros is
beheaded. This was followed by the lilii in which Arjuna is wounded by
his son Nagarjuna.16 At the climax of this scene several women shrieked
and swooned, while below in the dancing square men shouted, collapsed,
or began agitatedly dancing. The large crowd surrounding the dancers
surged forward, nearly engulfing them, at which point a pumpkin was
shattered and its pieces tossed in all directions as a 'small sacrifice' to the
malevolent beings (chal/pret) hovering about, so that they would not
harm Arjuna. This all happened so quickly that I had hardly recovered
" N agarjuna of the Pli;1<javalill ;., similar in many respects to the character Babhruva
hana in the Pune edition of the Mahibhirata.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
289
RITUAL AND PERFORMANCE IN THE PA~l;)AVALlLA OF GARHWAL
my bearings before it was over. Participants said that the swanning
ghosts and demons, attracted by the goat's blood and the passion of the
father-son battle, 'seized' members of the audience. However these
beings were apparently pacified by the squash offering and subsequent
rejuvenation of Arjuna, for when the latter arose, "possessed" persons
quickly returned to nonnal. People sitting near me emphatically pointed
out that in the following dance Nagarjuna recognized Arjuna as his
father, and the two were reunited as father and son. It is important
to note that Arjuna is in many respects the chief protagonist of
the Mahabharata; certainly he is the most heroic character in the
Pai:it;lavalila. Parricide is almost never represented in Hindu art and
literature (Ramanujan 1983), so this scene suggests extreme social and
moral disturbance. Evidently most of the villagers knew that it was
coming, so that the temporary mass possession was not as "spontaneous"
as it initially appeared, however the episode does suggest that disruption
of the Pa1;1t;lavama by malevolent beings is a real and ever-present
danger. At the conscious level, ritual actions that protect the environ
ment of the perfonnance are not "symbolic" of an underlying order so
much as they are practical expedients in a world inhabited by numerous,
potentially disruptive beings and forces.
Not only is Pai:it;lavalila itself a ritual, it also includes several rituals.
Local Rajputs consider themselves the direct descendants of the Pan
davas, and therefore consider it their duty to perfonn mortuary rites for
King Pandu, which they often do by incorporating JrQddha rites into the
performance. These are performed by Brahmans hired for the purpose,
acting as priests for Nakul, regarded as Pandu's only biological son (by
Madri). Participants were emphatic that these were 'complete' rituals in
every sense. Not only Pandu's Jriiddha, but also the aJvamtdha yajiril
pi~a
and accompanying riij tilak, the final expiatory yajirils, the prii'J(I prat4(hii
of the Jami tree, and a goat sacrifice in the "orthodox" Garhwali fashion
(some of these are described below) were all performed by Brahman
priests.
Throughout this article I have called Pai:it;lavama a 'ritual', intending
by that term a translation of the local word devakiirya, the 'work' (kiirya)
of the gods (deva). In a broad sense, any act of worship or devotion can
be called deuakiirya, though in practice the term is usually applied only to
public spectacles involving the physical presence of divine beings. In the
Pai:it;lavama, the most notably present gods are the Pandavas, but there
are others as well. Some people told me that Pai:it;lavama was the
equivalent of worship of the goddess Kali, since Draupadi plays such an
important part and is regarded as an incarnation of the goddess Kali. As
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
290
WILLIAM SAX
the local saying goes,
ruw
ilM avat4r duropati
kiili kt k4uil4s krmd:!etra kino
Draupadi took eight incarnations;
the Kali of Kailash did the Kuruluhetra (war)."
Thus by invoking Draupadi, honoring her and causing her to dance,
villagers believe that they are worshipping Kali as in the so-called catJt/I
pu-;·a-. 18
However, by far the most important reason Pa1:u;lavafila is regarded as
a piijii is that in it, the Pandavas arc summoned, worshipped, and 'caused
to dance'. The initial, purifying rituals arc performed for the sole purpose
of enabling them to enter safely and without hindrancc.19 Summoned in
the manner described at the beginning of this essay, they and their
'army' are honored, and u.se their brief period of embodiment to engage
in the pleasurable activity of dancing, to bless their devotee/descendents
with good health and crops, etc., and to provide them with oracular
information. In this sense the piijii which is Par:u;lavama exemp
lifies pan-Indian patterns: worshippers summon a divine or royal guest,
who is fed and/or honored, blesses the worshipper(s}, and is dismissed.
It is also thought essential that the Pandavas' weapons, containers of
their specific powers, participate in the lilii. In all Par:u;lavama, Arjuna
and his son Nagarjuna dance with bows and arrows, Bhima with a club,
Nakul with a scythe, Sahadev with a slate, Yudhisthira with a staff,
Krishna with a ca/era, and Draupadi with a dagger (again suggesting her
identification with Kali). It should be emphasized that these weapons
are indices (in the Peircean sense) of power by virtue of their infusion
with it; they are neither icons nor symbols of it. They are intrinsically
powerful and dangerous, and a great deal of care is taken to ensure that
they are given only to the appropriate persons and in the proper·
circumstances. Participants stress that only the village deity (bhiimyii/,
literally 'god of the land') can distribute weapons, and that this
distribution constitutes his permission to sponsor the lilii, a permission
which must be obtained before the performance can proceed.
" This adage confirms Hiltebeitel's deduction that Oraupadi, who is explicitly
id<.ntified with Shri in the printed versions of the epic, has at a "deeper" level more
similarities to Kali. Uttarakha9Qi experts on the Mahlibhirata harbor no doubts that
Draupadi is a form of Ka.Ii. As Hiltebeitel has suggested, "living traditions of and about
the Mahiibhiirata arc often in close touch with traditional epic meanings that have
escaped the classically based literary scholars" ( 1980: 152).
•• Worship according to the durgii sapta!ati or tlevi m4/W.tmya, the most popular local
text for goddess-worship.
"Nautiyal (1981:127- 130) also mentions the summoning (ahut) and dismissal (vitliii)
of the Pandavas' iitm<U, either by a pujari or by the pa11wii/.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
RITUAL AND PERFORMANCE IN THE PA~l;>AVALTLA OF GARHWAL 291
In Bhatgwali for instance, there were a series of "rehearsals" from the
sixth solar day, permission was sought from the bhii"!J'iil and the passes
'closed' on the ninth, and the weapons were first 'played' only on the
fourteenth solar day of the month of miigh. When the fami tree was being
carried up the mountainside to be installed in the Pandavas' courtyard,
players were extremely careful that their weapons not touch the ground,
lest the power contained in them escape (falcti ci(jiina). Recall that in this
village, the Par:u;lavalila was happening after thirty-five years. The
weapons were manipulated in such a way that the continuity of three
generations was assured: the youngest generation, referred to as 'little
dancers', who were in effect novices or understudies, and had almost no
contact with weapons; their fathers, who were the 'big' dancers of the filii
and performed with newly-made weapons; and the previous generation
of dancers (most of them deceased) virtually represented by the weapons
they had used in the previous lllii. These older weapons were not
employed in the dance, but remained instead on the Pandavas' altar at
the northeast corner of the square. On the final day of the lllii, they were
taken in procession along with the fami tree (itself an index of the
Pandavas' victory and rule), and 'buried' above the village water source,
where their power could be recycled, as it were, into local residents. This
manipulation of weapons seemed intended to facilitate an unbroken
transmission of royal power (kfatra) within the Pandavas' lineage,
thought to include living village Rajputs.
In contrast to other aspects of the performance (e.g. the feasting that
surrounds it, the episodic ll/iis per se), these rituals arc undertaken with
the utmost seriousness, since the ultimate success of the event is depen
dent upon them. By means of the rituals, the Pandavas can be sum
moned and their blessings obtained. There is however another important
source of power in the Pa1.1c;lavama: the villagers themselves. Although
the designation of positive ritual benefits as 'fruits' is primarily meta
phorical, the heat required to ripen them is more literally construed as
tap, 'ascetic heat' generated by human action. Singers, dancers, and even
some village spectators engage in a number of ascetic practices such as
going without sleep, restricting the diet, foregoing sexual activity, and so
forth. Such actions are generally talked about in terms of devotion
(bhalcti), but devotion often takes ascetic forms in India as elsewhere.
Pa1.1i;lavama performances generally begin around midnight, and last
until dawn, for several nights in a row. After the third such 'night of
standing', 20 when I went to interview the chief bard Padam Singh, he
'°
klraefi rat in Hindi; also ~rpratii (one's own night?) in Garhwali.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
292
WILLIAM SAX
told me he'd been "awake for thirty-one hours, and asleep for one". This
was typical of most of the players, who slept very little during the 1114. It
was considered bad fonn, whereas to stay awake as long as possible was
regarded as a merit-generating practice. Consumption of country liquor
notoriously accompanies a great many local spectacles, but is unam
biguously proscribed for the PaQcjavalila. Padam Singh told me that his
own rule (rr!)iam) was to abstain completely from sex, meat, and any
contact with polluting persons for the duration of the Pli\)cjavama. On
the night before the Jami tree 1114 in Bhatgwali, the chief dancer came to
the house where I was staying to inform all the dancers there that until
they returned next evening, they were to observe a total fast. Evidently,
the actions of humans are believed to have an important effect on the
success or failure of a PaQcjavama.
Possession and "Tiu Sacred"
In a recent essay, A. K. Ramanujan asserts that there is an important
difference between classical and folk aesthetics in India. Distinctions
between poet and audience, poet and character, and character and actor
are, says Ramanujan, the bases of classical poetics and its theory of
emotions, while in folk theater,
notions of possession are never far from the audience's mind ... bard and
character, bard and audience, bard and actor, actor and character arc
merged at crucial moments and separated at ordinary times. One goes to
the theater/ritual to experience such mergers in different degrees (1986:69-
70).
In PaQc;lavama, the boundary between actor and character is permeab1e,
fluid and shifting. Bards play characters (the chief bard in Suto!
also played the part of Arjuna, and recited the story as Arjuna to
his brothers); characters possess members of the audience; and these
onlookers-cum-players proceed to dance the characters' parts. Herc
Dcrrctt's assertion is literally true: possession is theatre ( 1979:287). The
most dramatic sort of possession in Pai;icjavama involves local village
gods, what one might call "special guest-stars". Just as a village's
ma,
resident humans, their relatives and friends enjoy coming to see the
so resident gods, along with their relatives and followers, enjoy par
ticipating in the lllii by 'dancing' in the bodies of their human 'beasts'
(pasvii) or 'abodes' (dhiimi). Their presence is auspicious, and they often
give oracular information to members of the audience, usually with the
hailftSaTJjurviil (literally "laughing barley"). In this oracular technique, a
god approaches a spectator with a handful of unhusked grain and hurls it
at him. The spectator counts the number of grains caught in his upraised
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
293
RITUAL AND PERFORMANCE JN THE P~OAVALlLA OF GARHWAL
hand: an odd number is bad, and an even number is good. Gods may
also give verbal oracles to human members of the audience, pledge to
eliminate their troubles or fulfill their desires, tell them the cause of some
difficulty they are experiencing, and so forth. Sometimes during Par;i
Qavafila, new deities manifest themselves by spontaneously 'coming over'
a person, causing him or her to begin dancing in the middle of a
performance. In the two cases I saw, the possessed person was a woman,
and the incident provoked a debate as to whether this 'new ialct1' should
be allowed to dance or not. Onlookers tried to find out the new goddess's
name, allowed her to do obeisance to the Pandavas, and dismissed her as
quickly as possible.
The typical style of possession of the Pandavas was quite different than
that of local deities. At the beginning of every performance in Suto!, the
Rajput priest of the local village deity would hurl some barley seeds,
along with the appropriate mantras, at the Pandava brothers standing
shoulder-to-shoulder on the small wooden stage elevated above the
dancing square. They would tremble and shake, evincing the charac
teristic signs of possession, then leap on the the square and begin
dancing. But aside from this initial and rather conventional sequence,
they did not exhibit the characteristic trembling, wild dancing, rolled-up
eyes, changed voice, and so on, of possession. Initially I thought this was
evidence that the actors were not "really" possessed, but villagers told
me that this was not so. Their possession was certainly authentic, but it
was more subtle (siiktma) than possession by other gods. This is consistent
with the Pandavas' benevolent natures, their kingly self-control as
opposed to the typically fierce (ugra), uncontrolled natures of less refined
village deities. Of course the Pandavas are the major characters of the
lilii, and the positive benefits of a performance are due above all to their
auspicious and benevolent presence.
What can we conclude about Pal)Qavafila? .It is certainly the case that
through rituals and other practices, this form of "folk theatre" seeks to
overcome distinctions between actors and the characters they play. If
classical Indian aesthetic theory does indeed insist upon the separation of
actor and character, where actors only "pretend to be like" the characers
they play, then it seems that we are dealing with a very different sort of
cultural form in Pal)Qavama, which seeks through ritual to make the
characters literally present and thus achieve, by means of a transference
of their inherent energy, a beneficial result (cf. Sax 1990 for a very
similar process in Ramlila). All of this relates to a central point regarding
the interpretation of Hindu cosmology. If it is true as Tambiah writes
that rituals "enact and incarnate cosmological conceptions" ( 1985: 121 ),
then we may infer the folk cosmology of these U ttarakhal)Q peasants
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
294
WILLIAM SAX
from their rituals. An examination of the Pii;tQavafili clearly suggests a
cosmology in which the boundaries between gods and men are not only
fluid, but can even sometimes be overcome. Although it has been
claimed (chiefly by Eliade and his followers) that in some or all cultures,
people react to a pre-existent and self-contained category called "the
sacred" which occasionally "irrupts" into the profane, everyday world,
Hindus by contrast often say that the gods they worship, the places to
which they perform pilgrimage, the rituals they perform, are 'good'
(blralii), 'holy' (pavitra), and 'auspicious' (iubh/maiigala), or have 'power'
(.prabhava/iakti)- all of which I take to be major components of the
notion of "the sacred"--only because of human action. Pilgrimage
places, for instance, are often said to derive their unique qualities from
the ascetic practices of sages in past epochs, and to retain their power
through the continuing actions of pilgrims. The creative power of faith
(viivas), understood as an active expression rather than a passive
attitude, is also important. When rural Hindus attempted to provide me
with global exegeses of their religion they almost always included a line
of explanation that went something this this: "In the Hindu dhanna, we
worship stones. If one has faith and worships in the proper way, then
even a stone becomes God. But without faith, it is only a stone".
The PiQQavama requires a special environment prepared and main
tained by humans, and humans are the vehicles in which gods speak and
dance. The auspicious power of the performance is to some degree
dependent upon the asceticism of humans who participate in it, and the
Pandavas themselves could not become present if humans did not possess
the appropriate mantras with which to summon them. Now whether the
Pii;i9avama, as it is experienced by peasants in Uttariikhai;iQ, is to be
seen as an "irruption of the sacred" into everyday life, or as a "deliberate
human creation", is largely a matter of interpretation, since the question
is not relevant to those who sponsor and perform it. But if we wish to
understand their categories rather than reify our own, we must attend to
their understandings and actions, and in doing so we discover human
creativity at the heart of Pii;i9avama.
Bibliography
Artaud, Antonin. 1958 (1938). Tlrt Tlrtatre il1ld its Doubu. New York: Grove Press.
lkrreman,Gerald 0. 1972. Hindus of tlrt HimalaJ4S. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Chandola, Anoop. 1977. Folk Drumming in the Himalayas: A LinguiJtit Approath 1<1 Musit.
New York: AMS Press.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
RITUAL AND PERFORMANCE IN THE P~(>AVALlLA Of GARHWAL 295
Courtright, Paul B. 1985. On This Holy Day in my Humble Way: A!pccts of Piijii. In
Joanne Punzo Waghome and Nonnan Cutler, eds., Gods of Fusll/Gotls of Sllnu. pp.
32-.SO. Chambenburg: Anima.
O.rrcu, J. Duncan M. 1979. Spirit-POSIC9Sion and the Gerasene Demoniac. Mt11t 14(2):
286- 93.
Goldman, Robert P. 1986. S1n1<1ur1, SrJ;s1"11<1, ONi F1111<ftor« in the Gr.al Slllukrit EpKs (1).
Paper presented at the Festival of India Conference on Indian Literatures, The
Univeniry of Chicago, April 1986.
Heestennan, J.C. 1962. Vrarya and Sacrifice. /11110-/rOllWt J-16: 1-37.
-1964. Brahmin, Ritual and Renouncer. Wimn :(.titschrijlfor dil KINU Sild-111111 Osl4sim.s
8: 1- 31.
Hein, Norvin. 1972. Till Mirael• P'4.Js of M.W.ro. New York and London: Yale Univenity
Press.
-1987. Lila. Jn Mircea Eliade, ct al, eds., Till &t.J<l"f><dia of &lipm, vol. 8, pp. 550-~.
New York: Macmillan.
Hess, Linda. 1986. Slll..U., al Fro'"" Till TJuy T""' Into ~s: An Ex<MrsiMt Tltr°"lh So,.,
Worlds of Tu.lsidtu. Paper presented at the Festival of India Conference on Indian
Literatures, The Univcnity of Chicago, April 1986.
Hiltebeitel, Alf. 1976. Th< Ritvo/ of Bout.: Kris/wJ in tJu Moh4/Jhirolo. Ithaca and London:
ComcU Univcnity Press.
-1980. $iva, the Goddess and the Di.sgultes of the Pli;idavas and Draupadi. History of
&lipMtS 19: 147-74.
Kinsley, David R. 1979. Th• Divine P/JJp: A Shuly of Krfrlll UIO. Delhi: Motilal.
Lutgcndorf, Phillip. In press. Th< life of a Tut: Trdsidi.s' /WntoribMM.s in P"f°""""''·
Berkeley: The Univeniry of California Press.
Marriott, McKim, 1968. Caste Ranking and Food Transactions, a Matrix Analysis. In
Milton Singer and Bernard S. Cohn, eds. St,,,,turt o1UI Clrangt in lrulion Soeil!J>.
Chicago, Aldine.
-1976. Hindu Transactions: Divcnity Without Dualism. In Bruce Kapfercr, ed.,
Tr011SOCtion ONi Mtonillg, pp. 109-42. Philadelphia: ISHI.
Nautiyal, Shivanand. 1981. Go4Jow0/ k• LAkoJrrl.Jd Git (Folk Songs and Dances of
Gadhwal). Prayag: Hindi Sahitya Sammclan.
Ramanujan, A.K. 1983. The Indian Oedipus. In Lowell Edmunds and Alan Dundcs,
eds., OediJnU, A Folklore Casebook, pp. 234-65. New York and London: Garland
Publishing.
-1986. Two Realms of Kannada Folklore. In Stuart Blackbum and A.K. Ramanujan,
eds., Jlrw Essa.JS in tJu Folklv" of Indio. Berkeley: Univcnity of California Press.
Sax, William S. 1990. The Ramnagar Rimlfli: text, pilgrimage, pcrfonnancc. History of
&ligi.ons 29( 1) .
- 1991. Molllllllin Goddtss: Gtrultr o1UI Politics in a Him4'0.J4" Pilgrimage. New York: O>tford
Univcnity Press.
Schcchn<r, Richard and Linda Hess. 1977. The Rlmllll ofRamnagar. Till Drama Rttlino
21(3): 51-82.
Singer, Milton. 1955. The Cultural Pattern of Indian Civilization. For &sUrn Qioar1<r(y
15: 23-36.
Smith, Brian K. 1987. Exorcising the Transcendent: Strategics for Defining Hinduism
and Religion. Hiswry of Rliigions 21 (I): 32-55.
Tambiah, Stanley J. 1985. A Ptrfonnativc Approach to Ritual (the Radcliffe-Brown
Lecture for 1979). /ft Crdtu,,, TM"1hl, orul SO<ial Actioft: A• A"'1rlopologilol Persjltctiw.
Cambridge: Harvard Univcnity Press.
Van Buit<n<n, j.A.8., ed. 1956. Ramanuja's V1t/4rtlwoingrolu.. Punc: Deccan Coll<gc
Monograph Series ( # 16).
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
RAKSASA BHIMA:
WOLFBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS
IN THE SANSKRIT MAHABHARATA AND THE VE}f1SAMHARA'
DAVID L. GITOMER
ABSTRACT
Bhima's killing of Duryodhana ends the great MaliiihMrala war and intiates the
reestablishment of dhanna in the reign of his older brother Yudhinhira. Like many of the
Plb;idava victories, however, the act itself is ess<:ntially one ofadhanna. Yet the extreme
violence, submerged sexual cannibalism, and suggested sacrificial moti& in Bhima's murder
of Duryodhana and especially of his brother Dul).Sasana go beyond mere adhanna: they
look like the work ofa raqasa. This observation prompts a reexamination of the preceding
Shima stories in the main narrative. Not only docs Bhima possess certain physical and
behavioral characteristics of these ogres, he actually weds a raqasi (Hidimba) and on her
fathen a son (Gha1otkaca) who figures significantly in the later narrative. Further,
a programmatic series ofc ncountcn with (and killings of) rakJasas construct (or reveal) the
various <Upects of Bhima's identity, culminating in the penona capable of dest.roying
Dul;lsasana by ripping open his chest and drinking his blood. Most important, these
encounters place Shima in the center of the opposition between brahmans and rilkpsas, the
keepers of the sacrifice and the smashers of the sacrifice. He intervenes lU a "good" rikpsa
in scenarios of distress involving these two orders of beings (who are actually mirror images
of each other), with the result that raqasas and Par.idavlU undergo transfonnations. All
these motifs arc highlighted in the Sanskrit drama called V11JiSaiii/uir• ofBha11a Narayaoa,
which uses Bhima's bloodthirst to articulate his p<Usionatc devotion to Draupadi; the
dynamics of this relationship can thus be more e<Uily traced in the epic itself. Since the play
also features a number of rakpsas who seem to be functioning as vidupklU (nonnaUy the
degraded brahman buffoons), we find peculiar confirmation of the brahman-riqasa
connection ..., well ..., new insights into the nature of the comic in the classical drama.
Bill.ma, the voracious and often violent Pa1:u;lava brother of the MakiibkaraJa,
is also aptly known as Vrkodara, "Wolfbelly." His most significant
charactcrological features, some of which arc only suggested in the epic
narrative (his passionate devotion to Draupadi chief among them) arc
explicitly delineated in the Sanskrit drama called the Ve11i"samJuira ofBhana
' This essay was first delivered ..., a paper at the Madison South Asia Conference in 1985
and later revised for publication. It began ..., a condensation ofp arts of the second and third
chapters of my doctoral dissertation. Sec David L. Gitomer, "The VmisamJiiita of Bhana
Narayar;ia: The great epic as drama" (Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University, 1987) All
translations from the play are mine. I thank Alf Hiltebeitel for his response to the Madison
paper. His comments helped especially in modulating and refining the similitude between
Bhima and riqaw, in filling out the typology of the brahma-raqasa, and in stimulating
further insights on Bhima's role in "the sacrifice of battle." Thanks also to Nonnan Cutler
for his many suggestions on a later draft.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
297
RAK$ASA BHlMA: WOLFBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS
Narayal)a. This play, written around 700 A.O., is one of the very few
post-Bhli.sa compositions based on the Makiihkiirata to have secured
a prestigious place among Sanskrit dramas. In retelling the epic, the play,
like any retelling, is actually interpreting it, but interpreting it within the
expectations defined by the genre prescriptions ofd ramaturgical manuals
such as the NalJiafiistra and other texts descended from it. This interaction
between the epic story and the dramatic genre will figure in this discussion,
but its theoretical aspects cannot be detailed here. 2 The fulcrum for this
essay is an exploration oft he range ofa ffinities between Bhima and the race
of cannibalistic ogres called clearly creatures who haunt the
ra~asas,
sacrificing, order-maintaining brahmans as their shadows. Yet there is
even more to learn from than their role in this crucial psycho
rak~asas
mythic reality: Since the Vn]isamkiira contains a number of horrific and
horrifically funny no (the brahman buffoon of the
rak~as-but vidii~ka
Sanskrit drama)- the play presents a wealth of insights into the peculiar
nature of the comic in the classical Indian theater.•
There are several features originating in the play that seem so powerfully
"correct" that they long ago seeped into the Makiihharata most Hindus
' Stt Gitomer (1987), Chapter Thrtt.
' After this essay achieved roughly iu present form, I came across the wonderfully
stimulating work of Kuiper (V."''"" and VidtilaA:a) and Shulman (Tht King and tht Clown in
~•th Indian Myth and Poetry). Both works contain arguments too complex to be faithfully
reproduced here, but mention ofs ome of the main features ofe ach must be given in order to
acknowledge th00< poinu where the present essay, though different in orientation from
either, approaches these other studies. Kuiper researches the Vedic god Varuoa who, in his
role as a sometime-asura, confronu the dcva Indra in a verbal contest which replicates an
original cosmogonical fight. This dynamic is repeated in the Trigata part of the purvartviga,
the preliminary ritual to the drama proper. Kuiper secs the interaction of the niyaka and
the vidii~ka in the play itselfa s an echo of this dynamic as well, and thus has traced a strong
argument for a Vedic origin of the Sanskrit drama. He docs not include the evidence of the
Veriisamh4ra in his "Dramas without a VidiiJaka" section, pp. 210ff. Shulma.n discovers
a primary and mutually transforming relationship between a mode of"tragic" limitation
within an obsessively ordered "sam;kara" and the mode which breaks free of this limitation
through comic critique and ••frame·shifting''-that is, clowning, an activity associatttl with
the vision embodied in divine play (Tamil ui/aiyii(al, Sanskrit lilii). The dynamics of the
Sanskrit drama arc only used to begin a delineation of the typologies and interactions of the
king and the clown, which would seem to be more vividly and radically realized in the
Tamil and Telegu materials. While the discussion of these modes and typologies is
genuinely revelatory, I feel uncomfortable with Shulman's identification of them with
"tragedy" and "comedy." I have explored the possibilities of the use of these terms in the
final chapter of my dissertation, and more fully in an unpublished essay, entitled "Karma
and the Question of Tragedy." In the end, because of my very strong conviction that the
aesthetic agenda of the classical drama tends, quite self-consciously, to naturalize all Vedic,
mythic, psycho-spiritual and political themes to its own purposes much more than it
"expresses" them, I decided to leave this essay basically unaltered, since it too observes these
moti& from the perspective of classical form and aesthetics.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
298
DAVID L. GITOMER
carry around in their heads; in fact, they recur in a number of later
vernacular versions.• One is the figure of Bhanumati, the wife of
Duryodhana. She docs not appear in any accessible Sanskrit recension of
the MaJW.bkii.rata (actually, none of Duryodhana's wives arc named); but
most Indians (especially South Indians) familiar with the epic, even
Sanskritists, when asked the name of Duryodhana's wife, will respond
"Bhanumati. "• Another striking feature is the vow which forms the
substance and the name of the play: In the epic, Bhima vows to smash
Duryodhana's thighs and drink Dul)sasana's blood (2.63.10-15; 2.68.
27-29) ,6 but in the play another element is added: With hands bloody from
smashing of Duryodhana's thighs, Bhima will bind up Draupadi's hair,
which has been loosened from the time when she was sexually taunted and
humiliated at the royal dicing assembly, the sabha at which
Yudhi~ibira
gambled away the kingdom. And whereas the epic simply lets it be known
at a certain point after the war (12.16.25) that Draupadi's hair is once
again restored to its condition before the dicing, Bhima's announcement of
his vow at Vtf]isamkii.ra 1.2 I promises a new, non-epic but epic-resonant
motif-the bloody binding of the hair.
Swinging around my throbbing arms
I will smash this wrathful mace
and grind the pair of Sudyodhana's thighs.
With hands reddened by Kuru blood,
clotted, sticky and thick, my queen,
Bhima will bind up your lovely hair.
This verse, and the enactment of its promise in the sixth act, carries an
unavoidable visual reminder of Draupadi's menstrual condition in the
epic, despite the play's avoidance, out of propriety, ofa ny direct reference
to a current menstrual condition.' For Hiltebeitel has shown, following
• Gitomer (1987), p. 25lff.
' Gitomer (1987), pp. 337-8; p. 419, n. 3.
' MaM/Jliiira14, crit. ed. V.S. Sukthankar, ct al. (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
lrutitute, 1933--66). All citations refer to this edition by book, chapter and verse;
translations from Books 1- 5 of the Mahil6/iiira14 arc from the translation of J.A.B. van
Buitrncn (Chicago: University ofC hicago Press, 1973- 78), except where I have indicated
a retranslation in order to highlight the issues under discussion. I have also consistently
made certain changes throughout, such as brahman for brahmin, qatriya for baron,
baronial, etc. Elsewhere brackets will contain a rephrasing, parentheses the original
Sanskrit. Translation> from books 6-18 of the epic are mine.
' In verse 1.11 of the play Draupadi is described as talMhhiltam, "thus being," or "thus
having become,'' i.e. ''in that condition.'' Commentator Jagaddhara glosses this expression
rhuruJtim nagria,;, ca, "having her period and naked." The more recent and more circumspect
LakJma\lasiiri explains the term, "degraded because of the inappropriate action> of the
dragging of the hair and garment, etc."
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
RAK~ASA BHTMA: WOLFBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS 299
Hershman's observations concerning the close symbolic connections
between women's head hair and female genitals, how the menstrual flow is
represented as a form of purification for certain forms of rape.•
That this "menstrual" blood is the blood of sacrifice-at least, as
a litnary association-is made evident in the play; verse 1.25 is a beautiful
extended metaphor of the sacrifice of battle, an image imported from the
epic:
We four brothers will officiate
as priests while Lord Hari oversees
the performances of the rite:
Our king is initiated
in the sacrifice called battle;
his wife's loosened braid
shows the purity of her vow.
We will offer the Kauravas
as victims; the fruit shall be
the quelling of the painful insult
to our beloved Paficali.
Now the drum of glory beats wildly,
calling warrior kings to join the slaughter.•
After that sacrifice has, for Pa1,14ava purposes at least, been completed, the
frightening visage ofBhima finally appears on the stage in the last act oft he
' Alf Hiltebeitel, "Draupadi's Hair," Puf'U4irtl&a 5, Autaur tk U. tkisse kindo ..: lltulu rlvltUs
pat MDJkltilll Biartka• (Paris: Editions de des hautes ctudes en sciencts sociales, 1981 ),
l'~ole
pp. 204-205, citing P. Hershman, "Hair, Sex and Dirt," M1111 IX (1974), pp. 274-298.
' The original actually has merely pami grlrilllvratii for the fourth line, "[our] wife is one
who has undertaken a vow." But the commentators realize the implications. LaqmaQasiiri
explains that the wife along with the yajamiiM (the patron of the sacrifice) becomes
a beneficiary of the fruit of such a sacrifice because the vow she maintains is part of the
consecration. Kale's subcommcntary on Jagaddhara states that the vow being spoken of
here is Bhima's-whcn the Kauravas arc destroyed, I will bind the hair. Identifications
made in the Brilrmarµss ofVi~ou with Prajiipati, particularly in his role ofs acrificer, are alive
in the epic, especially in the Udyoga Par0011, where Krishna the ambassador is seen as fanning
the flames of the tnmity betwt•n the two families and in the Mvam.dltika Parv1I11, whtre
Krishna plays a central role in producing th• ASvamcdha sacrifice ( 14. 70.21 ). As part oflht
peac• mission, Krishna offers the kingship to Kan)a who, in his bitterness toward the t ntire
kptriya ract, predicts a slaughttr in the form of a sacrifict; lhe mttaphor is quit< specific
and <xt<ndcd there (5.139.29-4-0), and may havt betn an inspiration for Bhana Niiriyaoa.
Compare also OnJ>Jrairga 1.6, 1.46, and 1.55. Again, immcdiately after Duryodhana has
bctn felltd by Bhima's adharmic thigh-smashing, Balarima turns lhe metaphor around to
praise the Kuru king against Krishna's defense ofBhima (9.59.25). My notice oftht notion
is as a metaphor within lhe economy of meanings shared by the MaMhliiirata and lht
Vt1,1isami\ira. The mylhic and symbolic importance of lh• great war as sacrifict has bctn
plumbed by Alf Hiltebeitel in Ritual of Bault: KrislrM in llrl MaMhi\irala (llhaca and
London: Cornell University Press, 1976).
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
300
DAVID L. GITOMER
Ve rJisatMi.ra to fulfill the promise of this verse by loving! y binding
Draupadi's hair. By that act he is not only celebrating a sexual revenge; he
is also ending, with his bloody hands, a period of impurity after
menstruation, and ending her life as a uirahU,i, a woman bereft; he is
proclaiming her an auspiciously married woman by applying the bloody
sindiira to her part; he is anointing and reconsecrating a queen with that
blood; he is, further, applying an auspicious "sandal paste" ofb lood to the
icon ofg oddess Sri, conferrer ofk ingship, and, finally, he is ornamenting his
lover in an erotic ritual.
The artful union of these bloody motilS in the play leads us to
a reconsideration of their epic sources. Although there are particularly
Indian sexual overtones in the revenge on Duryodhana's thighs-there still
exists a taboo against scratching the thighs for Indian men 10- we arc more
interested here in the vow pointing toward the murder ofDuryodhana's
younger brother Du)].sasana. It was Dui)siisana who actually dragged
Draupadi by her hair and garments while Duryodhana looked on, lewdly
stroking his thigh. Bhima vows he will rip open Duli.Sasana's chest and
drink the blood while it still runs warm. Although it has been noticed with
greater or lesser explicitness that the slaying of Duryodhana looks like
a castration in return for an attempted rape, 11 one wonders why no
explanation seems to have been offered about the configuration of
Dul].sasana's gory end.
Images from hymns to Durga came to mind, and inevitably the story of
Narasirhha and Hirar.iyaka§ipu. These may yet suggest further connections,
but they seem to have no other apparent resonances with the character of
Bhima as he is developed in the epic. It is likely that if there is a quality of
karmic revenge to Duryodhana's death, "the recoiling oft he deed upon the
doer," as Hiriyanna puts it,12 then perhaps that same quality exists in the
destruction of Du)].sasana: he who violated Draupadi when she was
10 On the malt thigh, stt O'Flahcrty, Origins of Evil, p. 322-324, 334. There arc also
specific vernacular traditions about Duryodhana's thigh; s<:c Hiltebeitel, "Draupadrs
Hair," p. 205. Van Buitcncn, vol. 2, p. 817, note to 2.63.10,stresscs that the exposure of the
thigh is not a bowdlerized version of a more specifically s<:xual exposure; rather, the
invitation to sit on the left thigh is tantamount to claiming Draupadi as his wife. He cites
legend and iconography depicting consorts s<:ated on their husbands' left thighs. In the
context of the mythological framework in which Sri (Draupadi) is the conferrer of kingship,
this would be a powerful and repugnant overture indeed. Van Buitcncn docs not draw this
implication, nor docs he choose to introduce the independently sexual nature (that is, apart
from marriage) of the left male thigh.
" Hihcbeitd (1981 ), p. 205; also stt Gitomcr (1987), pp. 294, 296.
12 M. Hiriyanna, Outlines of lnJian Philosophy (London: George Allen & Unwin, Ltd.,
1932), p. 96.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
301
RAK$ASA BHTMA: WOLFBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS
menstruating is made to "menstruate" by having a monstrous cavity torn
out of his middle. Thus Dul;isasana is literally unmanned, as will be his
older brother Duryodhana when Wolfbelly breaks his thigh. The commis
sion of this pair of acts constitutes adharma of the most extreme kind,
especially for one like Bhima who ought to be following the warrior code.
Yet even these mutilations do not seem to be the whole story; there is still
the drinking of the blood. We can acknowledge that in a Dumezilian
analysis Bhima gets to be the ferocious side of the warrior as Arjuna is the
chivalrous, 15 but Bhima's actions go beyond mere ferocity. The more
familiar one becomes with the epic, the more one sees that this cannabalistic
carousing is Bhlma's way, and that, moreover, he always seems to be
running afoul oft hose lascivious, cannibalistic wreckers oft he sacrifice, the
ogres called rlik$asas; rathcf, they always seemed to be running afoul of
him. On the other hand, we shall show how Bhima's fighting and killing
rlik$asas indicates his likeness to that order of creatures. For the image of
the middle PaQcjava ripping out the guts of a warrior (Dul;isasana) and
drinking his blood replicates the standard description of the raqasa
feasting on battle carnage.
It should not be surprising, then, that Bhima also enters into alliances
with the ogres. There are, in particular, two features oft he epic which are
to a great extent articulated by Wolfbelly's interactions with raqasas. The
first is the suppressed but genuinely passionate relationship ofBhima and
Draupadi, the relationship Mrs. Karvc so convincingly presented as
imaginative fantasy in ruganta. 14 The second is an aspect of the overarching
metaphor of war as sacrifice, evinced above, and Bhima's role in that.
Though the Veiilsamluira does persistently fuse the patterns of the heroic,
romantic niitaka with the chaotic and bloody epic narrative, a few words of
explanation may be in order to elucidate the relationship between the
various modes of presentation. In the Sanskrit belletristic tradition, which
includes drama, the primary concern is with beauty and the response to
beauty, love, always understood as erotic passion. Though the drama may
have its origins in ritual or ritual enactment ofm yth, the content, style and
implicit values of the developed nii/aJ:a are those of the lyric-sensual
textures and human emotions. From the standpoint of this literature, then,
the continuum from myth to lyric becomes one of increasing individuality,
emotionality, and intimacy. In a play like the (or even one like
Ve~lsamluira
the Sakuntala}, the heroic events of birth, marriage, battle, kingship, and
" Georges Dumezil, The Destiny of tlie Warrior, trans. Alf Hiltebeitel (Chicago:
UniveNity of Chicago Press, 1970), pp. 5, 59, 82-93.
" lravati Karve, Yuganta: tlie End of an Epoch (New Delhi: Sangam Books, 1974).
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
302 DAVID L. GITOMER
death in battle form its epic- and myth-resonant stnu:ture, but dramatic
genre expectation "fills in" that structure with its own content and style, its
own content and style, its own implicit values. There is naturally a more
distant, and certainly more complex, relation to myth: whereas the
Maliiibharata resonates with living myths, the Ver,lsamlliira resonates with
the Mahabharata thematically and aesthetically, evoking the aesthetic
universals, the rasas, as well as the epic ones.
Thus the more raw sexual motifs of the epic- menstruation and
castration- arc not obliterated in the Ver,isamJzara, but become at once
more symbolically and less explicitly suggested, finding a place within the
more graceful norms of erotic passion between a man and woman, here
between Wolfbclly Bhima and Draupadi. For despite attempts by
lndo-Europeanists such as Dumczil to pair Draupadi (who incarnates Sn}
with Arjuna (who incarnates Indra and is therefore the "type" of the
king)," it is only Bhima whose passionate devotion claims her in such
a way that in the epic's transformation to drama the couple can become
nayaka nayi.ta.
and The great number of episodes in the epic in which
Bhima's special relationship with Draupadi is narrated cannot be detailed
here; the abduction by Jayadratha (3.248-263), the killing of Kicaka in
Vira(a Parvan (4.13-23), and the fetching of the saugandlrika flowers
(3.146-153; 3.157-159) arc chief among them. What the abduction story
achieves, and the killing ofKicaka in an even more focused manner, is the
bringing together in a single cohesive and continuous narrative what in the
main narrative is separated by thirteen years in time and at least six parvans
of text: the sequence ofDraupadi's sexual humiliation, her call for revenge
(coupled with a reviling ofYudhi$ihira 's inaction), Bhima' s response in the
form of a vow (coupled with a declaration of his willful rebellion against
wishes), and his enactment of her revenge in gory mutilation.
Yudhi$~ra's
(And it is important to remember that Draupadi and Bhima's collaboration
against Yudhi$ihira constitutes a very real and literal opposition to
Dharma-thcy desire the justice of a revenge that cannot be contained
within the notion ofdharma.) It is almost as if the authors of this episode
were attempting to reintegrate the primary narrative, whose plot had
gotten pulled apart by mountains of rich interpolative material, by
creating microcosms with the original dynamic intact. Bhatia Narayai:ia,
using the na/a/ca format, was able to do the same thing with the main
narrative itself.
" Alf Hiltebeitel ( 1976), p. 169. Hiltebeitel is actually footnoting Georges Dumezil,
Mytlie et Epopie, 1.• p. 633. Sec Gitomcr (1987), pp. 298- 299, for a discussion of the traces
of the Draupadi-Arjuna relationship that remain in the epic.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
RAK$ASA BHTMA: WOLFBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS 303
Although the Killing of Kicaka draws together and recapitulates
dements from the primary narrative of the epic, there are new elements as
well. The absence of a royal-contest setting and the emphasis on
Draupacfi's beauty casts the story of humiliation and revenge in a mold
more markedly romantic than heroic. The extremes of tenderness and
violence on the part of both Draupadi and Bhima (as opposed to
a programmatic polarization) are part of the dynamic of passion and
mutual empowerment original to the epic and necessarily retained in this
episode and in the Vtl}isamJiara. Yet there are intermittent moti& in the epic,
woven into the Kicaka story, which suggest a further dynamic in the
Draupadi-Bhima relationship, the kind ofiJ"<>mantic love that is seen in the
saugandliika episode, to be discussed below. Yet in most of the epic this
dynamic parallels in an exaggerated fashion the conventional depiction of
female and male in Sanskrit dramas: the physical loveliness of Draupadi
and the fierce bloodthintiness of Bhima. It is in the enactment of this
bloodthint that Wolfbelly shows his rakµsa nature. In fact, when
Draupadi is fint punued by Kicaka, she prays for protection to the sun,
who sends an invisible rakfasa to guard her (4.14), but that ogre is only
partly successful at assisting Draupadi in repulsing Kicaka's advances
while the courtien and the powerless Pa1:11javas look on (4.15). She then
seeks help from Bhima, who is shown to be, in contrast, a more effective
rak,asa:
Holding Kicaka the powerful Bhima roared out like a tiger that is hungry for
meat and has caught a large deer. He pushed (Kicaka's) feet, hands, head,
and neck all into his trunk . . . When Kicaka had been rendered one mangled
ball of flesh, mighty Bhimasena showed him to Draupadi. {4 .21.58- 60)
Yet the killing of Kicaka is not only significant as an inset of Bhima's
larger drama of adharmic revenge; even ifBhima did not make and fulfill
a vow which entailed tearing open the chest and drinking the blood of
a presumably still living warrior (Dubsasana), there are a number ofo ther
narrative and characterological motifs which reveal affinities to the race of
ogres. In epic literature, a sound interpretive principle is that "the details
oft he hero's death and the fatalities that bring it on are telling strokes in the
protrayal of his character." 11 As Victor Turner has written, "Since most
epics are replete with combats, battles, wars and assassinations, the killing
scene is often an epitome or multi-vocal symbol of the scheme of values
underpinning the whole work."" A corollary oft his principle is that a hero
" Hihclxitel (1976), p. 39.
" Unpublished article, cited in Alf Hiltclxitcl ( 1976), p. 37.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
304
DAVID L GITOMER
incorporates an enemy's power by killing him. In the Mahi.bhOraJa the
clearest example of this is the slaying of the courageous and battle-ready
Kan;ia by the supremely skilled but reluctant-to-fight Arjuna.
Bhima kills rakµsas. Although in the list of partial incarnations
Duryodhana himself is identified with Kali, "Discord," the personification
of the evil age which will be ushered in as the epic cl0$es, "all his brothers
were born among men as creatures of the Riqasas, one hundred in all,
from Dul;isasana onward, cruel of deeds." ( 1.61.80--85) The killings of the
various rli.qasas prefigure Bhima's decisive role in the destruction of the
Kauravas headed by Dul;isii.sana, and prepare us for the ugly, unchivalric
and gory manner ofh is human killings. It seems as ifBhima must, through
his encounters and killings of rii.k$ll5as during the two forest exiles,
incorporate more and more of the nature of rli.qasas, the enemies of
dharma, in order to commit the deed he has vowed on Dul;isli.sana, an
adharmic deed unthinkable for the other Pa1:u;lavas- the ripping apart of
a fellow qatriya while alive, and the drinking of his blood. The litany of
"Hil;limba, Baka andJatasura" is used by Bhima to proclaim his capacity
for such violence, and by Draupadi to remind him of it. Each of these
episodes, however, has an individual character which shows a different
aspect ofBhima's raqasa persona, and of the corporate Pii.Ql;iava eth0$ as
well.
Bhima's first encounter with rak$asas is fraught with the greatest
consequences for him personally and for later developments in the epic. It
occur.; soon after the fire in the lacquer house (1.124-138), which itself is
precipitated by Bhima when he learns that Duryodhana has plotted to
have Kunti and the Pa1:u;lavas burned alive to remove them from possible
succession to the Kuru throne. Bhima then carries the entire family to
safety, and stays awake the whole night while the rest of his family sleeps,
lamenting this forced exile. The story that follows gives us a brother and
sister pair; the brother, Hil;limba, would eat Kunti and her sons,
rli.~asa
and must be slain by Bhima. The sister named as his twin- Hil;limba- falls
in love, or lust, with the beautiful, brawny Bhima, is wed to him, more by
order and Kunti in response to her plight than because of
ofYudh~thira
Bhima's desires, and bears him a son, Ghatotkaca, who later becomes
a faithful soldier, a "good in the Pa1:u;lava war with the Kauravas.
rli.k~asa,"
The story (1.139-143) seems to want to say more aboutBhima than that he
is capable of competing with and defeating a on its own terms: on
rli.k~asa
the one hand he does incorporate the adharmic might by fighting
rii.k~asa's
and killing him; on the other hand, he acquiesces to a lusty union with
a that is procreative and ultimately of value to the family's efforts to
riik~asi
regain the kingdom; Hil;limbli. even expressly claims that she will save the
Pa1:u;iavas (1.143.5-15), as Draupadi is later said to do (2.64.1- 3). The
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
305
R.l.K~ASA BHTMA: WOLFBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS
story goes a long way in reconciling the adhannic aspect ofraqasa Bhima
with his role as a Par:l(java brother.
Yet there is another aspect of Bhima's nature that has
ra~
wide-reaching effects. Bhima's entering into raqasa-hood is somehow able
to transform bad raqasas into good ralqasas. The thoroughgoing good
hcartedness of Gha1otkaca is our first clue to this transformation. When
Hic;limba and Gha1otkaca take leave of Bhima, Ghatotkaca promises his
father that he will come whenever he is needed (1.143.37). During the
forest exile, the brothers and Draupadi arc journeying to holy sites in the
Himalayas in hopes of meeting up with Arjuna. When Draupadi becomes
weary, Bhima merely thinks of Ghatotkaca, described as dharmiilma
("whose soul is dhanna"), and he comes along with his raqasa friends to
carry Draupadi as well as the Pai;ic;lavas themselves while Bhima guides the
way. When Bhima addresses Gha1otkaca he says, "Son ofHic;limba, your
undefeated mother has become weary (hai4imheya parilranlD ma1Dpa
lava
raji1ii)." (3.145.4) Ghatotkaca is being told that he has two mothers, his
raqasa mother Hic;limba, and Draupadi, the primary wife of his father.
Bhima's intervention between brahmans and shows another,
rak~asas
more complex face ofh is capacity to transform There is a curious
rak~asas.
connection between brahmans and raqasas. They are first of all opposites:
brahmans are the keepers of the sacrifice which sustain the world and the
dhanna of society; destroy the sacrifice, and are especially
rak~asas
associated with the carrying off of married women, an act which strikes
directly at the Brahmanically-defined social fabric. Brahmans obsessively
maintain their purity by ritual cleansing and vegetarianism; raqasas are
foul-smelling man-caters. Being opposites, the two orders of beings arc
brought together by natural enmity in scenarios of distress. Whenever
a great sacrifice is performed, one can be sure that a menacing lurks
ra~
nearby, ready to jump in and wreck its order. When anxiety about the
sacrificial order takes the form of a voracious, rapacious creature who
cannot tolerate that order and who suddenly appears to destroy it, it seems
likely that one function ofraqasas is to be the dark side ofbrahmans. Thus,
while demons (asuras) in general may represent the structural and
functional opposite of gods (devas),18 raqasas in particular are the opposite
of brahmans. The astonishing resemblance between the comic manifesta
tion of the brahman as the (in the drama) and the
vidu~aka rak~a
confirms the perception of their mirrored twin hood, as does the existence of
such as Ja!isura, whose story will be discussed below.
brahma-rak~asas
11 Wendy Doniger O'Flaherty, Tht Origin1 of Evil in Hindu ,W;ttho/og, (Berkeley:
Univcl'>ity of California Press, 1976), p. 64.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
306
DAVID L. CITOMER
Bhima, by being like a rilqasa (and fighting like a is able to
ri~)
destroy riqasas, and is therefore capable of neutralizing the brahman
anxieties about riqasas, that is, about the chaotic violence involved in the
sacrifice. In the Maliii,b/riirala narrative, this finds expression in making bad
riqasas into good riqasas. A secondary result, as we shall see in the next
story, is somehow to make the Pii;it;lavas into brahmans. Such a transforma
tion makes us suspect that we have a dynamic similar to that found in the
stories of violent brahman revenge (Para5urima and, to a lesser extent,
ASvatthirnan), but from the opposite side: these are kings who would
appropriate the entire symbolic apparatus of order-the order-defining
(brahman) as well as order-maintaining (qatriya) modalities. The second
rikpsa-killing episode, the killing ofB aka ( 1.145-152), follows immediately
upon the fint (the killing ofHit;limba), and is at least in part an ambivalent
parable of the lr.ing-brahman relationship.
After the Pir;ujava family has wandered for some time disguised as
ascetics, Vyisa appears to encourage Kunti and the brothcn, disguised as
brahmans, to reside with a brahman family in the nearby town of
Ekacakra. The brothers go out begging everyday, and give what they
receive to Kun ti. Half the entire amount of food is fed to the voracious
Bhima (Vrkodara, "Wolf Belly"); this same apportioning is specified
when Kunti later gives instuctions to the new bride Draupadi ( 1.184.6). In
a grotesque perversion of kingship, it turns out that the Ekacakra region is
held in the grip of a named Baka, who in return for protection
ri~
demands a wagonload of rice, two buffaloes and a human. The families
take turns satisfying Baka's demands; if a family should refuse, Baka cats
everyone in it. It is now the turn oft he Pii;it;lava's brahman host. In return
for the hospitality offered them, Kun ti volunteen Bhima to take the tribute
and destroy Baka. berates his mother for sacrificing Bhima,
Yudh~thira
whom he considers their ultimate weapon ( 1.150.5-11).
Kun ti replies that it is precisely because Bhima has proven himself so
powerful that she has confidence in him. Further, she identifies the act as
precisely manifesting the dharma of kings- protection, fint of all to the
brahman hosts, but more generally to the entire community which is at the
mercy of the terrible Baka. Out of this will accrue the religious merit and
worldly fame which will establish Pir;it;lava identity as kings. At this point,
exiled and thought to be burned alive through the machinations of
Duryodhana, they barely exist. Kunti's argument, speaks directly to
kingly concerns, and convinces him. ( 1.150.21- 25)
Yud~thira's
Bhima takes the food to Baka's grove, but when the riqasa arrives
Bhima begins eating the food himself, heedless ofBaka's rage. Even though
Baka smashes a tree on his back, Bhima waits until he is finished eating the
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
307
RAKSASA BHTMA: WOLFBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS
rik$asa-sized meal to start fighting. After much wrestling and trec
throwing, Bhima finishes him off.
When he saw that the ralqasa was fading, the Wolf-Belly squeezed him to the
ground and pounded him with his fists. Then he forcefully pushed his back
down with his knee, grabbed his neck with his right hand and his loincloth
with the left, and broke in two the frightfully screaming Blood gushed
rik~sa.
from the ogre's mouth, as the loathsome Baka was broken by Bhima.
(1.151.21-24)
Bhima then instructs the frightened members ofBaka's household and
retinue never to harm the humans of the country again, under penalty of
death. They agree; "henceforth the rak$asas there were friendly whenever
they were sighted by the townfolk about the city." (1.152.5) The
Par,u;lavas' host tells the people that it was a powerful brahman (!) who
destroyed Baka. All four castes then institute a brahmamaha, a festival or
feast in honor of brahmans.
Because of the initial frame of the brahman host's hospitality and the
endearing protrayal ofhis family, it does not seem that the intention of the
story is to take a jab at brahmans for arrogating to themselves credit for
maintaining the good of the people. On the other hand, stories such as this
one and Arjuna's triumph at the svayamvara ofDraupadi, in.both of which
the Par.u;lavas display their prowess in the disguise ofbrahmans, may have
been included to "balance" the force oft he DroQa·ASvatthiman narratives,
themselves an "historical" surfacing ofthcjamadagnya Bhtgu materials in
which brahmans appear as better warriors than, or even as weapons-gurus
ofk$atriyas. Yet as we saw above, Bhima's role of neutralizing the menace
of rak$asas for brahmans, which even on the literal level is certainly
a proper function of kings, becomes possible through his being a raqasa.
Given the deeper symbolic connection between brahmans and rak$asas, it
is not at all surprising that once he kills the rik$3sa (who here functions as
a "bad" k$atriya), Bhima, the "good" lqatriya, also usurps the brahman
role as well.
Were it not for the clement of a brahman-rak$asa ambiguity, the final
incident in which Bhima slays an individual rak$asa, "The Slaying of
Jafisura," (3.154) would be "a fairly routine rak$asa story, which serves to
remind us that the forest is not only the tranquil domain ofs aints but the
terrifying haunt of demons." 9 For Jatisura is a brahma-rak$asa who
1
" Van Buitcncn, Introduction to Tiu BO(}k ofI ll< Forest, in Volume 2 of Tiu Ma11Qblliiral4,
p. 201.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
308
DAVID L. GJTOMER
wears his hair in an ascetic's matted locks, a class of ogres much better
known in the .Ranuiymµi. 20 He resides with the Pai:ic;lavas and Draupadi for
some time, harboring designs on their weapons. Then he carries off
Draupadi and the twins (Arjuna is visiting Indra) while
Yudhi~thira,
Bhima is away hunting. Typically, lectures the ogre on
Yudhi~thira
dharma even as he is being abducted; then makes himself heavy to slow
Jatasura's progress until Bhima arrives. Sahadeva attempts to engage him
in combat. When Bhima shows up, he characterizes the crime as an
of
abductian Draupadi while acknowledging at least the partial authenticity
ofJ atasura's brahmanhood:
Why should I have killed you-you were doing us favors, never giving
offense, a guest who appeared to be an innocent brahman. Anyone who had
killed you, even though knowing you for a rilqasa, would have gone to hell
[for the crime of (3.154.33-34)
br~].
Bhima then promises to destroy him, reminding him of the deaths ofBaka
and Hic;limba. The conventionalized wrestling and throwing of trees and
rocks culminates in a scene no less vividly gory for its predictability:
The strong-armed god-like Bhima lifted him up high and powerfully crashed
him to the ground. The Paodava fractured all his limbs and with a blow ofh is
elbow snapped the head off the trunk. Jatisura's head, severed by
Bhimasena's force, fell with clamped lips, bulging eyes, and clenched teeth to
the ground smeared with blood. (3.154.58-60)
The epic motifs involving brahmans and are found in surprising
rak~asas
aesthetic transpositions in the Ve11isamhara. When first we encounter the
ralqasas of the play, they seem to possess the conventionally recognizable
marks of their breed; they are scavenging the battlefield for the carrion of
the combatants in the great war. Within the aesthetic norms governing the
classification of experience in literary works, such a scene ought to be
a depiction of bibhatsa rasa, the disgusting. Yet it is unquestionably comic,
and emerges as a species ofh iisya; these and another in the final act
rak~asas,
70 The most famous, ofc ourse, of the R4mii)'<l1J<I brahma-raqasa.s is Ravaoa. At R.imii-"""'
3.32.12 he iJ described as pata44riibhimtJr!IJl}4m, "seizing other men's wives," and in the next
verse asy a}Mvighnaka1am, '•making obstacles to the sacrifice.'' The same chapter, vene 23,
uses th< epith<t pardastyakula111Jndt1111Jm, "delight of the Paulastya clan," which recalls
another epic theory about riqasas: they are all descended from Pulastya, fourth son of
Brahma. (This iJ presumably the reason why Pulastya intervenes when Parasara tries to
destroy all ogres at a riiA:f4J4Jaltra, "sacrificial session whose sacrificial victims are rilqasa.s. ")
ThiJ means that technically all raqasas are brahmans, but this fact seems to have only
intermitt<nt significance for Mah.abhiirata authors. Commentaries on Riimii.JatµJ 1.8.17 make
it clear that brahma-riqasas are brahmans who have not properly observ<d the sacrificial
ordinances; these creatures themselves se<k and enter the chidras ("gaps, holes, fissures") in
the sacrifice and destroy it-truly, a nightmare of anxiety about the sacrificial procedure.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
309
RAKSASA BHIMA: WOLJ'Bf.LLY AMONC OCRES ANO BRAHMANS
of the Ve11i'samluira, function in a kind of vidiip.ka (buffoon) role in a play
where there is no Before looking at the tantalizing possibilities in
vidii~aka.
this substitution, we ought to consider a number of motifs found in the
Bhima-raqasa encounters in the Maluibluirala which are carried over into
the play. To see these motifs more distinctly, especially that oft he passion of
the passion of Bhima and Draupadi, we will have to look back and forth
from play to epic to play.
The Act Three prologue begins as the ogres Lard bouquet (Vasagandha,
Skt. Va5agandha) and her husband Bloodficnd (Luhilappia, Skt. Rudhi
rapriya) are gorging themselves on the blood, fat and flesh ofs oldiers killed
in the great war. As they name the warriors they are eating, the audience
learns how far the battle has progressed. The relationship ofBhima and his
first wife, the raqasi Hic;limba, is given particular attention. We learn that
the son born to her and Bhima, GhaJotkaca, has been killed. In the play
+ ),
(3.3 Hic;limba is afforded the status of a queen of raqasas, a status not
known elsewhere; for the rakp.sas at least, she is an intimate of Subhadra
and Draupadi, who share her grief in their own Joss of Abhimanyu. In the
epic, as we have seen, GhaJotkaca promises to come whenever Bhima
wishes, but Hic;limba largely disappears after her marriage and world
ranging dalliance with Bhima. (In the manner of rakpsas, GhaJotkaca is
born on the the very day he is conceived, and born as a vigorous child, not
a helpless infant.) The play wants to afford a continuing power and status
to the consort of Bhima, and conversely to "royalize" Bhima's
rak~asa
nature.
rak~asa
The of Act Six, called Carvaka (perhaps in derogation of the
rak~a
materialist philosophic school known by that name) identifies himself as
a friend ofDuryodhana and pretends to be a brahman in order to deceive
the Par:ic;lavas. He convinces and Draupadi that Bhima and
Yudhi~Jhira
possibly Arjuna have been slain by Duryodhana in the final battle of
maces, and nearly succeeds in driving them to a desperate suicide on the
funeral pyre. The character and the incident are no doubt inspired by Siinti
Parvan 12.39, where a named Carvaka, also called a friend of
rak~asa
Duryodhana (I 2.39.22,33), and also disguised as a brahman, deceives the
assembly of brahmans gathered to greet the victorious as he
Yudhi~Jhira
enters the sabhii. of the palace at Hastinapura. He curses the Pal)c;lavas and
tries to convince the brahmans that YudhiHhira is a killer of their kinsmen.
The brahmans recognize the ruse and burn him on the spot with their tejas.
It turns out that in a former yuga this Carvaka had practiced tapas and
pestered Brahma to grant him a boon of protection. It was predicted,
however, that he would become a friend of Duryodhana's and, through
insulting brahmans, be burnt by them. Since the Carvaka incident in the
Maluibluirata occurs at a point in the story after the close oft he VtTJi'samluira,
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
310
DAVID L. CITOMER
the use ofCiivika in the play, though invented by Bhana NiriyaQa, is
nicely consistent with the ogre's character in the epic. There may have even
been a special delight for the audience watching Ciivika try to get
Draupadi and Yudh~fhira to immolate themselves on the funeral pyre,
knowing that the riqasa himself would end up burnt to ashes.
There are some loose similarities between theJatisura episode oft he epic
and Cirvika's role in the play. Both make victims of and
Yud~f}llra
Draupadi h>ge/Mr while Bhima is away, suggesting the crucial role Bhima
plays in enabling Draupadi (as Sri) effectively to confer kingship on
Both work their deception by using a brahman disguise to
Yud~thira.
gain trust. It is interesting is that both Jatisura and the Ciivika of the
previousyuga are actually living as brahmans. We saw above thatJatisura
had enough authenticity in his brahman role to make Bhima angrily
declare that anyone who killed him would be guilty of bra/unaliatya and go
to hell. The krtayuca Ciivika performs mighty austerities. The VDJisatiiMra
Ciivika relishes his part, enacting all the stereotypical (but perhaps
exaggerated) noli-me-tangere obsessions associated with brahmans. Beyond
the comic potential of these scenes, they again seive to remind us of the
peculiar relationship between brahmans and a relationship in
rik~sas,
which Bhima always seems to be inteivening. A minute before the offstage
uproar signalling the entrance of a Bhima so bloody he has to announce "I
am no ogre (naJuzm rakfo 6.37)," the ogre disguised as a brahman suddenly
exits. This exit is as mysterious and unmotivated as the sudden appearance
of the "foremost brahmans" praising Bhima in the very last verse of the
Jafisura episode l).
(3.15~.6
The talc oft he slaying ofJatisura is sandwiched between two versions of
a story that not only draws together Bhima's affinity with the raqasas and
his devoted seivice to the beautiful Draupadi, but presents 1hesc motifs in
a romantic framework with delicate hints of the erotic mood. After the
incident recounted above in which Ghatotkaca arrives to carry the weary
Pi1;ujavas, the brothers and Draupadi sojourn in a holy region of the
Himalayas abounding in hermitages and brahmans. Such a place must
also abound in all the uibhiivas of frrigara rasa--beautiful flowering trees,
flocks ofc uckoos, tranquil lakes variegated with lotuses and lilies, fragrant
breezes. When such a breeze blows in a beautiful, divine flower, Draupadi
declares she must have more.
It is the story which unfolds from Draupadi's declaration and challenge
("If you love me, Pirtha, bring me many more!") that, along with the
killing of Kicaka, defines most clearly that relationship of Bhima and
Draupadi. But these dazzlingly gorgeous flowers from the divine realm also
impel Bhima towards an encounter with the most basic, yet least known
aspects of his identity, knowledge of which in turn grants him cosmologic
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
RAKSASA BHTMA: WOLFBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS 311
vision. For on this journey he meets his brother, another son of the wind
god, the great ape Hanuman who served Rama in the krta yuga. The
episode is, as it were, Bhima's Bhagavadgltii; in their colloquy, Hanuman
reveals to Bhima the cosmological truth of the deterioration of time. 21
But what needs to be cited here as an important postscript to the account
ofBhima's interaction with in the epic is the problem of the two
ril~as
versions of the story. It turns out that the flower has originated in the
garden of Kubera, lord of wealth. In the first version of the story, Bhima
finds the garden guarded by a group of known as Krodhavasas.
ril~asas
They try to prevent him from sporting in the pool and stealing the lotuses,
but they run off to Kubera when he displays his prowess by killing
paral}iatam, "over a hundred of them"- a number perhaps significant for
its allusion to the (3.152.18) The conclusion of this version
Dhartar~tras.
contains some confusion about ralqasas which demands that the story be
retold and "corrected." Ghatotkaca's friends arc pressed into
rak~asa
service to carry the PaQ<;!avas to Bhima, while Ghatotkaca himself,
standing in for Bhima, carries Draupadi. Coming upon Bhima, they find
him looking like Yama, the god ofd eath wielding his club, standing amidst
the slain yakillJ'-Cverywhere else in this first version the guardians arc
referred to as ralqasas. After admonishing him, Yudhi$thira is confronted
by a new appearance of the guardians of the garden, udyiina.rya ra/c.fil}QI}.
However, when they recognize the Dharmaraja, the sage Lomasa, and the
other PaQQavas, they do obeisance. Then, we arc told, "these stalkers oft he
night [rak$asas] were appeased by Yudhinhira and grew calm, siintvita
dharmarajma prasedul] k!anadacara}J." (3.153.31)
We do have here the expected "good" rak$asas, led by Bhima's son and
acting on behalfo fBhima, as well as the (somewhat belated) transformation
of the "bad" (i.e. violent, behaving hostilely to humans) ralqasas. But why
are the creatures slain by Bhima identified as ralqasas rather than yak$a5?
Another story is provided: After the slaying ofJatasura, the PaQQavas stay
at the hermitage of AT$tisena. With no reference to the previous incident,
once more Draupadi is enchanted by celestial flowers wafting in on
a mountain breeze, and once more she sends Bhima off to fetch more
(3.15 7). Van Buitenen explains:
In his first encounter he got embroiled with Rilqasas; in the present one with
Yalqas, which is indeed more appropriate, for Kubera, whose playgrounds he
violates, is the king of the Yalqas, who are generally portrayed as genial
" For a somewhat fuller analysis of the striking comparison between this episode and the
Gitiz, see Gitomcr (1987). pp. 322ff.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
312
DAVID L. GITOMER
leprechauns. One has the impression that the present story is a recast of the
first one; it corrects the "mistake" of introducing Rakµsas where Yaqas
ought to roam and play-although Kubera docs have genealogical connec
tions with the Rakµsas. It also provides a rationalizing explanation of
Kubera's inexplicable benevolence toward Bruma, who in fact had been
devastating his parks. The narrator of the second version felt that some reason
was in order; he provides it with the usual power ex madriM, a curse: by his
killing of Mai;iimat [a leader of the rikµsas who, in this version, guard
Kubera's precincts, along wi/11 the and harassing of the Yaqas Bhima
ya~as]
unwittingly sets free the God of riches from a curse by Agastya.22
While van Buitenen's analysis is true as far as the riqasa/yakµ
problem is concerned, it misses the main point: the first version is about
Bhima, the second version is not. It merely uses Bhima's well-known
propensity to kill rikµsas to get rid oft he chiefriqasa Mar;iimat and move
on to the explanation of Kubera's curse. In fact, there is a kind of
anti-Bhima frame in this version: Draupadi's desire is to visit the mountain;
she does not ask Bhima to bring her flowers; she uses Arjuna as a foil for
Bhima, and in the end Bhima is ridiculed by Kubera while Arjuna is
praised. By contrast, the first version has been sensitively shaped to
highlight and integrate Bhima's characterological features, his particular
relationship to riqasas, his devotion to Draupadi, and his whirlwind-like
violence as he swings his club, pressaging war. Most important, the first
narrator has granted to Bhima the encounter with Hanumin, his brother
and perhaps prototype, who explains to him the mysteries of time and its
cosmic cycles.
Though the first version of the fetching of the saugandlrika flowers can be
seen as a romantic episode specifically tailored to Bhima's character, the
epic writers had very good reasons to suppress any tendencies to collapse
the complexities of Draupadi's personality into the profile of a conven
tional heroine. In spite of these reasons-the dangerous implications ofa n
attractive woman in a polyandrous marriage, that woman's burden of
carrying the symbolic persona of Sri, conferrer of kingship, and the wild
wrath she must from time to time manifest to protect her integrity and
reanimate her husbands- Draupadi does also emerge as a beautiful
heroine, a virahiT}i recognizable by her hair and costume, who has a special
relationship with one man, Bhima. This image of this epic Draupadi and
especially ofh er relationship with Bhima must have been powerful enough
to allow the playwright to use her and Bhima as a sort of pair
~aka/niiyikii
in the play without too much anxiety about audience acceptance. But even
" Van Buitcncn, Introduction to T ht Book of tire Fortst, pp. 201-202.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
RAK$ASA BHTMA: WOLFBELLY AMONC OGRES ANO BRAHMANS 313
more than this, the demands of poets, aestheticians, audience and the
Sanskrit dramatic genre itself required the depiction of f(iigiira rasa, which
meant the inclusion of an actual love scene.
The play, while it need not account for all the complexities of the epic
Draupadi, nonetheless cannot depict an actual love scene between Bhima
and Draupadi. In the play, as in the epic, it is almost as if, out of modesty at
the polyandry or a desire to contain its chaotic implications, the audience
has entered into the compact Narada struck with the brothers-that we are
not allowed to look on one of them while he is sitting with Draupadi
( 1.204.28). Yet somehow the playwright must more strongly delineate the
faint outlines of the erotic relationship seen in epic Draupadi and Bhima,
precisely because he is writing a classical Sanskrit drama. An analysis oft he
complementary structure of the first and second acts of the Vt7]isamniira
shows that Bhana Narayana has invented a wife, Bhanumati, for
Duryodhana and depicted an inappropriate and ineffective passion
between them in order to reflect the passion ofBhima and Draupadi which
may not be shown.2
'
Just as in the second act the playwright uses Bhanumati and Duryodhana
to suggest aspects ofDraupadi and Bhima's relationship, so in the third act
the pair Blood fiend and Lardbouquet, a kind of passionate, though
rak~asa
comic, couple, are used to present information and attitudes about Bhima
and his wife Hifjimba, who in tum further illumine the passion of
rak~si
Bhima and Draupadi. This riik$asa interlude before Act Three actually
accomplishes many purposes and has many meanings. The pravefaka, like
the v4kambhalca, is intended to present to the audience in a condensed
fashion parts of the story that have happened or are about to happen. As
was mentioned above, when the rlik$asas tell us which generals they are
eating, we learn how far the war has progressed. By virtue of the
relationship Bloodfiend and Lardbouquet have with Hifjimba, the
Interlude also serves to keep Bhima's rlik$asa nature in the foreground. The
couple here becoine part of the class of tamed or friendly rak$asas, like the
companions ofB aka, the kingship-usurping ogre slain by Bhima. Again, by
serving Hifjimba, they arc sympathetic to Bhima, not to his enemies.
Bloodfiend is to attend Bhima at the killing ofDul:tsasana: by Bloodfiend's
drinking Dul:tsasana's blood, the onus of adharma will not accrue to Bhima,
though this nicety is not only inconsistent with the epic account, but
inconsistent with Bhima's announcement, elsewhere in the play, that he
has actually drunk the blood (e.g. 5.28). In any event, these are clearly
" Gitomcr (1987), pp. 355- 380.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
314
DAVID L GITOMER
Pat;iQava raqasas-they ftee as ASvatthaman storms on stage. That they
should do so is comic: can change form at will, and are not
ra~asas
ordinarily sla yable-cxcept by the likes of Bhima.
But is the scene supposed to be comic, or disgusting? An ogress gleefully
dances while singing of all the body parts she has gathered from the
battlefield to feed her husband. She calls for him longingly. He enters
wearily, craving warrior's ftesh dripping with blood to slake his thirst. The
two share a moment of rapturous reunion. Lardbouquct carefully
describes her neat and plentiful larder-the mighty warriors of the great
Bharata war. Her husband Bloodfiend praises her "good household
management." He tells of the arrangements Queen Hi<jimba has made
concerning his assistance in Bhima's killing of Dui;ISasana. When they sec
Dh!ltadyumna killing Droua offstage, Lardbouquet enthusiastically
suggests that they go to drink his blood. Bloodficnd cautions her:
"Lardbouquet, don't you know this is the blood ofa brahman? It burns the
throat when it goes down. So what's the use ofi t?" (3.3 + ) Then they beat
a hasty retreat as ASvatthaman enters.
There are clearly a number ofp arodistic elements here. At the same time
the content can be nothing other thanjugupsa, the sthiiyibhiiva ofb ibhatsa, the
aesthetic emotion ofd isgust. All the alamkarafiistra manuals define this rasa
with the mention of stinking ftesh, worms, etc., and this omnipresent
example, which could be describing our Bloodfiend and Lardbouquct,
from the fifth act of Bhavabhiiti's Malatimadhava, in Michael Coulson's
delicious translation. 24
This starveling ghost, having ripped at the skin and feasted
On bloated stinking cuts of shoulder, rump and rib,
Has removed eyes, tendons and guts, and with bared teeth
Sits quietly picking at the bones of the carcase on his lap.
Quite naturally, the commentators and editors have seen the signs of
blbhatsa,
OGRESS (LARDBOUQUET)
Bloodficnd! Look what I've brought specially for you. It's a prime cut
from the ftesh around the heart ofs ome royal sage who was just killed.
" Bhavabhiiti, Malalimadliava, with the commentary ofjagaddhara, critically edited by
R.G. Bhandarkar. 3rd ed., revUed V. V. Mirashi. (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, I 970), 5.16; translated by Michael Coulson. Malatl and Mii.d"4va, in Tltret SttNkril
Plays (Hammondsworth: Penguin, 1981), p. 3!>8. It should be mentioned that another
variety ofj ugupsa concerns the aver.ion, presumably to the same degree of disgust, felt by
ascetics at the sight of women. In such a case, breasts and hips take their place alongside
rotting flesh and worms as uibMva. for this rasa. See Jla{laiiislra 6.72, 7.25; DaJarVf>al<a 4.74
[Haas trans. 4.80]; Sii.ltilJadarpatJ4
3.23~241.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
315
RAKSASA BHTMA: WOLFBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS
You can wash it down with warm blood, oily rich with lots ofg lobs of
fat! (3.3 +)
and solemnly identified the scene as such, without a word about hasya, the
comic.
Humor in Sanskrit drama is often a kind ofw itty irony when it involves
the hero, the heroine, and the go·between.2' The alamkarikas consider it
an accessory aesthetic mood to the erotic. Yc t the definitions of the bM.va
called hasa and its rasa, hii.sya, which would seem to have been traditionally
retained from the .Niityafiislra all the way to the Rasagaitgadhara, invariably
center around the notion of the vilcrta, literally "changed, altered," but
a word commonly used in the sense of"strange," and almost as commonly
"deformed, disfigured, mutilated"-in short: grotesque. By the time of the
Dafariipaka, humor is formulaically characterized as vilcrtakrtiviigvefa,
"strange behavior, speech and dress," but the Niitya!iistra also mentions
l!)'aitga, "a defective limb," which Abhinavagupta glosses as vilchwt.iidi,
"such as a noselcss face. "2
6
The Niitydfiislra seems to harken to a more archaic understanding of the
comic, archaic at least when viewed from the point of view of classical
norms. As in other pre-classical theaters, such as that of Greece, what was
funny was originally the grotesque, the deformed; only later did the
grotesque become symbolic ofp sychological or spiritual deformity. We will
see how the vidii$aka, the brahman buffoon of the drama appears as
a tamed transformation of the threatening rak$asa- both arc creatures
who might be seen as shadow aspects of the brahman psyche escaped from
the cage of brahmanical order, though to different degrees. But with his
exaggerated features standing out like a sore member in the genteel world
of the Sanskrit court, and his incessant jokes about eating (which,
considering the cultural configuration implied by the verbal root bhuj, are
perhaps about sex as well) the also stands as a reminder of this
vidii~aka
earlier kind of humor described in the .Niitydfiislra.
The humorous and the disgusting meet in the grotesque, which has been
defined as "characterized by distortion or unnatural combinations," and
"combining heterogeneous and incongruous details or employing distor·
tion for artistic effect." The textual evidence is that Bhaua Narayai;ia
self-consciously produced a text which is really both humorous and
disgusting. The first stage direction of Act Three is tatalJ pravifati vikrtavefii
" See for example the Vi.tramomU!J"' ofKlilidlisa, 2.1 ~2.15 +, Gitomcr trans. in T°Juakr
of Mmuity, pp. 198-199.
" See NatJaiastra 6.47; DaJmpaka 4.76 (Haas trans. 4.82); SOJtjtyaJlarpa,,,, 3.214;
RasagoitgOdluira, Bcnarcs Sanskrit Edition, p. 56, Jha, p. 182.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
316
DAVID L. GITOMER
riikfasi, "an ogress enters, grotesquely attired," and the second stage
direction, which follows immediately, is vikrtam uiMsya saparilofam, "laughs
grotesquely, [and recites] with delight." It is as if, at the very beginning of
the scene, the reader (and the spectator) are being signaled, by the very
prescriptive terms the f4Jtra uses to define humor, to look for what follows to
be funny, even though the content is all disgusting.Just as in the second act
of the play, where Duryodhana's inappropriate erotic pursuit ofBhanumati
was awkwardly "misused" to stir up a painful reminder of Draupadrs
humiliation, and to look forward to the horrible smashing ofDuryodhana's
thigh, in this interlude before the third act, the many constraints (or
"codes," as some might say) which come together to write this text, forced
the author into a novel ·solution. Though the dramatic problem solved is
how to provide a scene ofc omic reliefin a play in which a buffoon would be
entirely out ofp lace, Bhafla Narayar;ia's cultural instincts about the use of
raqasas affords a further insight confirming the brahman-raqasa connec
tion.
In his Rasagangiidhara, Jagannatha Pat;tc;litaraja, the last great creative
aesthetician, offers an observation which sheds some light on the relationship
between the disgusting and the humorous. In discussions and exemplifica
tions of the various rasas, the alambanavibhava (person who inspires the
sthiiyibhava underlying the rasa to be invoked in the spectator) is specified, as
well as the ii.Jr'!Ya (the receptacle, that is, the spectator). This argument, too
convoluted and technical to be detailed here, 27 raises a major problem in
the Sanskrit psychology of aesthetics, namely that of how and in whom
does the rasa occur. 28 Lurking in the discourse is the problem of a specific
sadharariikararµi, the universalization, oft he comic and disgusting emotions,
within the larger problem of sadharal}ikaral}a of all emotions in aesthetic
experience. The issue hinges on a theoretical point- what sort of
relationship is posited between bhava (Jaulcika or worldly emotions) and rasa
(aesthetic sentiments). In the context oft he present discussion, it seems that
a particular likeness is seen betweenjugupsa and hasa, which are similar in
that they possess a reactive rather than identifying quality. The response to
a person or event as comic has to do with its strangeness. Disgust and
" Jagannlitha, Rasagarigiidhara, with the commentary GuramtmnaflrakOJo of Nagcb.
Bhana, edited by Gangadhara Sastra (Benar<s: Btnar<s Sanskrit Series, 1903), p. 74; edited
and with commentary Candrika by Badarinath J ha and Madan Mohan Jha; Vols. 1-3
(Varanasi: Chowkhamba Vidyabhavan, 1970), pp. 18&-187. Sec Gitomer (1987), pp.
394-5, for translation; p. 424, n. 60 for text.
" A full discussion of this problem is found under Abhinavagupta's commentary on the
rasa sitra of the NalJaiii.slro (6.31 + ) in the AbhinavahJiarali and is summarized by Mamma1a
in the fourth chapter of Kiiuyaprakii.sa, 4.27, 28ff.
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
317
RAK$ASA BHTMA: WOLFBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS
laughter (it may be more useful and accurate to identify the latter as
ridicule) both involve an active distancing of oneself form the ii/ambana.
In this regard it is interesting to observe that Indian performers in the
various dance-mime traditions always "depict" the disgusting as humorous.
The great Odissi dancer Sanjukta Panigrahi, for example, in one portion of
her performance, represents in succession the nine rasas. Not only is b'ibhatsa
alone presented with narrative content (finding a worm in the food), but
the performer's shrinking grimaces seem to be meant to evoke laughter on
the part of the audience, not revulsion. Since auci!Ya, "aesthetic propriety,"
is paramount in Sanskrit, the disgusting can be presented in a refined form
by making it into the object of laughter, or by describing it in elegant
language, such as that of Bhavabhiiti in the example cited above. This is
the real point of Jagannatha's argument. It docs not matter that the
connoisseur is not a fit ii.fraya for laukika (mundane) jugupsa, for it is the
a/aukika (transmundane) bibhatsa, (literally) refined by the aesthetic
experience and the Sanskrit language itself, that he or she savors: hence the
aesthetic delight, comically disgusting, of the Act Three Interlude.
The more genre-specific source for the comedic nature of this interlude
must be further examined. The stock comic character in the Sanskrit natafca
is the vidii$aka, or buffoon. He is presented as a kind ofd egraded brahman,
unable to speak Sanskrit but ready to pull rank with his prestigious status
when it is to his advantage to do so. The Nii/)lafiistra describes his
appearance as dwarfish, hunchbacked, baldheaded, red-eyed, and having
big teeth- not unlike some descriptions of rlik$asas. 29 Both the buffoon in
Miilavikiignimitra ( 4.17 + ) and the one in Vikramorva.f!Ya (2.0,5.11 + ) are
said to look like monkeys. Finally, it must be observed that two of the most
basic physical characteristics of the vidii$aka are exaggerations of stereo
typed brahman features--obesity from gorging on food served as part of
the rituals and baldness due to regular tonsure.
Whether or not one could go so far as to say that the standard vidiiµka of
the drama is a kind ofs afe, tamed half-rlik$asa (monstrous-looking, but not
cannabalistic), half-brahman (obsessed with food, but without wrath), it is
clear that the ogres of the VtiJisamhiira are functioning as vidiiµkas with
brahman overtones. We have seen how the rak$asas of the Act Three
Interlude and Act Six have particular connections to the complex of
notions surrounding Bhima's rak$asa nature, one ofw hich is an intervention
in the brahman-rak$asa opposition. There are still further ways that the
ogres of the play enact "brahman-ness." First, simply by being comical
" •V a()'aiaJlra 35.9- 11, 35. 79. Sec also G.K. Bhat, Thr Vidu1aka, Ahmcdabad: New Order
Book Company, 1959).
Google Ong1nal from
Digitized by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
318
DAVID L GITOMER
they are taking the role reserved for brahmans, or the vidii$aka species of
brahman. This results in a double parody on brahmans, since the
characterization of the vidii$aka is a parody to begin with; the usurping of
their function by ogres points up their similarity to ogres.
One of these points of similarity is appetite. The typical vidii$aka is
obsessed with food, always looking for an opportunity to eat. He regards
food the way his companion, the king, regards passionate lovemaking.
Indeed food is the buffoon's passion. Considering that the Sanskrit words
for enjoyment ofs ex and food arc the same, as we saw, it is unavoidable that
the vidii$aka's jokes about food arc also about the lewd aspects ofr ati which
would have no propriety on the Sanskrit stage.
Miir;iavaka's "consolation" to King Puriiravas in the second act of
VikramorvaJ!Ya is an example. The king here is trying to determine whether
the vic;lii$aka has kept the secret of his passion for the nymph UrvaSi.
Why are you silent?
KING:
I've been holding my tongue so well I can't even answer you.
BUFFOON:
V cry good. But where should I entertain myself now?
KING:
Let's go to the kitchen!
BUFFOON:
Why there?
KING:
We'll watch them take what's been brought from the market
BUFFOON:
and make it into all the five kinds of food- the kind you have to chew,
the kind you don't have to chew, the kind you can lick, the kind you can
suck, and the kind you can slurp. That's the stuff to make you forget
your yearning!
You'll be happy in the kitchen, surrounded by what you want. But
KING:
how am I to enjoy myself when my desire is impossible to attain?•0
In fact, the Act Three interlude is all about eating as a passion, in
rii~asa
this case a shared passion between a couple. It is appropriate that raqasas
should be presented as ravenous and disgusting, for that is their nature. But
that they should also be comic has to do with their functioning as buffoons.
Bloodfiend's remark that the blood ofa brahman (Dror;ia) is unfortunately
undrinkable not only prepares the audience for the entrance ofDror;ia's son
ASvatthiiman, it also serves as a reminder of the
brahman-rii~a
connection/opposition, thereby looking forward to the other comic
rii~asa
of the Vtt}i:samnara, the false brahman Ciirviika who deceives Yudhi.$thira
and Draupadi in Act Six.
Earlier we noticed Ciirviika's affinities to a Ciirviika in the Siinti Parvan
( 12.39) of MahQ.bharata, who also attempts to deceive the Piir;ic;lavas using
•• 2.2 +, Gitomcr trans., TMater of Mtm0ry, p. 191. The five kinds off ood arc not listed in
the original, but have been supplied from Ka1ayavcma's commentary.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
RAK$ASA BHTMA: WOLFBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS 319
the guise ofa brahman, as well as toJaiasura (cf. 3.154), a rilqa.sa living as
a brahman who is killed by Bhima for trying to steal the weapons.
Pa1;u~ava
Dramatically, he parodies an additional cluster ofs tereotypical brahman
traits- the demand for hospitality, obsession with the purity of his person,
and, when these arc violated or denied, an easily triggered irascibility.
Strangely, though such personalities might be easy targets for ridicule, they
do not seem to appear as subjects for caricature in dramas. They arc,
however, frequently depicted in a serious fashion, the most well-known
+ ).
perhaps being the cursing of Sakuntalii by Durvasas (4.H. l
Could it be that expression of resentment towards the status-obsessed
brahmans, enacting their prestigious identities through demands for
reverential hospitality and public displays ofp urity in food and cleanliness,
was off-limits for the classical Sanskrit drama (in a way that it is not in folk
theater)? Perhaps the bumbling, endearing who parodies only
vidii~aka,
one, safe brahman excess-gluttony- an excess surely resented, but one
with less direct harm on others than the taunting hospitality which
demeans and even excludes the host, was as far as a Sanskrit, i.e. ultimately
brahmanical, form would go in mockery." In any case, Bhaua
Niiriiy~na
is taking a tremendous risk in the character of Ciirviika, not so much
because he is depicting an obnoxious brahman sage--after all, we know
that he is really an ogre from the moment he appears on the stage--but
rather because he seems to work himself into a dilemma ofc haracterization
just as the play is about to reach its denouement. ever
Yudhi~~ira,
respectful towards brahmans, reveals the "weak," hopeless side of his
personality in believing the deception that both of his brothers have been
killed by Duryodhana. As with the second act, this part of the play has
never been well received by the tradition.
Ciirviika disappears after manipulating and Draupadi into
Yudhi~ihira
a pathetic attempt at suicide. Suddenly Bhima arrives, though no one, not
even the audience this time, can recognize him at first. His entire body is
drenched in blood, as the stage direction (6.36 + ) has it, and he is calling
for Draupadi: Though he is feared to be Duryodhana, he knows he looks
like a himself, or someone from the dead:
rii~asa
I am no ogre,
I am no ghost
but a wrathful warrior
who cooled his body
in the pool of his enemies' blood,
" Recent typologies of the vidiipka, such asJ efferds (1981}, p. 67, and Shulman (1985),
pp. 155-169, emphasize that he does not enact the potential of his role as critic or alterer of
perspectives in any radical way.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
320
DAVID L. GITOMER
and crossed the vast abyss
in the ocean of his vow.
You royal heroes,
the charred remnant
of the battle blaze,
Why do you crouch, quivering in fear,
hiding behind carcasses
of elephants and horses? (37)
Tell me where Pancati is!
With the advent of Bhima, the dramatic dynamics seem to regain
integrity, force and direction. In the first part of the act, the audience was
aware of the true identity of the source of danger, the Carvaka;
ra~asa
when Bhima enters, the audience must believe him to be Duryodhana.
Where before we saw a comic pretending to be a brahman, and
ra~asa
inspiring the most embarassingly maudlin behavior on the part of two
noble characters, now we see a warrior who likes look an ogre or a wraith
and is feared to be the wicked villain. YudhiHhira is in a stupor, and
Draupadi is fearfully slinking away from this creature pursuing her toward
her funeral pyre. Suddenly awakens, regaining his courage
Yudhi~thira
along with his consciousness. As Bhimasena reaches for Draupadi's hair in
fulfillment of his vow, tries to stop this "Duryodhana" from
Yudhi~thira
completing the rape he began at the dicing assembly. The stage direction
says he "impulsively throws his arms around Bhima." (6.37 + ) In the
midst of this fierce embrace, the two brothers joyously recognize each
other. Bhima can now complete his vow, tying up his queen's hair with his
bloodied hands. Krishna arrives with Arjuna to resume the preparations
for royal consecration. Benedictory verses conclude the play.
Yudhi~thira's
It seems that this situation is constructed to allow YudhiHhira and
Draupadi to enact their radical dependence on Bhimasena. On the verge of
restoration through the agency of Bhima, each is at his and her most
characteristically vulnerable, abounding in dharma but only
Yudhi~thira
intermittently able to assert the strength which betokens the Pa1;u;lava right
to the throne, Draupadi after so many episodes of being championed and
rescued by Bhima, once again in danger of being violated by Duryodhana.
In other words, YudhiHhira needs Bhima in order to be king and Draupadi
needs Bhima in order to be queen. Without him they are so vulnerable they
can be destroyed by a trickster. This trickster is a and a "brahman,"
ra~
reminding the audience of the situations in which Bhima has intervened.
Moreover, he is an agent ofDuryodhana, whose attempts to bring about
the downfall of the Pa1:l(javas by trickery have been well-rehearsed
throughout the play.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
R.I.K$ASA BHTMA: WOLFBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS 321
Without Bhima to uphold it, the Pai;iQ.ava royal ujas has dwindled to
near-extinction in death. Not only do the king and queen prepare to cast
off their lives, but they see death everywhere; they vie with each other for
the privilege of entering the fire first. Into this scene of death, Bhima
+ ):
arrives, looking like the very picture of death (6.33
CHAMBERLAIN
[ Enlering in agitaled confusion.]
Save us! Save us, great king! I see the
wicked Kaurava filth, his body and tunic
bathed in blood and his terrifying club
smeared with it, like the god of death
brandishing the staff of time ....
Yet it is life that he brings with this blood, reinvigorating the royal pair. It
is as if Bhima has caused the the promise ofv erse 1.25, "the sacrifice
rak~asa
called battle" to be realized, the sacrifice Lord Hari has supervised. This
sacrifice, however, has not been delimited by procedures expressive of
brahman anxieties about the chaotic release of blood; lhis sacrifice will
therefore not be compromised to an uncertain conclusion. In the sacrifice
of war the rak$asas are permitted to overrun the sacrificial enclosure, the
battlefield, resulting in the complete triumph of both death, for the land
and people of Aryavarta have been destroyed, and life, for the Kuru line
has been revivified.
First the failed king YudhiHhira, who has fainted, revives ("Suddenly
getting up; resolutely" is the stage direction, 6.35 + ) and calls for his bow.
When no servant appears he resolves to fight barehanded. Draupadi also
revives from her swoon, and once Bhima has been recognized she prepares
for her royal reconsecration as YudhiHhira prepares for his. Bhima
explicitly understands his gory triumph over Duryodhana as the act which
reestablishes legitimate kingship:
Yudhi~thira's
BHTMASENA
I tossed his body on the ground
and made mine gleam with his blood like sandal.
The royal splendor now lies in you
along with the earth to its four-oceaned borders.
(39)
[ r
slowly letting go,
udhi~(hira,
gazes at Bhima, wiping away his tears.
Bhima falls to his .feet.]
Victory, noble brother!
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
322
DAVID L. GITOMER
This last speech (jayatvaryal}) is significant; in dramas only a king is
properly greeted with the word jaya or jayatu, and here Bhima has
pronounced it.
The blood-drenched reunion of Bhima and Draupadi that follows
immediately upon recognition of his brother constitutes the
Yudh~ihira's
conclusion of the drama in terms of the agenda of meanings Bhana
Narayal)a pursues throughout the play. The vow with its barely disguised
significance of menstrual purification through menstrual revenge, a revenge
that Bhima has accomplished for his royal wife, the disinherited personifica
Sri
tion of (royal prosperity) who must now act as the violent, gory Kali
through her husband-this vow takes center stage in the action; Bhima, in
fact, declaims once again verse 1.21, cited at the beginning of this essay.
Although all three oft he main characters on stage affirm the importance
of the vow's completion, it is Bhima who repeatedly fixes on the blood,
reveling in the emblems of his bestial nature. We should remember that
Bhima has appeared so much like a at his entrance shortly before
ra~asa
this that he must announce in his first speech: Iii.ham rakfo--"1 am no ogre!"
+ + ),
Here are Bhima's speeches from this passage (6.4-0cd - 6.41 which
beautifully reveal the integration of its themes:
BHTMASENA
With this very hand smeared with Suyodhana's blood
I will bind up Pancali's black tresses, pulled apart
by Dul;!.sasana.
J
[Approaching Draupadi.
My queen, daughter of the Pancala king,
your good fortune waxes with the eclipse of
our enemies' clan. Look at me, and cease
this fearful trembling.
Touch this blood, clotted on my hands
all that remains of the beast DuQsasana
who dragged you into the council of kings;
and, beloved, touch this blood as well,
still liquid and smeared on all my body,
of the Kuru king whose thigh my mace crushed
to extinguish the fire of your disgrace. (4 1)
Selected Bibliography
SANSKRIT TEXTS AND TRANSLATIONS
Abhinavagupta. Ablrinauabh4rafi. Commentary on Bharata's NalJafastra. Vols. 1--4. Editrd
by M.R. Kavi. Gaekwads Oriental Series, nos. 36, 68, 124, 145. Baroda, 1934-64. Text
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
Ril.KSASA BHTMA: WOLfBELLY AMONG OGRES AND BRAHMANS 323
with Hindi and Sanskrit commcntaries. Edited by A. Madhusudan Shastri, 2 vols.
Banaras: Banaras Hindu University, 1971, 1975.
Bhana Niriya9a. Vt11ismMiira: du EltrmrtUllllg dn Klilligtn, tin Drama in 6 Ak"" ..,. B/talia
NiiriiyfJllQ. Kritisch mit Einlcitung und Notcn hcrausgcge~n vonjulius Grill. Leipzig:
Fues Verlag (R. Rcisland), 1871. Vn,isamlrDra of Bil411a Jrarii.1'1114. Edited with the
commentary of Jagaddhara, curtailed or enlarged as necessary, various reading,
a literal English translation, critical and explanatory notes in English by M.R. Kale.
Second ed. Bombay, 1918. Reprinted, Deihl: Motilal Banarsidass, 1977. Vnpsamloiiraof
Bftalia Niirii.JfJllQ with the commentaries ofLalqmai;tasiiri andJagaddhara. Madras: V.
Ramaswamy Sastrulu, 1939. Sec also translation in Gitomer (1987).
Bhavabhiiti. MiUatimiidlllwa, with the commentary ofjagaddbara. Critically edited by R.G.
Bhandarkar. 3rd ed., revised V.V. Mirashi. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, 1970. Translated by Michael Coulson. Miilali 11114 M°""4N. In Tltrtt Sanskrit
Plays. Hammondsworth: Penguin, 1981.
Jagannitha. Rasagaiigiidltara, with the commentary GunrmarmaprakaJa or Nagcia Bhaflll.
Edited by Ganga d hara Sastra. Bcnarcs: Ben arcs Sanskrit Series, 1903. Edited and with
commentary Candrika by Badarinath Jha and Madan Mohan jha. Vols. 1-3.
Varanasi: Chowkhamba Vidyabhavan, 1970.
Kalidisa. A~hijfliinaiiikWltala, with the commentary of Righavabhana. Edited by N.R.
Acharya. 12th ed. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1958.
--. MiUau..-kiignimitra, with the comm<ntary orK11ayavcma. Edited by N.R. Acharya. 9th
ed. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1950.
- . Vikramorvafi'J"'. Edited by H.D. Vclankar. Delhi: Sahitya Akadcmi, 1961. With th<
commentaries of Ka1ayavcma and Railganatha, ed. S.P. Pandit. Bombay Sanskrit
Series, no. 16. Bombay: Central Book Depot, 1889. Translations of the three plays in
Tluattr of Memory: Tiu Plays of KiUidiisa. Edited by Barbara Stoler Miller. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1984.
Mahii/JMrata: tlit llxt as cons6tulld in its critieal tditiM. Edited by V.S. Sukthankar ct al. Poona:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 193~. Translated by Kisari Mohan
Ganguli and Pratap Chandra Roy (publisher), 1884-1896. Reprinted in 12 vols., New
Ddhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1970. Trans. J.A.B. van Buitcn<n, vols. 1-3
(comprising parvans 1-5). Chicago: University or Chicago Press, 1973-78.
Riimii.Jfll!ll of Viilmiki, with three commentaries called Tilaka, Shiromam, and Bhoos01UJ. Edited
by Shastri Shrinivasa Katti Mudholkar. Bombay: Gujurati Printing Press, n.d.
SECONDARY SOURCES
Bhat, G.K. Tht Vid~aka. Ahmedabad: Nrw Order Book Co., 1959.
Dumezil, Georges. The Dutiny oft/it Warrior. Trans. AJfHiltc~itcl. Chicago: University or
Chicago Press, 1970.
Gitom<r, David. "The Vt71uarMiira ofBhatta Narayana: the great epic as drama." Ph.D.
diSS<:rtation, Columbia University, 1987.
Journal (
Hihc~itcl, Alf. "Draupadi's Garments." Jtulo-lra11ian 1980), 22:97- 112.
- . "Draupadi's Hair." Puru~artha 5, Autour th la dtisse Mndoue: itwks rhmits par Matkltint
Biartkau. Paris: Editions d< l'Ccolc des hautcs ctudes en sciences sociales (
1981):l7~214.
--. The Ritual ofB attle: Krishna in tlit Mahii/JharaJa. Ithaca and London: Cornell University
Press, 1976.
M. Hiriyanna. Outlints of Indian PMlosop/z;J. London: George Allen & Unwin, Ltd., 1932.
Hopkins, E.W. Epic Mytlioloq. Reprint ed., Delhi: lndological Book House, 1968.
Jefferds, Keith N. "Vidiifaka v<rsus Fool: A Functional Analysis." Jovrnal ofS outli Asian
Litnal•rt 16 (1981), pp. 61- 73.
Karvc, lravati. Yugiinta: tlit End ofa n Epoeh (New Delhi: Sangam Books, 1974).
Kuiper, F.B.J. Varyna am/ Vid~aka: On tlit t>rigi• of tlit Sanskrit drama. Amsterdam: North
Holland Publishing Company, 1979.
O'Flahcrty, Wrndy Doniger. Tht Origins ofE uil in Hindu .lo,lyt/ioloq. Paperback ed. Berkeley:
U nivcrsity or California Press, 1980.
Shulman, David Dean. T ht King am/ tlit Clown in Soutli Indian Mytli am/ Poary. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1985.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SAVITRl: OLD AND NEW
VIDYUT AKLUJKAR
The old myth of Savitri as it appears in the Mahabharata (Arar;iyaka
parvan 277-283; hereafter Mbh.) is cherished by countless generations
of Indians. In many ways, this is a unique story, and perhaps that
explains the fascination with it to some extent. Yc t, as far as I have been
able to find out, it has not enjoyed the varied treatment that some other
stories from the same epic have in Classical Sanskrit or medieval Indian
literature. This paper will examine the reasons behind this curious lack
of reinterpretation and will discuss a couple of its modern reinterpreta
tions.
Before proceeding further, let me recount the Mbh. myth in some
detail. ASvapati, the childless king of the Madras, performs penance for
eighteen years in the hope of obtaining sons. At last, the goddess Savitri
is pleased and offers him a daughter, whom the king names after the
goddess. Savitri grows up, unsurpassed in beauty, wisdom and virtue.
Awed by her radiance, however, no one comes forward to seek her hand.
So the king sends her off to find a match for herself.
Savitri comes back having chosen Satyavat, the son of the blind,
dethroned king Dyumatsena, who is residing in a forest with his wife and
son. She tells her father of her choice, in the presence of sage Narada,
who then discloses the sole flaw in her choice, namely, that Satyavat is
destined to die within a year. The king hesitates, but Savitri is firm in her
choice, and finally, with the blessings of Narada and her parents, she
marries Satyavat and goes to live in the forest with her new family.
Within a year, Savitri charms everyone by her virtuous behaviour. She,
however, carries within her heart the knowledge of the dreadful destiny.
Three days before the fateful day, she observes a vow of standing and
fasting. On the last day, with the permission of her parents-in-law, she
accompanies Satyavat into the forest where he is going to gather some
firewood. Suddenly Satyavat complains of a piercing headache and lies
down with his head on her lap. Savitri keeps vigil.
Varna, the king of Death, approaches and starts to take the soul of
Satyavat away with him. Savitri follows him. When told to go back,
Savitri gently reminds Varna that her place is where her husband is.
Varna admires her courage and offers her a boon-anything except the
life of Satyavat. She asks for the restoration of sight for her sightless
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SAVITRT: OLD AND NEW 325
father-in-law, and Yama grants her that. Savitri still follows Yama.
Again he tells her to go back, again she refuses, and he offers her one
more boon- anything except the life ofSatyavat. This time she asks him
to restore the lost kingdom to her father-in-law. She is granted this
second boon. The same senario repeats itself two more times, and Savitri
is granted by the third boon a hundred sons for her own father, and
lastly, a hundred sons for herself. She still follows Yama, and when told
to go back, answers by praising the virtues of the company of the
righteous.
Finally, Varna is thoroughly pleased with her courage and wisdom,
and he grants her an unconditional boon. At this point Yama has already
lost the battle. Savitri simply reminds him of his earlier boon that she
would have a hundred sons and asks him how this is possible without her
husband. Yama accepts defeat, and retreats, giving her the gift of the life
ofSatyavat. Satyavat is revived, he returns home with Savitri, is reunited
with his joyous father, who has regained his sight. There, at the bidding
of the forest sages, Savitri relates the whole story and thus everyone
comes to know of the victory of love and wisdom over Death.
Broadly speaking, this is a myth of a mortal's close encounter with
Death with the special motif of regaining the life of someone already
dead. There are a few parallels to it in Indian as well as in other
mythologies. In terms of close encounter with Death, the myth probably
belongs to the broad type of myths such as that of Naciketas, where an
account is given of the conversation between Death and a mortal.
However, the narrower category of comparable myths seems to be of the
type in which one of the two lovers dies or is taken to another world, and
the survivor tries to win back the life of the lost one. Sister Nivedita
( 1975) and Anthony Horowitz ( 1985) have compared it with the story of
Alcestis, wife of Admetus, who bargains her life for that of her cursed
husband's. Two other myths from Greek mythology come to mind: the
myth of Orpheus and Eurydice and the myth of Laodamia and
Protesilaus. (Grant and Hazel, 1979). In spite of broad structural
similarities, Savitri in the Mbh. is noticeably different from either one of
these myths.
Consider the myth of Orpheus. Eurydice's death by snakebite is an
accident. It is not in any way pre-destined nor is it anticipated in agony
by her lover. Orpheus does not follow his beloved as soon as she is dead,
but ceases to sing and play and while hopelessly wandering, by chance
enters the underworld. Moved by his sad music Hades grants him a
favour, but it is not unconditional. He may take Eurydice back, only if
he does not look back before he reaches the upper worlds. Unlike Savitri,
at this point, there are two versions of the conclusion. According to the
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
326 VIOYUT AKLUJKAR
oldest, Orpheus succeeds, but according to Virgil and Ovid (Metamor
phoses: Tenth Book) he looks back just as he is about to enter this world
and thus through an excess of love, loses Eurydice. There is only sadness
of loss and pitiable imploring on the part of Orpheus, and we do not see
there anything close to Savitri's determination, fortitude, quiet persis
tance and wisdom in dialectic.
The other Greek myth, that of Laodamia and Protesilaus is closer in
some respects to Savitri, but that too, is not without points of difference.
There is an element of pre-destination in this myth, although not quite in
the same manner as in Savitri. It is learned from an oracle that the first
Greek to tread on the Trojan soil will be the first to die. In a sense, the
outcome is pre-destined for a blank slot as it were, and Protesilaus fulfills
the destiny by jumping on the Trojan soil before anyone else. Unlike the
myth of Orpheus, and like the Savitri myth, the one to die in the myth of
Laodamia is the husband and the one to pray to the gods is the faithful
wife. However, unlike Savitri who gains back everything that was lost
and much more, Laodamia gets her husband back for three hours only,
at the end of which period, according to one version of the story, she dies
with him and accompanies him back to the underworld.
The Savitri of the epic stands out by contrast. The similarities with the
other myths are only superficial, confined to the general outline of the
story. The main differences are in characterization and in the import of
the myth within each tradition. Unlike the Greek lovers, Savitri knows
about the impending death of her chosen mate, but in spite of that, she
enters the union. The Indian ideal of marriage finds expression in
Savitri's words, "Only once is a daughter given in marriage. Blessed with
a long life or not, virtuous or otherwise, once I have chosen a husband, I
shall not wed anyone else''. (Mbh. 1971, 3.278.25- 6) Unlike the
lamentations of the Greek lovers, or unlike the viliipas in the Indian
tradition, when Satyavat dies, Savitri does not lament. Hers is only a
calm, resolute confrontation with Death. She has the strength of charac
ter that is a natural outcome of a life of righteous observances, and
although she is neither impolite nor aggressive, she never gives up. Like a
calculating diplomat, she accepts whatever is offered to her and per
severes in the quest for more. In the end, when she returns, she has her
mission fulfilled and has earned a perennial place in the list of great
women-the paJiuratas.
By now some of the reasons for the everlasting fascination that the epic
Savitri holds should be clear. In the Indian tradition, the essence of the
Savitri myth lies in precisely those areas in which it differs from the
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
327
S.\VITRl: OLD AND N£\V
Greek myths. In pan-Indian lore and literature Savitri is often used as a
standard of comparison for a devoted wife. There is a spill-over of this
myth in certain rituals and in everyday language as well. Even today,
married women in India observe a vow of fasting and praying for their
husband's long life in memory of Savitr1. The often uttered blessing for a
newly married girl in India is still (janmasiivitri bhava) "May you be like
Savitri all your life".
Although Savitri has thus won a perpetual place in the collective
memory of the Indian audience, there is a relative lack of reinterpreta
tions of this old myth in Indian literature. This is all the more surprising
in view of the fact that myths about the other patiuratiis from the epics
seem to have inspired many generations of poets and dramatists to create
new bottles in which to pour the old wine. Take the case of Sita or
Ahal ya. We find not only faithful retellings of these myths but numerous
reinterpretations both in Sanskrit and in other Indian languages.
It should be noted at this point that there is a distinction between two
qualitatively different art-forms. The former is a more or less faithful
rendering of the original myth, allowing for a few cosmetic changes in
narrative detail, or introduction of a few minor characters or events,
without changing the backbone of the original myth. This is mere
retelling. We find many examples of this kind in the medieval period of
Indian literature i.e. 11th century onwards.
The other, more interesting art-form is reinterpretation or re-creation
based on the old myth. In this the author uses the old myth to take off,
but it is the new content that he gives to the old myth that elevates it to
the level of recreation. This new content may be manifest in the form of a
postscript to the old myth or a revelation of an entirely new trait of a
major character or it may consist of a completely different interpretation
given to the major events or characters of the old myth. Examples
abound in the Indian as well as other literary traditions. In the Indian
tradition, we have Bhasa's Pratimii, Kalidasa's Siikuntala, Bhavabhuti's
Uttara-riima-carita, to name just a few. In the western tradition, the classic
examples are Milton's Paradise Lost, Joyce's Ulysses, etc. Karel Qapek's
Apocryphal Stories provide instances of re-creative postscripts. To come to
contemporary scene, Timothy Findley's Not Wanted on the Voyage is an
excellent reinterpretation of the Biblical myth of Noah's ark.
As I mentioned before, there are many retellings of the epic Savitri in
Sanskrit and in the vernacular languages of India; but surprisingly, there
are virtually no re-creations of Savitr'i, with only two exceptions that I
have come across, one in English (by Sri Aurobindo) and the other in
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
328
VIOYt:T AKLt:JKAR
Tamil (by K. Santhanam).1 The retellings ofSavitrl in Sanskrit are to be
seen ·in the Matsya-puraQa, Brahma-vaivarta-purai:ia, Devl-bhagavata
etc., and they can be found in the numerous translations of the Mbh. in
the vernacular languages as well. For example, Moropant, (1729-94) a
Mara1hl writer of the 18th century wrote a Savitri-akhyana (Godbole,
1854, 379-388) that is essentially the same as the story in the epic. A
modern Bengali writer, Toru Dutt (1856- 77), has rendered the Saviu'i
myth in her The Ancient Ballads and Legends of India. She simply recounts
the original with a few peripheral changes in detail. (Dwivedi, 1977).
Speculations as to why the Savitrl myth has not inspired more authors
would be idle; however, I might offer some suggestions. If one compares
Savitri with the other celebrated pativratas or devoted wives of the Indian
lore, she stands out by herself. Ahalya, Draupadl, Sita, Tara, Man
dodari-these are the commonly cited names of pativratiis in the Indian
tradition. (ahalyii draupadi sitii Iara mandodari tathii / paiicakam nii smaren
niryam mahiipiitaka-nii.ianam / /) Each one of these devoted wives was
treated unjustly, knowingly or unknowingly by her husband at some
point. With the exception of Draupadl, all the rest appear to be silent
sufferers. Sita accepts the fire ordeal, the abandonment and the final
ordeal. Ahalya is literally petrified by the wrath of her husband, sage
Gautama. All these are somewhat passive women, who endure ordeals
and yet come out virtuous and devoted towards their husbands. Even
though Draupadl is more active than the rest in her stunning questions
and her passionate scoldings, she seeks to avenge only through the
agency of her husbands. But Savitri has outdone them all. Far from
being passive, she takes charge of the situation whenever there is a
stumbling block. She is not won by the hero in the svayamvara contest like
Sita or Draupadl, nor is she simply offered in wedding by her father, but
chooses her husband entirely by herself, and stands by her choice even
after learning of the fateful flaw in it. Sita is rescued by her husband,
Draupadl is avenged by her husbands. But it is Savitri herself who
rescues her husband, and that too, from no ordinary foe, but Death
1 Herc I must mention, if only to set aside, two modem stori.s which arc ndther
rctcllings nor recreations. These are Dharmavir Bharati's c•savitri Nambar Do'' ln Hindi.
and Sivasankari's "Piirvai" in Tamil. (The latter was kindly sent to me by Ginette
lshimatsu in an English translation.) Both th= stories use the name of the epic heroine
for their heroines. • and then depict an entirely different life for them, which has no
resemblance to the story in the original. They therefore, cannot be considered recreations
of the old myth. Rather, they are ins1ances of a favourite littrary mode employed by
modern Indian authors, namely, of creating utter behavioural contrasts to th< old
pa1iv1ati.s in thC"ir modern namesakes.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig111z..,by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
S.l.VITRT: OLD A:-10 xt:w 329
himself! All this puts her in a class by herself. There is no match for this
active pativratii, either in her own era or in the later ones. At Satyaval's
death, Savitri follows him but her accompaniment of the dead husband
is not the passive following (sahagamana) of a sati that later became the
model in life and in literature. Her saha-gamana is purposeful, she follows
him only to bring him back alive with her. It is interesting to note that
the other princess of the Madras from the same epic-PaiiQu's wife
Madrl, hailing from the same lineage as that of Savitri- has neither the
courage nor the wisdom of Savitri. She follows her husband in death by
becoming a saJi. So, all things considered, Savitrl exhibits the ideal
qualities (as recognized by the Indian literary tradition,) of a hero, not
so much of a heroine, and yet the guiding force behind all her activity
seems to be her love for her husband. Perhaps it was this apparent
anomaly in the old Savitrl that stumped the authors and instead of
creatively handling the myth from different angles they simply preferred
to worship this unusual heroine in their rituals.
The only new creations of the old myth of Savitrl known to me are the
Sri
English epic Savitrl by Yogi Aurobindo (1954), and a Tamil short
story "Savitri" by a modern writer K. Santhanam (1963). It is the latter
that interests me more. The former is a better known re-creation, and
has been commented upon by many able critics. For this reason I will be
brief in my treatment of it. Out of the Mbh. myth of about 700 verses
Aurobindo has created what is perhaps the largest epic in l\fodern
English, of about 24,000 lines and 17 cantos. His Savitrl is steeped in
Vedic symbolism and mysticism. He interprets the old myth
Upani~adic
as an allegory, where "Satyavan is the symbol of the Soul of Truth that
in its descent into the earth atmosphere is caught up by Death and
ignorance, while Savitri is the Divine Light that comes down to release
the Soul from the grips of death and ignorance and to enact with him
the union of the passive truth of being and the active power of grarc"
(Iyengar, 1975).
Apart from the symbolic interpretation that changes the impact of his
new epic, Aurobindo has introduced many significant changes in the
story. Aurobindo's Asvapati (Aswapathy in his spelling) is an active
seeker of truth, a yogin, "the leader of the human race on its evolution
ary march", whose journey into the occult worlds occupies more than
one third of the epic. Aurobindo's Savitri, unlike the Mbh. Savitrl, does
not return to her father to seek approval of her choice. She meets
Satyavan, there is a mutual recognition of love, a romantic exchange of
ideals, and a willing consummation of the union before she returns to her
father. The opposition to this choice of Savitri comes not so much from
the seer-King but from his queen who does not figure in the l\1bh. story
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
330 \'lDYt:T AKLt:JKAR
at all. The tri-riitra-urala of Savitri in the Mbh. expands in Aurobindo's
hands into a full-fledged yoga performed by SavitrI, the yoga of Sclf
discovery and the yoga of preparation for the coming struggle. And
finally, victory over Death is not just an individual gain but the
Savitn~s
victory of Divine Light over Death and ignorance. The myth ends by
being a futuristic, cosmic epic of superhuman grandeur.
The other new re-creation is found in a Tamil short story by K.
Santhanam. This is a far cry not only from the Savitri of Aurobindo, but
even from the epic Savitri. To me this is an extremely intriguing short
story because the au th or consciously accepts a challenge by shedding
most of the fascinating aspects of the old myth and yet succeeds in
creating a self-contained, original and chiselled piece of literature which
claims inheritance from the old myth. This is a remarkable accomplish
ment because the author, according to my sources, is not regarded as one
of the masters of the short story genre. Although he has published 16
books in Tamil and English, he is better known as the Lt. Governor of
Vindhya Pradesh in 1952- 56 and as the chairman of the finance
commision of India in 1956- 57. His books such as India's Road to Socialism
are more widely read than his short stories. And yet, from this unlikely
source comes what I consider a most remarkable recreation based on the
myth of Savitri.
If you strip Savitri of her independent choice of mate, the self
confidence in sticking to her decision, the calm fortitude in observances
of vows, the strength of character manifest in enduring the agonizing
secret in her heart for a whole year, and the towering courage and
wisdom in confronting Death, if you strip Savitrl of all these aspects,
what is then left of the myth? You would be forced to say, nothing much
of interest. And yet this is the challenge that Santhanam has taken and
created a memorable story out of it.
Santhanam's story is that of a girl called Sii.vitrI in contemporary
Madras. When she is fifteen, her father consults a distinguished
astrologer, who informs him that in Savitrl's horoscope, there is a chance
of widowhood when she will be twenty-nine. There is also a crisis in the
intended bridegroom's horoscope, about the·same time,but the boy is
attractive in every other respect, and the father is keen on the match, so
the astrologer gives a false horoscope for Savitrl so as to match the
horoscopes and blesses the union. The astrologer consoles the father by
saying "For all we know, this girl might have the same good fortune of
the SavitrI of the purar;ias who won back her husband's life from the
hands of the God of Death".
The wedding takes place, Savitri lives a happy life as a wife of a
thoroughly westernized doctor for about fourteen years without the
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
S.l.VITRT: OLD AND Nt:ll' 331
knowledge of the impending crisis. Her father has told her to chant daily
the thousand names of the Goddess. Her husband, Sunderasan, is a
product of modern scientific age and education, who ridicules old rituals
and superstition. Under his silent scorn, Savitri gradually gives up the
practice of chanting the thousand names of the goddess. The father tells
her of the dreadful prophecy only on the death-bed, and then, in a panic,
she employs Vedic Brahmins to chant the holy mantras in her house, and
tries to atone for her former lack of faith. As the fateful day approches,
her mother in the agony of anticipation takes seriously ill, Savitri calls
her husband to come right away, he drives at the top speed, meets with
an accident, almost dies, but recovers in the hospital under Savitri's vigil.
Savitrl's mother dies on that day. The conclusion of the story is as
follows:
Savitri waited till the year was out before she revealed the secret. Sundaresan's
disbelief in astrology was only confirmed by the revelation. There were frequent and
excited disputes between them on this subject.
"It is this superstition that killed your mother and nearly killed me too",
Sundaresan would declare.
"JVo. The prediction was /rut and it was only God's mercy that saved us'', said
Savitri with conviction.
After reading Santhanam's SavitrI, one realises that even in this age of
science and scepticism, the Savitri myth has an appeal that defies the
passage of time. Santhanam has taken the task of interpreting the myth
of a bygone age, of sarya:Yuga in the context of kali-yuga and still has
succeeded in retaining an element of drama in it. This he has achieved
by focussing on the classic tension between blind faith and open-eyed
skepticism.
What he had to lose in the characterization ofSavitri he has gained in
terms of realism in the story. The characters that are the counterparts of
king Asvapati and sage Narada of the old myth are extremely realis
tically portrayed by him. Savitri's father in the short story shares with
the old king the same concern about finding a good match for his
daughter, but unlike Asvapati, he has occasion to be critical of his son-in
law's eccentric, untraditional ways. The counterpart of sage Narada of
the old myth, astrologer Raju SastrI can peep into the future and predict
crisis just like Narada; however, unlike the old sage, he also suggests the
falsification of the horoscopes to achieve the intended marriage. This is
not only realistic in the context of Indian match-making practices, but
interestingly, also reminds an Indian reader of the scheming character
often attributed to sage Narada elsewhere in the purai:ias.
The heroine is but a pale shadow of the original; but she is, after all,
merely a name-sake of the radiant Savitri. Her destiny resembles the
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
332
VIDYUT AKLUJKAR
destiny of the old Savitrl, but whereas the old Savitrl represents steadfast
faith. in her own conviction, the new Savitrl represents the blind,
borrowed faith which is never much sure of its shaky foundations. This
contrast is brought out very vividly in the account of Savitn""'s efforts to
rectify the slackness of her own righteous observances by employing the
vedic Brahmins to chant holy mantras in order to ward off the evil. The
old Savitrl trusts in her own ability and silently performs a tri-riitra-vrata,
the new Savitrl has more faith in the vedic Brahmin's efficacy than in her
own. The old Savitrl is calm, deep and unwavering even when Satyavat
dies, the new Savitrl panics under the tension and in a sense contributes
to fulfil the density she is trying to avoid. The counterpart ofSatyavat in
the new story, namely Sundaresan, is Santhanam's original creation, an
agnostic and a skeptic who beautifully balances the element of faith in
the tension between faith and reason.
Given the context of the scientific, rational age the story unfolds quite
naturally, and the conclusion comes almost inevitably. In the case of the
old Savitrl, there is no doubt about Savirl's conquest of Death. However,
in the framework of Santhanam's modern story, given the new inter
pretations of these characters, the classic tension between fate and free
will is never resolved. Instead of the Savitrl-Yama dialectic of the old
myth, Santhanam's Savitrl ends with a new dialectic, the everlasting
battle between faith and skepticism. Thus even after giving up most of
the elements that made the old Savitrl memorable, Santhanam has
succeeded in rebuilding the edifice on the foundations of yet another
conflict that can be drawn from the old myth, namely, the question of
pre-determination and free-will.
These are the new garbs that the old Savitrl has donned so far. When
compared with the other pativraliis, one feels that she could don many
more.
Bibliography
Bharati, Dhannavir. 1969. Banda Gali ka Akhari Makana. Lokodaya series, Tille no. 286.
Bharatiya Janapith Publications.
Dwivedi, A.N. 1977. Toru Dull. New Delhi, Arnold-Hdnemann Publishers, Indian
Writers Series, Vol. XV.
Dwivedi, A.N. 1977. Sri Aurobind~A S1udy of Stlrct<d Ponns. Bareilly, Prakash Book
Depot.
Godbole, P.B. 1854, ed. Nal'an(la. Poona, Poona College Printing Press, Isl edition; 18th
edition: 1957. ed. A.K. Priyolkar, Bombay, Government Central Press.
Grant, Michael and Haiel, John. 1979. GodJ (111,/ Mor/a/J in C'4ssital My1/wlogy: A
Diclionary. New York, Dorseu Press.
Horowitz, Anthony. 1985. Mylhs and A1)·lholog1· in the Children's Library: Lillie Simon.
Simon and Schuster Inc.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze<>by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
S.\V!TRT: OLO AND NEW 333
Iyengar, K.R. Srinivasa. 1975. Dawn to Guatn Dawn: Six Lectures on Sri Aurobindo's
Savitri. Simla, Indian Institute of Advanced Study.
Malt4bh4rala te.i as constituted in its critical edition, Ed. The Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, Poona. 1971.
."ialJya·fJUrillJa. Vidyii.agara-Bha11acarya, Jivananda. 1876. Calcutta.
Mttamorphosts by Ovid. tranolatcd by Rolfe Humphries, Bloomington, Indiana University
Press, 1955.
Santhanam, K.R. 1963. "Siivitn~• in Tht Plough and tht Stars: Stories from Tamilnad ed.
K. Swaminathan, Periaswami Thooran and M.R. Perumal Mudaliar. New York,
Asia Publishing House.
Sister Nivedita. Cradlt Tatu "f Hinduism. Calcu11a, Advaita Ashrama, Third Illustrated
Impression, 1975
Sri Aurobindo. 1954. Sifritri. Sri Aurobindo International University Centre Collection
Vol. II. Pondichcrry, Sri Aurobindo Ashram.
Google rron1
Origi~al
Digll1Ze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE EPIC CONTEXT OF THE BHAGAVADGITA
MADHAV M. DESHPANDE
1. Introduction
I. I. In trying to understand the meaning of the Bhagavadgitii., the
relation between the situational context which forms the frame for the
philosophical discussion and the philosophical discussion itself becomes a
very important question, and our entire understanding of the text may
be colored by how we tend to view this relationship. Is the situational
element of the Bhagavadgitii subservient to the philosophical element, or is
the philosophical element subservient to the situational element? These
are not the only two choices, but represent the extremes of a spectrum of
possibilities. This general question is very important in trying to under
stand the true import of the Bhagavadgitii. ls it the case that the author of
the Bhagavadgitii had a preconceived systematic philosophy which he
chose to express by using the particular context of the Mahiibhiirata war
as a frame? Or is it the case that the story of the .l\;/ahiibhiirata was the pre
eminent concern of the author and that the philosophical doctrines were
custom designed to fit the exigencies of the larger plot? We may never
fully know the historically justifiable answers to these questions, since we
know very little about the author or the authors of the Bhagavadgitii in
particular, and the Mahiibhiirata in general. While resolving such ques
tions in a totally conclusive fashion may be beyond our means, one can
certainly keep in mind these issues in evaluating the contents of the
Bhagavadgitii and its commentaries such as that of Sankara. If the
particular situation of Arjuna and its evolution turns out to be a factor
which significantly molds the direction of the philosophical discussion, it
may serve as a warning against uncritically accepting the dominant
cultural belief in India that used Arjuna's battle situation simply
K~~a
as an occasion to teach his philosophical message to the world, a message
which he would have communicated in any case.
1.2. Such an impression is created by the phrase arjunam nimillikr!Ja
"by using Arjuna as the occasion" used by Sankara in the introduction
to his Gitii.bhiiva. Most traditional commentators believe that the
Bhagavadgitii intends to convey a systematic doctrine, but may contain
occasional deviations from this main doctrinal systematicity. Since the
commentators do not agree upon what this main doctrine is, their
notions of what the occasional deviations are are also divergent.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE EPIC CONTEXT OF THE BHACAVADGTTJ 335
However, no commentator in the tradition ever argues that it is the
context of Arjuna's situation on the battlefield which is the most
powerful factor actually shaping and reshaping the line of K11i:ia's
argument. Again looking at the extremes of the spectrum of opinions
concerning the Bhagavadgltii, the tradition holds that the Bhagavadgltii is
not only a genuine part of the Mahabharata, but that it is directly a
representation of God's words. On the other hand, modern scholarship is
willing to consider the whole or parts of the Bhagavadgitii as being
interpolations. In this paper, I propose to build an argument based on
the consistency of the plot of the epic to show which parts of the
Bhagavadgilii may be most central and therefore original and which in all
likelihood may be later additions.
JArJuna's Depression
2.1. \jhe description of the state of Arjuna's mind in the first chapter of
the Bhagavadgitii makes it clear that Arjuna's decision not to fight is not a
conclusion based on well thought out philosophical or any other reason
ing. It was the climax of a total breakdown of self-confidence caused by
fear, uncertainty, compassion etclHis initial statement (Bhagavadgitii
1.29-30) starts out with a descripu'on of the shock:
drUvtmarri suajanarri krroa yuyutsurri samupasthitam I
sldanti mama gatrOl}i mukhatp ca pari.fuviati / /
vepthui ca Jarire mt rornaharfai ca jiiyalt /
gatµ/lvarri sratpsatt hastiil tvak caiva paridahyate 11
na ca Jaknomy avasthiiturri hhramatlva ca mt I
mana~
having seen these assembled relatives who are eager to fight, my
"K~1.1a!
limbs sink and my mouth dries up. My body is trembling and my hair
stands on end. My bow slips from hand and my skin is burning. I am not
able to stand still. My mind is as if circling around".
2.2 It is only after this initial description of his shock that Arjuna
begins to present a series of arguments to justify the conclusion that he
has decided not to fight. These arguments seem to place a greater
emphasis on external factors such as the impropriety of killing relatives in
battle, danger of the mixture of castes etc., while Arjuna projects himself
as a compassionate knowledgeable person ...
(asmiibi~ prapaS)adbhi~,
Bhagavadgllii 1.39) without acknowledging his own fear, uncertainty,
confusion and ignorance. Arjuna had fought many battles in the past
and this was certainly not his first experience of war. Naturally, Kllr.ia
admonishes him to abandom this unmanly (klaibya) and uncivilized
(aniiryaju.r/a) behavior which would not lead him to heaven nor fetch him
any glory (Bhagavadgitii 1.2- 3). In response to this prodding from Kllr.ia,
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
336 ~·IAOHA \I M. DESHPANDE
Arjuna reveals a much greater depth to his emotional problem, his fear
of killing his own teachers in the battle, and most importantly his
concern that he was not sure whether the Pan.t;lavas would win or lose
the war (,yad viijaynnayadi vii nojayeyul,, Bhagavadgltii 1.6). This last doubt
is the most significant factor in Arjuna's reaction. The Pan.Qavas are
outnumbered almost two to one, i.e. eleven Kaurava akfauhiTJls versus
seven Pan.Qava akfauhif}ls according to the story of the Mahiibhiirala.
Similarly, the moral factor of killing one's teachers and relatives in battle
was also very significant. The rest of the Bhagavadgilii is a masterly
argument built by Knn.a to refute Arjuna's logic, and to encourage him
to fight. During the course of this discourse, Arjuna slowly reveals his
lack of full acceptance of Knn.a's divinity, and a major portion of the
Bhagavadgitii is spent on convincing Arjuna of Knn.a's divinity. In the
course of revealing his own divinity to Arjuna, Knn.a shows him his
cosmic form in which the great Kaurava heroes were being destroyed.
Such a specialized cosmic form again has a very closely contextual
significance. Finally, Arjuna is convinced of divinity and agrees
Kr~n.a's
to follow his advice and fight.
2.3 This is briefly the situational frame of the Bhagavadg'ilii. While this
frame is widely known, the antecedents of many elements of this frame in
the story of the Mahiibhiirala are not so widely known. These antecedents
throw a great deal of light on Arjuna's state of mind in the Bhagavadgitii
and Knn.a's response to it. It is commonly believed that Arjuna's
reaction to the battle scene was an instantaneous response and therefore
it shocked Knn.a all the more. A study of the antecedents in the
Mahiibhiirala point to quite a different picture. In fact one may be able to
say that it was Knn.a who was more bent upon going to war against the
Kauravas and that he could not let Arjuna resign from carrying out this
plan. The Udyogaparva and the Bhirmaparva of the Mahiibhiirala provide
ample evidence to create a profile of the pre-war attitudes of the
Mahiibhiirala characters. With this evidence, we better able to
ar~
understand the Bhagavadg'itii in its proper epic context. )
..-
ef
3. Acceptance Krf1'a's Divini!J' by Other Participants
3.1. It is clear from the Mahiibhiirala that not all characters were sure of
or even aware of divinity before the war. Even with the various
Kr~n.a's
textual accretions, the story retains its integrity to a large extent. To put
it simply, if characters like Arjuna had been already fully convinced of
Knn.a's divinity, a large part of the Bhagavadgitii as we have it would not
make any sense. The evolution of the discourse in the Bhagavadgilii shows
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE EPIC CONTEXT ot· THE BHAG,H"ADGTTA 337
that Arjuna was aware of K11r:ia's divinity through hearsay, though he
had no personal experience.
3.2. In chapter MB 5.7., we are told how both Arjuna and Duryod·
hana approach Knr:ia to seek his assistance in their war effort. Knr:ia says
that all of his army will be on one side and he will be himself on the other
side, unarmed and not taking part in the fighting itself (ayudlryamanalj
sarigrame nyastaiastro' ham ekata}J, MB 5. 7 .17). After being told this, Arjuna
chose K11r:ia, while Duryodhana chose Knr:ia's army. After Duryodhana
left, turned to Arjuna and asked him: "With what idea did you
Kr~r:ia
choose me who will not fight in the battle?" (ayudhyamanalj ka'!I buddhim
asthaya aha'!! tvl!)'a vrtalJ, MB 5. 7 .31). Arjuna answered:
bhauiin samarthas tiin sarviin nihanlul!I niitra sal!liayai} /
nihamum aham apy tlcal} samarthai} /JUTUJOllama / /
bhauii1t1s tu lcirtimaTolct tad ya.las tvii1t1 gamityati /
ya.lasii ciiham apy arthi tasmiid asi mayii rn;ta}J / /
"O without doubt you are capable of killing all of them ( =
Puru~ttama,
Kauravas). I too am capable by myself. However, since you are so famous
in the world, you will be I too am desirous of success, and
succcs.~ful.
therefore I chose you".
MB 5.7.32-33.
Interestingly, Arjuna does not bring in any notion of or acknowled
gement of Knr:ia's divinity in this context. However, Arjuna had heard
about Knr;ia's divinity and that was indeed a factor in his choosing
Knr;ia over his army. During the period when both sides were exchang
ing messages, Sai'ijaya reports Arjuna's words to Duryodhana:
ayudhyamiino manasii pi yasya
jayaf'!I kn11alJ purU.[asyiibhinandtt /
dhruva1(1 sarviin so' bh)•atfyiid amilriin
stndriin dtviin miinuft niisti cintii / /
"Even though KnrJa is not fighting, if he even contemplates in his mind the
victory of a person, that person will indeed overcome his enemies, even the
gods along with Indra. There is no question about human (enemies)." MB
5.47.64.
Sai'ijaya reports Arjuna's belief that Knr:ia was the powerful
Vi~r;iu
himself (viroum anantaviryam, MB 5.47.82), and that gods had asked
Kr~r:ia to rescue them from the demon Naraka (jiinanto' sya prakrti'!I
ktsavasya nyayojayan dasyuvadhiiya MB 5.47. 74- 76). How did
kr~11am,
Arjuna know about divinity? Certainly not through personal
Kr~r:ia's
expenence. It was th_rough indirect reports from Narada and others.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
338 :>IAOHAV M. Ol::SHPANOE
Looking at the invincible arrangement of the army made by
Bhi~ma,
was terribly worried and depressed. He asked Arjuna how
Yudhi~thira
they were going to emerge successful from this battle. Arjuna replied:
tva'!I riijan vijiinihi dhruvo' smiika'!I rarµ jayal} /
yathii mt niiradal} praha yatal} krPJas tato jayal} / /
anantalejii Jatrupiigt$U nirvyathal} /
govinda~
saniitanatamo krPJQS tato jayal} / /
pu~al} yata~
purii hy t~a harir bhiitvii vaikuTJtho' ku1Jthasiiyakal} /
suriisuriin avasphiirjann abravit kt jayantv iii//
anu krtTJO'!I jaynntli yair ukta'!I tatra lair jitam /
tat-prasiidiid dhi lrailokya'!I priipla'!I Jakriidibh0 surai~ / /
tasya le na vyalha'!I kii'!lcid iha paiyiimi bhiirala /
yasya le jayam iiiiiste viivabhuk / /
tn'daitivara~
"You should know, 0 King, that our victory in the battle is absolutely
certain. As Narada has told me, where there is Ko1,1a, there goes the victory.
Infinitely powerful, Govinda is painless (while moving) in the midst of the
throngs of enemies. He is the most ancient spiritual being. Where there is
Ko1,1a, there goes the victory. Previously, indeed the same Ko1,1a, having
assumed the form ofHari, the being from Vaiku1,11ha with invincible arrows,
spoke with a resounding voice to gods and demons, "who should win?"
Those who said that they will win by following K111,1a won in those battles.
Only through his grace did Indra and others gain the kingdom of the three
worlds. Since that lord of the gods, the ruler of the universe, wishes for your
victory, 0 Bhiirata, I do not see any trouble for you". l\llB 6.21.11-17.
The identity of K"i;ia with Vi$t;iu was thus communicated to Arjuna
by Nlirada, and Arjuna did put a great value on this supposed divinity,
though he did not have a personal experience. As is clear from the
Bhagavadgitii, K"i;ia's divinity was not beyond doubts and questions for
Arjuna. K"i:ia had to establish it for Arjuna not only through his
discourse, but by granting him a vision of his cosmic divine form, which
was normally accessible only to mystics.
3.2. While normal characters like Arjuna did not have any personal
knowledge of Koi:ia's divinity, several mystically oriented characters
"knew" Kni:ia to be Vi~r;iu. Consider the situation of Dhrtara~1ra.
Through hearsay, he also seems to have been' aware of Kor;ia's divinity,
which he uses to convince Duryodhana to make peace with Plir;ic;lavas:
tatha ktiauo' py apradhrtyo
vip}u~
lokatrayasyiidhipatir mahiitmii /
tq/htta kas /a.ijla martyaiJ purastiit
;·aii vart'l)'a I
sarvadtvt~u it/ya~/
"Similarly, this Kesava, who is Vi$1,1U himself, is invincible and a great soul,
the overlord of the three worlds. Which mortal would be able to confront
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE f:PIC CONTEXT OF THE BHAGAVADGTTJ 339
him, who is the best and the most praiseworthy among all the gods"? MB
5.22.10.
However, it is clear that had no personal experience of
Dhrtar~tra
divinity. In chapter MB 5.67, asks Saiijaya:
K~l.la's Dhrtar~tra
I
katha111 tva111 miidkava111 vettha sarvalokamahtfvaram
I/
katham ma111 na vtdiihal!I Ian mamii&akfva sailjaya
"How come you know Madhava to be the overlord of the entire universe,
and how come I do not know him? 0 Saiijaya, please explain this to me".
MB 5.66.1.
Saiijaya says:
I
vidyayii liila jiiniimi triyuga111 madhusiidanJJ111
11
kartiira111 akrtaf!I dtuaf!I bhiitiinii111 prabhaviipyaya'!'
"Through wisdom, I know Madhusudana, who has existed through all the
three Yugas, to be the uncreated creator, the god who is the source and the
final return of all beings". MB 5.67.3.
At this point, Saiijaya then explains in detail the doctrine of K~l)a's
divinity to This discussion continues into chapter MB 5.68.
Dhrtar~tra.
In the next chapter, then tries to convince Duryodhana of
Dhrtar~tra
Knl.la's divinity. Thus, it is clear that in the story of the Mahiibharata,
Knl)a's divinity is heard about by most of the heroes, but very few if any
have had a first hand experience. The Pal)c;lavas are not yet convinced
beyond a shadow of doubt, though they would like to believe in it. In the
light of such a background in the story, it makes perfect sense why
Arjuna could not accept Knl.la's exotic doctrines and claims
immediately.
4. Doubts about Pa1J4ava Victory
4. 1. In Bhagavadgita (2.6.), Arjuna expresses his doubt about the
outcome of the war. He could not be certain whether his side will emerge
victorious in the battle. While he was a brave warrior, he could still see
that the odds were stacked against the Pal)c;lavas. This realization was
shared by other Pal)c;lavas. Interestingly, the three sons ofKunu shared a
very ambivalent attitude, an oscillation between willingne.ss and
unwillingness to go to war. While Arjuna is confident of his own prowess,
and he boasts about it to scare the Kauravas (MB 5.47.91ff ), he still
cannot forget that the Pal)c;lavas were outnumbered by their enemies.
Such doubts were shared by others. Knl.la says to the allies of the
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
340
MADHAV M. DESHPANDE
Pii.1;u;lavas at the court of Virii.1:
latkapi nemt' lpatayii samarllliilJ
ltfiil!I jayiiyeti bha11m mata111 vali /I
samerya sarvt sahitii!J srJirdbhilJ
ltfiil!I vin.iiiiya yaltyur tva / /
"Even if you may think that because of numerical inferiority these
(Pai;ic;lavas) arc not capable of gaining a victory over them ( = Kauravas),
still, joined together with all their friends, they will certainly attempt to
destroy them (=the Kauravas)". MB 5.1.22.
In chapter MB 6.21, YudhiHhira is worried about the Pii.1;ujavas'
ability to break through the formations arranged by On this
Bhi~ma.
occasion, Arjuna tries to console YudhiHhira by referring to Koi;ia's
reported divinity. However, it is obvious that such an explanation was
not fully convincing even for Arjuna himself.
5. The Will to Fight
5.1. The Mahabhiirala depicts a picture of different individuals with
different responses to the idea of war. Among the Pii.1;u;lavas, clearly the
three sons of Kunti emerge as the soft-hearted warriors, to the great
irritation ofDraupadi, Nakula and Sahadeva, as well as Koi;ia. After the
Kauravas refuse to give even five villages to the Pii.r;ic;lavas,
Yudhi~1hira
realizes that war is the only option. However, even at this point, he
would rather avoid war, if peace could be attained in some way or
another. Therefore, he sends Koi;ia on a final peace mission. These are
Bhima's words to Koi;ia before his departure:
api duryodhanJJl!I krf'14 sarvt vayam /
adhaicarii~
nicair bhiitvanuyiisyiimo mii sma no bharatii naJan / /
af>y syad yathii na!J saha /
udiisinavrtti~ kuruhhi~
I/
viisudtva tatha kiirya111 "" kuriin anJJya/J sf>rftt
aham etad bravimy eva111 riijii caiva praJarpsati /
arjuno naiva yuddkarthi bhii)·asi hi dayiirjune / /
"We may even walk behind Duryodhana, bending low and walking at a
lower leve.1, 0 but let not our Bharatas be destroyed (in the war). 0
Kr~l)a,
Vasudeva, please arrange it in such a way that we will have a peaceful
relationship with the Kurus. That way no injustice will fall upon the
Kurus .. . I say this and the king also a pp-roves of it. Arjuna is indeed not
desirous of war. Arjuna has a great deal of compassion". MB 5.72.20- 23.
Draupadi recognizes that Bhima and Arjuna have a weak resolve to go
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE EPIC CONTEXT Of" THE HHAGAV.~D(;TTJ 341
to war. This angers her immensely:
I
yadi bhimarjunau kH(UI krJ>a(Ulu sandhikiimulcau
pitii mt yotsyatt vrddhal} saha pulrai}J mahiiralhail) / /
"O K{lQa, ifthe wretched Bhima and Arjuna want to make peace (with the
Kauravas}, then my old father, along with his mighty warrior sons, will go
to war". MB 5.80.37.
Such angry words, coming from DraupadI, who was insulted at the
court of Duryodhana, seem to be quite natural. Nakula and Sahadeva
have a similar reaction. Their advice to who is about to leave for
K~i;ia,
his peace mission, is:
yadi praJamam iccheyuh kuraval) saha pii'14avail) /
tathiipi yuddha'!I diiJiirha yojaytthiil) sahaiva tail] / /
"Even if the Kurus would want to make peace with the Pai:ic;lavas, still, 0
K{lQa, you should plan to bring about a war with them". MB 5. 79.2.
Sahadeva says:
yadi bhlmiirjunau krPJfl dharmariijaJ ca dhiirmikal) /
dharmam ulsrjya ltniiha'!I yoddhum icchiimi sa71!Yuge / /
"If Bhima, Arjuna and Dharmaraja are righteous (in thinking about not
going to war), then, 0 I would like to abandon Dharma and fight
Knr~a.
in the baule". MB 5.79.4.
is the one character that is consistently advocating war with the
Kr~i;ia
Kauravas. Even before leaving on his final peace mission, Kni;ia says
that for every possible reason he advocates war with the enemies (sarvalhii
yuddham eviiham iiiarrzsiimi parail) saha, MB 5. 71.34). He promises Draupadi
that there will indeed be a war in which she will see the Kaurava women
crying after their relatives have been killed. This, Kni;ia says, is destined
to happen and it cannot be altered (MB 5.80.441f).
6. A1oral Dilemmas
6.1. Arjuna makes a number of moral arguments against fighting the
war in the Bhagavadgltii. Again it must be said that Arjuna is not unique
in making such arguments. The same moral issues faced a number of
characters. Arjuna says that he sees evil omens {nimittiini ca paiyiimi
viparltiini keiaua, Bhagavadgrlii 1.31 ). Many such descriptions of evil omens
before the war are found in the Mahiibhiirata. The most detailed descrip
tion is perhaps found in chapters MB 6.2 and MB 6.3, where Vyasa
describes numerous evil omens to DhrtaraHra sends
Dhrtara~)ra.
Saiijaya as a messenger to Yudhi~1hira (chapter 5.25) and a large part of
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
342
MADHAV M. DESHPANDE
the message is the description of the evil effects of the war and the
resulting sin. Saiijaya, in communicating Dhrtara~tra's message, says:
µtra Jii.ntaMuo h.ataJi syii.t
bh~a~
µtra drOT}tJI/ sahaputro syii.t / /
ha~
krPaJi saumadattir vikar1}0
Jaly~
kaJ'TJflduryodlumau ca /
uiuitpiat~
etii.n hatvii. kidrJarp tat suklrarp syii.t
yad vindethas tad anubriihi pii.rtlra / /
labdlwii.pimii.rp prthwirp sii.garii.ntam
jarii.mr!Jii Miva hi tvarp /
prajahy~
priyii.priye ca rii.jan
su);lrad~t
naivarri uidvii.n Miua yuddliarp kur"lva / /
"(In this war) where Bh~ma, the son of Santanu, would be killed and
1
where Drooa would be killed along with his son; where Krpa, :Salya,
Saumadatti, Vikan:ia, Kan;ia, Duryodhana and scores (of others would be
killed), tell me, 0 son of Prthli, what would be the pleasure that you will
earn by killing these? Even after obtaining the kingdom upto the limits of
the oceans, you will not be free from old age and death, pleasant and
unpleasant things, sorrows and happiness. 0 king! Knowing thus, you
ought not to make war''. MB 5.27.24-26.
Kuntl faces the same dilemma, knowing the kind of disaster the war
would bring upon everyone:
dliig astu artham yat-krtt' yam mahiin jifiitivadlit ktayaq /
vartsyau suhrdiirp hy tfiirp yuddht' smin vai / /
pariibhav~
piirµ/auiiJ ctdipii.ifciilii yii.daviiJ ca /
samiiga~
bharatair yadi youyanti kirrz nu param / /
d~ham at~
paiyt dotam dliruvarrz yuddlit lathii yuddlit pariiblrauam /
adhafl4S)'a mrtarri !reyo hi jifatiktaye I I
114 Jay~
"Cursed be the riches for which this great destruction of the relatives in the
battle will occur. Similarly, there will be the defeat of these good hearted
persons in this battle. If the Pai;i<;lavas, Cedis, Pliiiclilas, and Ylidavas come
together and fight with the Bharatas, what greater pain could there be
compared this' I certainly see the fault in the war and I also sec the
10
defeat in the war. It is better to die poor than attain victory in the
destruction of one's kinsfolk''. MB 5.142.11-13.
Similar issues are raised even by Dharmaraja in deciding to take up
arms against the Kauravas. The Udyogaparva (5.151.19-22) describes the
moral dilemma faced by Dharmaraja:
katharp hy avadhyaiq saha bhauiv·ati /
sal!lgram~ kiiry~
I/
kalhal!l hatvii. guriin vrddliiin uijayo no bhavivati
"How one would have to fight with those who are not to be killed? Having
killed the aged elders, how could victory be ours"? MB 5.152.22.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE EPIC CONTEXT OF THE BHAGAVADGTTA 343
Upon listening to these woes of it is Arjuna who cites
Yudhi~1hira,
Knr.ia's advice to the Par.ic;lavas that they must fight for their just cause
(MB 5.151.23- 4). Arjuna tells that this war, in the opinion
Yudhi~lhira
of Kor.ia, Kunti and Vidura, was indeed not adharma, and that the
Pa1,1.c;lavas could not simply withdraw without giving a fight. Knr.ia
himself is present on this occasion and he approves Arjuna's justification
with a smile (lac chrulva viisudevo' pi sal!Jlasiicivacas tadii smayamano' bravlt
parlham tvam tlad iii bruvan, MB 5.151.27). Again Arjuna is not alone in
leaving up to Kor.ia the decision between what is dharma and adharma.
After listening to Saiijaya's message that fighting the war may lead to
adharma, YudhiHhira replies:
yadi hy aka111 uisrjan syam agarkyo
yudkyamano yadi jahfa111 svadkarmam I
makiiyaJiil} ktiavas tad bravitu
vii.sudeuas tiibkf!Yar / /
arthakiima~
idrlo' ya111 kelavas tiita bkiiyo
vidmo ky ena111 karma1)ii111 nilcayajflllm /
priyaJ ca siidkulamaJ ca krf'J•
na~
niitikrame vacana111 keiavasya / /
"Would I be free from blame if I were to give up? Would I be abandoming
my own duty by fighting? Let Kni;ia, of great fame, speak about that.
Vasudeva wishes well for both sides. Sir, such is this Kni;ia. Moreover, we
know him as one who can decide between various possible actions. Kni;ia is
dear to us and he is most noble. I will not transgress Kni;ia's words". MB
5.28. lo, 14.
7. Ku'la's Special Relationship to Arjuna
7.1. In the Bhagavadgitii (10.37), Knr.ia says that, as God, he represents
the best of everything, and that among the Pa1,1.c;lavas, he is Arjuna
himself (Pii7Jtfaviinarri Knr.ia also says that Arjuna is his
dhanarrijay~).
friend and is devoted to him (bhakto' si me sakha ceti, Bhagavadgllii 4.3). In
the story of the Mahiibharala, relationship with Arjuna is par
Kr~r.ia's
ticularly intense. In general, the Pa1,1.c;lavas are Knr.ia's cousins. Kunti,
the mother of the Pa1,1c;lavas was Knr.ia's father's, i.e. Vasudeva's, sister.
Additionally Kor.ia's sister, Subhadra was married to Arjuna. Knr.ia also
had an intense brotherly affection for Draupadi, the wife of the
Pa1,1c;lavas. There were no such links with the Kaurava side. The fact that
the Par.ic;lavas are deemed to be followers of the righteous conduct is also
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
344
MADHAV M. DESHPA!\IJt:
a factor. Kni:ia explains to Duryodhana:
yas tan dvtfli sa mii'I' dvtfli
yas tan alUI sa rniim alUI /
aikiitmyatp miitp galatp viddlii
pi.rµ/aNir dltamuuiirihlrilJ I I
"He who hates them hates me, and he who is behind them is behind me.
Know me to have reached a state of identity with the Pa1:u;lavas of righteous
conduct". MB 5.89.28.
Arjuna in particular was Kni:ia's most favorite Pai:ic;lava and this
relationship had been recognized by others as well. Vidura explains to
that Arjuna is as dear to Kni:ia as his own life and that
Dhrta~1ra
Kni:ia will never abandon him (a!Jiijyam asya jiiniimi priirµJis turya711
dJuma711jayam, MB 5.85.12).
8. Arjuna's Baggage
8.1. The above discussion makes it clear that Arjuna's reaction to the
war as depicted in the Blragavadgilii was neither unusual nor unexpected
in the light of the preceding descriptions in the Mahabharata. The
Pai:ic;lavas were aware of the moral issues involved in killing their own
kinsmen, teachers and relatives in the battle. They were also aware of the
larger cultural damage which would inevitably result from the war.
They were numerically inferior to the Kauravas. Such facts naturally led
to doubts in their minds about the moral justification of their venture as
well as the prospects of success in the war. Arjuna was aware of Kni:ia's
affection and support for him and valued this special relationship. While
he had heard about Knr:ia 's divinity, and had come to view it as an
important asset, he personally had no experience of this aspect of Knr:ia's
personality. It is necessary to understand this as an important point in
the story of the Mahiibhiirata. Between Arjuna's concern about the
possibility of losing the war and the solace he gained in knowing that
Kni:ia was on his side, ultimately it is the concern over who may be
victorious (yad viijayemajadi vii nojayeyu4, Bhagavadgitii 2.6) that proves to
be more powerful. Arjuna sinks into depression even while Knr:ia is
standing next to him. It is obvious that Arjuna's second-hand knowledge
about Knr:ia's divinity was not strong enough to help him pull out of this
depression. Nor was it strong enough to make him accept Knr:ia's
philosophical claims without objections.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE EPIC CONTEXT or THE BHAG.~ l'ADGTT.:T 345
9. Back to the Bhagavadgita
9.1. On this background, we can understand why Arjuna could not
simply accept initial admonitions in the Bhagauadg"itii. It should
K~i;ia's
be noted that most of those initial admonitions are not new but have
occurred earlier in the Mahiibhii.rata. K"i;ia has already explained the
moral issues to the Pai;ii;lavas on many previous occasions and there was
very little new. Even the doctrine of karmayoga, the argument based on
the duty of a had been made previously (cf. MB, Chapter
K~atriya,
5.29). Therefore, Arjuna's reluctance in accepting the same old
arguments is quite understandable. The new arguments in the Bhagavad
gitii begin with gradually introducing supernatural claims about
K~i;ia
himself and introducing a hierarchy between himself and Arjuna. Such
issues are introduced from the beginning of the fourth chapter of the
Bhagavadgitii.
ima'!I vivasvalt yoga111 proktavii.n alzam al!)'ayam /
vivasvii.n manavt prii.ha manur iqvii.kavt' bravit / /
"I explained this imperishable doctrine of yoga to Vivasvat. Vivasvat
explained this to Manu, who explained it to Bhagavadgitii. 4.1.
l~vaku".
This is the first time when Koi;ia has directly brought in a notion that
he represents the eternal godhood and that he is more than and beyond
the limitations of his particular mortal appearance. This was not
immediately acceptable to Arjuna, and with an air of disbelief he asks:
apara'!I bhavalo janma para'!! janma vivasvatal} /
katham ttad vijii.nijii.111 tvam ii.dau proktavii.n iti / /
"Your birth is recent, while the birth ofVivasvat is in the remote past. How
can I comprehend that you explained this [doctrinel] first to (him)"?
Bhagavadgitii. 4.4.
This is the beginning of the new element in the Bhagavadgitii.. has
Kr~i;ia
now taken the argument to a new height and the validity of this new
argument depends not just upon the value of the ideas, but upon the
truth of the personal claims about Kni;ia's divinity. The fourth chapter
of the Bhagavadgitii introduces claim to godhood directly, and
K~i;ia's
then this idea is slowly developed in the later chapters. In the eleventh
chapter of the Bhagauadgitii., we reach the climax of this argument with an
opportunity offered to Arjuna to have a direct realization of 's
K~r)a
divine form. After this vision of Ko i;ia's cosmic form, Arjuna needs no
more verbal descriptions. Arjuna now personally knows that is
Kr~i;ia
God and that his prom.ises about everything now override all other prior
ideas about mortality, fear, duty and defeat. After this cosmic vision of
Kni;ia, Arjuna's resistance is completely broken and till the very end of
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
346
:\IADHAV ~1. DF.SHPANDF.
the Bhagavadgltii, he is only at the receiving end, willing to carry out
Koi:ia's advice.
9.2. In order to get Arjuna back on his feet, Koi:ia has to deal with all
aspects of Arjuna's psychological breakdown, from his pseudo-wisdom
and pretence of self-confidence to fear, uncertainty and ignorance. The
shape of Koi:ia's discourse is primarily circumscribed by this task. His
exposition of philosophy is not an excercise in pure philosophy. It is
applied philosophy, philosophy manipulated and reorganized to suit a
special purpose. It is through this manipulation and reorganization of
various strands that a new application of old philosophies is gradually
developed and perfected. While the individual philosophical ideas in
most cases are old, their peculiar redesigning and reorienting is the
contribution of the author of the Bhagavadgltii, or of Koi:ia himself as the
Indian tradition believes.
10. Tht Conttxluali;:.td Cosmic form of Kurµi
I 0.1. Thus the context of the Bhagavadglta shaped its philosophy and
therefore is of primary importance. In the cosmic form of Koi:ia, Arjuna
sees the Kaurava heroes entering into the mouth and being chewed up
and destroyed. Even a traditional commentator like Sankara recognizes
that the purpose of this cosmic form being shown to Arjuna is to remove
his doubt about his victory once and for all (athiidhunii purii ''yad viijaymia
yadi vii no iry arjunasya salfliaya iislt tan-nir11ayiiya piit}t/auajayart;t
jayeyu~" ya~
aikiintikart;t dariayiimlti pravrtto bhagauiin / Gltiibhiif]a on Bhagauadglta 11.20).
The Bhagavadgltii itself makes this situational significance of the cosmic
form quite clear. Kni:ia says:
kiilo' smi lokaJqayakrt pram;ddho
J
/okiin samiihartum iha
pravrtta~
rtt' pi tvii111 na bhavivanti sarvt
yt' vaslhiliiq pratyanilctfU yodhiiq { /
lasmiit tvarri ullif/ha yaio labhasva
jitvii ialrim bhunkfva samrddharri I
riij)la1~
mD)'llivailt nihatiiq piirvameva
nimillamiitrarri bhava saryasiicin / /
dro1Ja'1' ca bhlima111 ca jayadra1ha111 ca
kanµzrri lathiin1iin api yodhavlriin /
mayii hatiirris tva1f1 jahi mii ryathi,thii
yudhyasva jtlii.si ra1Jt sapatniin / /
"I am the Time that causes the worlds to perish, matured and here come
forth to destroy the worlds; even without you not one of the warriors drawn
up in the opposing ranks shall survive. Therefore arise, win glory, defeat
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
347
THE l:PIC CONTl:XT Of THF, BllAIJAVAIJGTTA
your foes, enjoy wide sovereignty! I have already slain these men; be no
more than a means, 0 Arjuna. Drooa and Bhi$ma and Jayadratha and
Kan;ia and other mighty warriors too are already slain by me and now you
may slay them. Tremble not! Fight! You shall conquer your rivals in the
battle". Bhagavadgltii 11.32- 34.
On these verses too, Sankara brings out the situational significance of
the particular visions. refers only to those major Kaurava heroes
K~i:ia
as already being killed who worried Arjuna in one way or another (Jtfu
ytfu yodhtfv arjunav·iisankii tii111s tiin 11Japadiiati bhagaviin mayii hatiin iti,
Gitiibhii.f)ia on 11.34). Thus, the situational context is a major factor
shaping the particular philosophical and theological arguments.
11. Conclusion
11 . I. In this brief paper, I have tried to show that the Bhagavadgf/ii as it
is available to us is deeply embedded in the story of the Mahiibhiirata. It
represents a progression of the Mahiibhiirata narrative rather than an
intrusion. Does this mean that the Bhagavadgitii as we have it is all by one
author, or that it belongs, as <l whole, to the oldest stratum of the epic?
This is a difficult question.(To state my conclusions briefty, it seems
most likely that there was a v';¥sion of Mahiibhiira/a which did not contain
a notion of Kr$Qa as a divinity. A version of the Bhagavadgitii most
probably existed before Kr$Qa's divinity developed and was added to
the epic. Perhaps the first three chapters of the current Bhagavadgitii
contain material that goes back to this older core. A reftection of this
state of the Bhagavadgitii is seen in the Anugitii, which purports to
summarize the Bhagavadgitii, and yet does not contain references to Kr$r;ia
as a divinity. However, once the notion of Kr$r;ia as a divinity developed
in the history of Indian religions, new layers were added to the epic
across the board, not just to the Bhagavadgitii. Those redactors who added
these new layers of Kni:ia religion made use of this new motif in
enhancing the story element of the Mahiibhiirala, and the evidence
presented in this paper demonstrates that the newly formed version of
the Bhagavadgitii also shows the use of the motif of Kr$r:ia as a divinity in
its contribution to the story, i.e., this new element has been successfully
used as an argument to show why Arjuna must fight the battle. This
layer of Knr;ia devotion is added in such a skillful way that Arjuna does
not have a first hand experience of Kr$r;ia's divinity until the eleventh
chapter of the Bhagavadgitii. Thus, the progression of arguments in the
Bhagavadgitii as we have it makes eminent sense.
We know that the epic continued to grow past this phase, and newer
elements of devotion were added to the epic. A student recently
K~i:ia
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
348
MADHAV M. DESHPANDE
asked me the following question. When Draupacfi was being stripped by
Dul)slisana at the court ofDuryodhana, she prayed to Koi:ia. Koi:ia then
provided a continuous unending sari for her, so that Dui)slisana finally
was exhausted and Draupacfi was saved by Kona from being disgraced.
Arjuna was supposedly at the court watching this incident. If he realized
at that time that K"i:ia was God, how docs he not assume that at the
beginning of the Bhagavadg'itii? The best answer to such a dilemma is
provided by the fact that the critical edition of the Mahii.bhiirata does not
contain this episode, indicating that it must be a later addition to the
epic. Thus, it seems likely that elements of Kni:ia religion were added
intially in ways which would keep the logical progression of the Mahab
harata story unimpaired. However, in later times, this process of adding
elements of Koi:ia religion continued a point of maintaining the
~
integrity of the plot of the Mahiibharata',,...)
Bibliography
Bhagavadglta. Edited and translated by S.K. Belvalkar. Hindu ViJvaqidyiilaya Ntpala Rajya
Sanskrit StritS, Vol. I. Banaras: Banaras Hindu Universirt, 1959.
ClliihMv<> by Sankaracirya, with a sub-commentary by Anandagiri. A"""daframa
Sanskrit StritS, No. 34. Second e<fition. Pune, 1909.
,l;fB, Mahabharata. The Critical Edition of the MaMbMrala. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1933- 1959.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig111z..,by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE BATTLE OF KURUK$ETRA IN TOPOLOGICAL
TRANSPOSITION
VICTORIA URUBSHUROW AND T.R. SINGH
I. Introduction
In 1924 Stanley Rice, in his introduction to Tales from the fl.fahiibhiirata,
observed that
(the Indian epics) are living and throbbing in the lives of the people of
India, even of those illiterate masses that toil in the fields or maintain a
drab existence in the ghettos of the towns. To such as these the famous old
stories are the music and color of life. They are the perennial fount from
which the oft-repeated draughts never quench an insatiable thirst. In the
kings' palaces and in the peasants' huts you may still hear the grand legends
of the Great War and the pathetic sufferings of Rama. ... 1
This observation is borne out by the example of the Baba of Sahavafi, a
low-caste agriculturalist camiii', for whom the epics were, indeed, the
"music and color of life."
SahavalI village is situated about sixty miles east directly
ofKuru~etra,
across the Yamuna, and Baba was acutely aware of living on the soil of
A note on transJiterations: Pan-Indian conctpts arc trtatcd as Sanskrit terms, and
transliterated in a standard manner. Regional Hindi terms, including some proper names
and places, arc rendered according to Library of Congress transliteration tables, except
that unpronounced a's arc dropped. Major place names are rendered in accord with the
spelling of the Survey of India. Special thanks go to Allen W. Thrasher of the Library
of Congress for help with the diacritics. The authors take responsibility for any persistem
trrors or inconsistencies.
' Stanlty Rice, Ta/rs from tht Mahiibhiirala (London: Selwyn & Blount, 1924). p. 9.
1 Originally .., amiir" referred to a jiiti of leatherworkers who htlped drag away dead
cattle, etc. They were among thr untouchables of north India. Today chey arr one of
the schrdulcd castes. For some generations many have worked as field laborers.
"The great Camar caste is found all over the country except in the south, but
in the tract where it is most numerous, between lhe ease Panjab and Bihar, it
is not exclusively a leatherworking caste as its name denotes. It supplies ...
the main body of field labour, and receives its share of che harvest like the
ocher village menials on the establishment."
.Jcrvoi$e A. Baines, Ethnograp~y: Casi" and Tribn1Strassburg: Verlag von KarlJ. Trubner,
1912), p. 78.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig111z..,by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
350 VICTORIA URUBSHUROW AND T.R. SINGH
ancient Aryavarta.• He claimed that the whole of western Uttar Pradesh
was a sacred place due to its connection with the Mahabharata war.
(p. 114)4 For Baba, the sacred space of Kuruk$etra provided grounds
for a contemporary concatenation of epic history. From a young age
Kanval Das (later known as "Baba") took a keen interest in recitation
of the Indian epics. His devotional fervor matured about fifteen years
ago when he dreamed of a child who manifested the four-armed Vi$QU.
Thereafter, Vi$QU duly tested the devotee and granted him numerous
supernatural weapons. In time, Baba used those weapons to heal people
afflicted with spirit possession.
In 1983 word spread about a vision ofMansa Devi' that came to Baba's
daughter, auguring that water from the family tube-well would have
curative properties for four months. During the presaged period, in fact,
literally thousands of people with various ills descended upon Sahavali
cspedally on Sundays. Many local villagers were dismayed at seeing their
fields badly trampled, while others seized the opportunity to do business.
' The Indian village of Sahivali is located' Iii the Muzaffarnagar -district of western
Uttar Pradem. It is midway between the Yamuni and Gangi riven, about sixty miles
due cast of Kurulqctra, seventy-five miles northwest of D<:lhi, and forty miles southeast
ofHardwar. This area between the Himalaya and Vindhya mountain ranges is the ancient
"land of the i\ryas" or i\ryavarta-seene of the Mahabharata war and other epic evcnu.
' All citations from Bibi's biography, media reporu, penonal interviews, and photos
follow the pagination of an unpublished manuscript by T.R. Singh, J.M. Mahar, and
Victoria Urubshurow, "Bibi Project: Material Collected during 1983-1984." The
mauscript is divided into three parts: (a) Hindi texu and English translations of booklets
prepared by Biibil's followers, with local newspapen and magazine accounts; (b) English
translation of the Bibi interviews conducted and tape recorded in Sahivali in June 1984;
and (c) Photos of Bibi and his family prepared by local photographen and sold at the
site of the healing. Newspaper and magazine accounts were translated by T.R. Singh
and Ganesh Saili (Landour Cantonment, Mussoorie, U.P.). The interviews were
conducted by T.R. Singh (with K.S. Chauhan, Caroline Mahar, and V. Urubshurow),
and translated by T.R. Singh.
' In the biography of Bibi distributed at the""'"· the name of the goddess is rendered
as "ManSi Devi." Her identity is somewhat mysterious or ambiguous. When asked, ''Tell
us something about 'Mania,'" Baba chOS<: to speak of the MaJiabhifrata goddess:
is the queen of naga.r. She is the daughter ofKaiyapa,Jaratkiru's
"'~ianSi-Ji'(?)
wife, Astilca's mother. You might know the story of Vasuki- the story of the
serpent ... churning the ocean. She is the sister of Netiki. This is 'Man.ii-Ji'
(?]. She is the disciple of Sankar Bholanith."
Yet, Biibii responded "No." to the question, "Is this (i.e. your deity) rhc Manasa of the
1Wahizbhizrata?" (p. 102) He further stated, "This is not that (?].This (goddess of
'~iansi'
the Mahabhiirata) is the queen of serpents. Her husband's name is Jaratkiiru." (p. 103)
Biibii did not disclose the identity of his own "Mansi Devi."
The snake goddess's story is told in the Mahabhiirata, I {5) where she is known by the
same name as her husband,Jaratkiiru. the epic deity's name is spelled variously
Otherwi~.
as Manasii or Manasii. The Pura,,;, Encyclopedia de.cribes Manasa D<:vi (sic) as, "A devi
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
351
THE BA'ITLE Of KURUKSETRA IN TOPOLOGICAL TRANSPOSITION
Small cottage industries sprang up to accommodate the needs of the
faithful. The enterprising heaped up for sale old bottles in which Bibi's
tube-well water might be stored, and arranged stalls where an official
biography and photos of the bhakta, or devotee, were peddled,
Vi~i;iu
along with mustard oil, etc. (for treatments prescribed in Bibi's biogra
phy). The October 1983 issue of the periodical Srjan described the incident
as follows:
India is a country of miracles. From days of old until today, numerous
miracles have been seen and heard of. Every day some incident takes place
that becomes an object of surprise and attraction to one and all. Such an
incident of interest today is in a place some four kilometers onJansa1h Road
in the village Sahavali, near the jungle. A village bhali:ta is distributing water
from the tube-well on his field with the belief that it will cure all the ills of
the human body. For the last two months, thousands of people from nearby
and far-flung areas have been flocking there in tractors, buggies, tongas,
and busses to get this miraculous water. (p. 12)
born of the mind of Ka>yapa Prajapati. She is known as Jaratkaru also." (p. 474) h
further states:
"This devi (goddess) is the daughter of Prajapati Ka>yapa, born from his mind.
She got the name Manasadevi [1ic] (goddess born from mind). Some think
that she got the name Manasadevi because she is the ddty of mind. There arc
some who imagine that she got the name Manasadevi because she hdd Sn
K!li;ia Paramatman (the Supreme Spirit) firmly in her mind."
Vettam Mani, Encyclopedia (Ko11ayam, Kerala: n.p., 1964; reprint ed., Delhi:
Pura~ic
Motilal Banarsidass, 1984), p. 348.
Along different lines, it is uncertain whether Biiba's "Mania" bears any relation to
Mana.ii, the snake goddess identified by N.N. Bhattacharyya:
"All over India and especially in Bengal, Manasa is worshipped as the goddess
presiding over snakes. She is sometimes described as Jagad-Gaun as well as
Padmavati. Her other names arc [sic) and Bhujangajanani
V~ahari
Kamala. ... Among the Mais, t.1al Paharias, etc., who are generally agricul
tural peoples having a wide distribution in different parts of the country, such
goddesses as Manasa and others are worshipped."
Narendra Nath Bhauacharyya, Tu /mfian ,\4otltrr Goddtss. 2d. ed., rev. (New Delhi:
Manohar, 1977), pp. 52, 72. N this Manasa Devi is popular especially among
agriculturalists, Baba's status as a camar is consistent with the profile of those who worship
her.
Yet, according to the research ofT.R. Singh "Mania" or "Mansi Devr• is a regional
deity, and a favorite of women and students in Meerut, U.P. . She is believed to be the
goddess of wishes, fulfilling the desires of her devotees. Mania is enshrined in Hardwar
where a special tree grows near her shrine. A devotee tics a thread around one of ii$ twigs
and opens the knot when his or her wish is fulfilled. Untying the knot involves quite a
formality because there art hundrtds, even thousands of threads tied to the branches.
\\'hen a knot is untied the devotee thanks Mans3 Devi.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
352
VICTORIA l!RUBSHUROW AND T.R. SINGH
Many journalists and "intellectuals" were piqued by the Baba spectacle.
Attempting to bring village folk into the twentieth century, they mightily
tried to expose the healer as a fraud. On November 14, 1983 the local
paper Dainilc Deh41 ran the editorial headline, "This is not elixir! It is
death-water!" and proclaimed:
There is no dearth of blind faith in any corner of India. Sadhus, saints,
mullas, and maulavls use magical amulets, etc. to befool the simple people
of this land. This is more so with people living in the rural areas, as the
fear of ghosts, demons, etc. is put into their minds and hearts by such frauds
to the extent that sometimes they give their lives for no reason. The
intellectual of today can raise his voice against these evils because he
understands that the "ghosts," etc. are the product of evil frauds, and there
is no basis in reality for these th.ings. (p. 43)
In spite of an onslaught of media harangue, not until the presaged term
of hydrotherapy expired did the hopeful sick cease to overwhelm Baba's
village. Even then, a handful of the faithful continued to seek treatment.
After the hoopla, in June 1984 during private interviews, Baba spoke
of his vocation and other biographical matters.• He drew freely on epic
themes, and spontaneously identified himself as a participant in the battle
of it continues in the realm of spirits. According to his
Kuruk~tra-as
own testimony, Baba healed people with the aid of good spirits of
combatants killed in the Mahabharata war by "destroying the [evil]
powers ofKurulqetra." (p. 85) In explaining the mechanics of his healing
practice, Baba employed a logic of topographic transposition. By virtue
of this "topo-logic" the continuity of history from the Mahabharata
wartime until now was preserved on account of its transfer from the
earthly realm to the realm of spirits. With topographic tenacity, spirits
of combatants killed in the epic war never abandoned their locale, and
remained ready to do battle in an invisible realm superimposed onto
contemporary Aryavarta. Moreover, Baba could insert himself into this
persistent gathering of by using his talents as story-teller,
"Kuruk~tra"
healer, and devotee of
Vi~QU.
' During the June 1984 interviews Bibi told stories, answered questions, and performed
healing rites on a few afflicted persons who were among the handful present. Bibi was
seen on a few other occasions by V. Urubshurow (Religious Studies. . Catholic University
of America), and more often by T.R. Singh (Sociology, B.S.M. College, Roork.ie, U.P.)
andJ. Michael Mahar (Oriental Studies, University of Arizona) who were present during
the healing mrlii. With no luck, T.R. Singh sought to contact Bibi in Sahivafi after June
1984. Some villagers claimed that Bibi had absconded. Others said that he may have
been in Delhi; while a cast• fellow noted, in serrrt, that Bibi may have been with his
~uru in Sukartil.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
353
THF. BA"ITLE OF KliRUK~ETRA IN TOPOLOGICAL TRANSPOSITION
Baba was an illiterate peasant-with a lively imagination. Although
he was billed as a devotee Baba's activities were far more eclectic.
ofVi~i;iu,
Elements of three vocations were involved in the realization of his
accomplishments: bard, shaman, and bhakta.' Baba was neither a full
ffedged story-teller nor healer, but to appreciate the dynamic of his
devotional life it is useful to recognize the extent to which it embodied
bardic and shamanic functions. As bard Baba envisioned and portrayed
epic events. As shaman he diagnosed ills caused by malevolent spirits and
harnessed the aid of the beneficent. As bhakta he devoted himself to
Vi~i;iu's
cause of promoting dharma in the world. Baba was unusually creative in
appropriating the diverse vocational possibilities submerged in his syn
cretic cultural milieu. The result was an imaginative blend of an ancient
Aryan concern with the power of recitation, an indigenous folk involve
ment with spirits, and a Hindu fascination with the dariana of personal
divinities.
11. Baba as Bard: Reconstitution of Epic History
Baba stepped into the stream of an ancient oral Indian tradition and
embodied the basic, raw elements of a primitive bard. Though from a
young age he recited the epics, Baba was not an accomplished performer
and apparently was not connected with any bardic lineage. Ideally, a
bard has command of numerous narrative themes, complex sequences of
events, and mnemonic devices suitable to sustain lengthy recitations.
Moreover, members of a bardic lineage customarily have inbuilt checks
on the range and variation of epic content by which they are "brought
back into line ... by the songs and singers of the tradition itself."• In
contrast, Baba mainly just alluded to characters and events, and did not
provide lengthy elaborations of plot. Moreover, he seemed to reign free
of the tensions of thematic constraint.
On the other hand, Saba's bardic vocation reffected an elementary
' The proposed characterization of Baba's activitirs in terms of three vocational types
is approximate. His profile does not conform fully to any single idral type, but embodirs
basic aspects of each. Moreover, to speak of Saba's "accomplishmrnts" does not rcAect
an implicit or rxplidtjudgmtnt on the literal truth value of his claims. His drdamations
are neither counted nor discounted as being literally true. Of inter<st here is a cultural
rathrr than psychological or metaphysical phenomenon. Baba's idiosyncratic portrayal
of cvcnu, derived from st'ltctivc appropriation and creative synthesis ofc ultural sedimtnl
deposited over millennia, rrArcts a significant cultural dynamic that allows the cpirs to
perdure.
' Albert B. Lord. Thr Sinf.tr of Ta/rs (New York: Atheneum, 1974), p. 118.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
354 VICTORIA URUBSHUROW AJ'llD T.R. SINCH
instinct for the numinous that is characteristic of an archaic and less
literarily complex oral tradition. Albert B. Lord's observation on aborig
inal bardic recitation aptly describes Baba's compositional orientation:
Its symbols, its sounds, its patterns were born for magic productivity, not
for aesthetic satisfaction. If later (in the history of epic development] they
provided such satisfaction, it was only to generations which had forgotten
their real meaning. Tht poet was sorcerer and seer before kt btctmU "artist"
[emphasis added]. His structures were not abstract art, or art for its own
sake. The roots of oral traditional narrative are not artistic but religious in
the broadest sense.•
Through Baba such an archaic oral tradition was exposed in its nakedness.
In spite of a journalist's accusation that "his speech does not have the
faintest touch of intellectualism or spiritualism" (p. 23), Baba spoke with
a bardic authority and specificity derived from intense involvement in
the narrative materials. His cultural vocabulary was immense, encompass
ing references to Sanskritic literature, Hindu and Muslim folklore, and
anomalous historical figures. Baba expertly distinguished among various
kinds ofs pirits including bhiilas, pretas,jinns, pitrs, naugajas, sayyeds,
rak~asas,
Jaklis, and piiacas. His foes included combatants from Duryodhana's army,
[Aurangzeb's chief] Mal:ibiib Khan's [sic) army, as well as the Britishers'
army. Baba named as helpers the benevolent spirits of epic heroes such
as [sic), Duryodhana, Rama, Balarama, Hanuman, Garuc;la,
Bhi~ma
Jafayu, KumbhakarQa, Kubera, Hic;limba, Yamaraja, and numerous
unspecified epic characters. Three more helpers were the good spirits of
Sir Edmund Hillary, Abraham Lincoln, and Jesus Christ. To top it off,
this gigantesque epic reconstitution was conducted under the guidance
of a cross-cultural array of divine powers: the traditional Hindu divinity
the folk goddess Mansa Devi, and the Persian Qudrat [nature,
Vi~Qu,
fate). 10
India's cultural lore so permeated Baba's experience that the distinction
between art and life was moot. It not only provided material for the
' Ibid., p. 67.
10 Our records indicare that Bibi named ''Bhi$ma'' instt:ad of 1'Bhima.'' Howt':\'er,
judging from the context it is probabk that "Bhima" was int<nded, for of the hero Baba
stated:
"Yesterday also I mentioned that in the battle of only Bhi1ma
Kuru~tra,
[sic) survived. All others died. And this devotee of T1vara I invite at the time
of my daily offering [hauana)." (p. 86)
Although Biibii recalled numerous figures, those with whom he seemed to have the
closest rdationship were Vi1i;iu, Mansli Devi, and Hanumiin. He did not specify the roles
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
355
THE BA'ITLE OF Kt:RUK$ETRA IN TOPOLOGICAL TRANSPOSITION
telling of tales, but largely shaped his life story and world view. On a
basic level, Baba imitated traditional themes in conceiving his own
biography. This simple epic identification is reflected in several details
noted by Baba: (a) His daughter was called "Satyavati," namesake of
Vyasa's mother and grandmatriarch of the Kauravas and PaQ<javas. (b)
As the PaQ<javas stored their weapons in the Sarni tree, so Baba declared,
"On top of the tree are [my) weapons." (p. 90) (c) When asked whether
he would be reborn, Baba answered, "my next birth will be without
conception .... At that time, my head will be sacrificed .... It will be as
it was done with Babarbhan [Babhruvahana (?)) of the Mahiibhiirata
(because will ask for my head)." (p. 112) (d) Baba's nights as well
Vi~i:iu
as his days were emboldened by epic themes and characters. Once Baba
dreamed that some "bad characters" carried away his wife intending to
assault her. This oneiric situation reflects the epic accounts of Dul)sasana
and Duryodhana insulting Draupadi, and Ravai:ia abducting Sita. As
Bhima redeemed Draupadi and Hanuman delivered Sita in the epics, so
in Baba's dream Bhima and Hanuman descended to protect his wife.
Baba's relationship with epic characters redounded beyond such
descriptive echoes, however. As the archaic bard was a seer, so Baba's
poetic expression involved more than mimicry. His bardic research
conferred the gnostic ability to distinguish between true and false
narratives. Upholding a version of the Riimiiyal'}a that contradicted the
traditional brahmanical view of Hanuman' s brahmacarya status, Baba
believed tha1 Hanuman had a wife (a fish) who conceived a son after
swallowing a drop of the monkey's perspiration fallen when he crossed
the ocean in search of Sita. He based his claim that Hanuman was not
brahmacarya on authority derived from two ecstatic experiences: (a) Baba
met Hanuman's fish-wife when the couple came to his havana, and (b) he
personally conferred with Tulsidas on details of the epic. Baba noted that
sometimes great falsehoods were perpetrated in transmission of the epics
due to the self-interest of high-caste people who had only superficial
of many, and certainly not every character named is e.asily or necessarily identifiable. Of
the three westerners mentioned, Bibi only specifically reported having communicated
with the spirit of Lincoln. He said:
"[Y]ou had Abraham Lincoln as a president, and he has brought his spirit
here .... [He told me] there is a law in India that letters should not be given."
(p. 85) ... [At one point] Ma[n.Sal told me that the British ruled the whole
world. They engulfed the whole wor d, and there was only one crore of believers.
All the rest were atheists (ie., not supporting traditional values]. Only three
[were believers, namely] Jesus Christ, Abraham Lincoln, and Hillary." (p. 88)
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
356 VICfORIA URUBSHt.;ROW AND T.R. SINGH
knowledge. Intuiting that the absence of an ecstatic connection with epic
characters (or authors!) leads to a degeneration ofn arratives into enfeebled
and fanciful stories, he proclaimed:
What a great falsehood that Hanuman is without a wife! All this has been
mentioned in the texts. Hanuman-ji comes to my /talJQlllJ with his wife. This
has not been mentioned in the Vahru1ti Riimii.J0114 .... I uked Tulsidas if it
was true. He replied, "Someone before me wrote it like that." Traditionally
this [fact of Hanuman's conjugal relationship) docs not occur in Valnu"'IU's
Riimii.1a1J4. This has been added by high-caste people. ... We arc !Wlras, but
we still have power. (p. 107) 11
Baba's words wielded authority because, as seer, he had access to ecstatic
sources of knowledge. In the telling of tales, he did not ju.st repeat epic
events willy-nilly. Baba spoke of what he saw.
Baba also had access to ecstatic sources of power. At times, epic
characters emerged from their narrative lives to alter the tum of events
in Baba's own, and readily permeated the barriers of his mental states.
Characters who visited Baba during his daily offerings (havana] 12 moved
into his dreams, and again into wa.kefulness. For instance, when Baba
awoke from the dream (sapanal of his wife's abduction, simulta
V~i::iu
neously emerged. The divinity appeared before him in person (sti.t.fat]
and issued an empowering directive. Baba described this hierophanic
encounter:
He J said in clear words, "Now look, you have been tested. The rest
[Vi~r;iu
of your life you should spend performing hhajan. You are a true devotee.
All my powers arc with you." (p. 91)
Baba was initiated by and his status as hhakta and shaman was
V~i::iu
confirmed by the post-oneiric communication. Thus, Baba's bardic
activity was ecstatically enhanced to embrace aspects of shamanic
practice-all in the context of devotion to
Vi~Qu.
III. Baba as Shaman: Healing with Divine Weapons
As shaman, Baba extended the bardic function of reconstituting epic
history- that is, of imaginatively enlivening epic characters and bringing
11 There is confusion in the account here. Baba docs not seem to know much about
Valmilti, whereas he might have been more familiar with the RDmiiya114 ofTubidas. Thc
point is, Baba believes himself to be in touch with the living truth of the epics.
" HavaM consisu of lighting a fire and making offerings to a deity. Typically, faggots
of mango, pipal and other auspicious trees arc burnt. Offerings include grains, leaves,
flowers, various roots, and ghec. The ashes from Biibii's iialXllUl werr collected and immcrscd
into his tube-well.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THt: BATJ'LE or KURliK~ETRA IN TOPOLOGICAL TRANSPOSITION 357
them into his midst. He created (might we say) "new history" and
actualized original events by himself participating in the narrative action.
Whereas typically a bard would not disturb the basic parameters of a
narrative framework, a shaman prevails upon spirits and heroes to directly
impact on the human condition." Baba governed his narrative subjects
to a degree exceeding that of the bard as he marshalled an army of good
spirits and harnessed their power to heal the sick. His intimate bardic
familiarity with epic heroes issued in the shamanic means of enlisting
their help to fight malevolent spirits that inflict human ills.
Although Baba was no moro a professional shaman than bard, his
self-styled eclectic vocation clearly embodied prototypical shamanic
elements. Baba's profile resembles the portrait of a shaman drawn by
Mircea Eliade:
Here [among the Eskimos], as in so many other cultures, he alone is a
shaman who, through mystical vocation or voluntary quest, submits himself
to the teaching of a master, successfully passes through the initiatory ordeals,
and becomes capable of ecstatic experiences that are inaccessible to the rest
of mankind."
Typically, a shaman receives two kinds of instruction in the course of
initiation. One is ecstatic in which knowledge and power are bestowed
through dreams, visions, trances, and so on. Another involves the
transmission of traditional cultural lore, including the names and functions
1~ As narrative recitation is employed frequently in the course of shamanic healing, it
is useful to distinguish between the vocations of shaman or sorcerer and bard. (The terms
shaman and sorcerer are used often without distinc1jon. Htrc •~shama11'1 is prrfcrrttl due
to the rich connotation.• given to the tcnn by Mircea Eliade in his classic work, Shamanism:
Archaic Ttthniquts of Ecstasy.) As Albert B. Lord docs not examine the role of the archaic
hard as "sorctrtr." his discussion is of limited use in probing the relationship between
narrative reritation and healing- which is the vocation proper to a shaman (sorcerer).
In general, the shaman is involved more with the healing arts, and Jess with the poetic
aris. Shamanic recilations arc designed specifically to produce therapeutic effects whereby
1he psychological or physiological disposition of the hearer/patient is altered. Claude
Lcvi-S1rauss (in "The EHi·ctivencss of Symools") analyzes the therapeulic dynamics of
narrati\'C recitation. Discussing the role of a poetic text in a shamani<' rite- 10 facilitate
difficult childbirth he observes that
"[t]hc technique of the narrative thus aims at recreating a rral experience [in
the patient] in which the myth merely shifts the protagonists (from the poetic
to the psychological and physiological contex1s]."
Claude Levi-Strauss, Structural Anthropology. trans. Claire Jacobson and Brooke Grundf<·st
Schoepf (New York: Doubleday & Co .. Inc .• Anchor Books, 1967), p. 189.
14 Mircea Eliade, Shamanism: Archaic TuhniqutS 11fE<Stasy, trans. \Villard R. Tra<k (:>icw
York: Pantheon Books, 1964), p. 297.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
358 VIC."TORIA v Rt:BSHUROW AND T.R. SINGH
of spirits, tribal mythology, a secret language, shamanic techniques, and
so on."
Baba received both traditional and ecstatic types of instruction.
Although his traditional education was not transmitted in the context of
a formal shamanic initiation, over the years Baba vociferously digested
vast amounts of the cultural lore generally available to him. Moreover,
ecstatic experience was a consistent and potent feature ofBaba's vocational
development, as through many dreams and visions he was granted
knowledge and power. who served as Baba's main ecstatic guide,
V~i;iu,
issued a shamanic mandate whereby he was appointed the task ofh ealing,
and endowed with the means by which to enlist epic heroes as helpers.
Thus empowered with a shamanic vocation, Baba's bardic relationship
with the epic narratives was extended.
The overriding context in which Baba's vocation as a shaman gained
coherence was the "ritual of battle" of the MalrabharaJa, in which he
employed the various weapons granted by Vi$QU through ecstatic
initiation.•• He explained:
When I was curing people, I was destroying the powers of
Kuruk~tra.
The army ofDuryodhana was being brought in by the thousands. I started
cutting the [evil powers of Kuruk$etra] to pieces. (p. 85)
Doing the work ofVi$QU, Baba fostered dharma in the world by exorcising
and vanquishing malevolent spirits. He trapped them in an invisible yantra
situated in the palm of his hand. (This invisible yanlra was graphically
portrayed, however, in mock-up photographs for sale at the healing
festival. (p. 115)) Once attracted into the yantra, as to a magnet, Baba
put the trouble-makers into an invisible box. (p. 101) Before deciding to
destroy them, he gave them a chance to do something good, such as "cure
our children." (p. 87) For example, the spirit of Mal;ibiib Khan's wife,
RazTii., turned good after performing penance in Baba's fields for one
month. If the spirits reformed, Baba released them from imprisonment.
In addition to theyantra and prison box, Baba commandeered numerous
other supernatural weapons such as the da>Jt/a, triiiila, gadii, and spear."
" Ibid .• p. 13.
" Alf Hiltebeitel explores implications of the cpic war as '"ritual" in, Tiu Ritual of
Battle: Krishna in tht Malriibhirata (Ithaca: C.Orncll Univ. Press, 1976).
" Baba's expertise on weapons is noteworthy. For examplc, hc spoke cloqucntly ofo ne
called "kalkha:"
"This kalkhJJ is a very powcrful weapon. In my childhood, I saw a big earthen
pot ftying through the air like an atom bomb. It was in the air and smoke was
coming out ofit. I said to Pradhan·JI, though I was small at that timc, '\Vhere will
Google rron1
Origi~al
DiglllZC1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE BAl"l'LE OF Kt.;RUK$ETRA IN TOPOLOGICAL TRANSPOSITION 359
One of the most effective was Vi~t;1u's ca/era, with which Baba cut bad
spirits to pieces before throwing them into his (also invisible) oven (bhall/11]
to burn up. The cakra was activated when Baba practiced his devotions,
engaged in epic recitation, and circled his right index finger. He noted:
My relatives thought that I was mad [and declared], "There is something
wrong with Bhagavin-Ji's mind. He is always in Muslim pii.jii and jRiiM,
and moving his finger in circles." There were only four boys who knew
[what I was doing]. Reciting the Riimiiytuja and Mahiibhiirala, I cut down
the gathering of Kuruk¥tra. (pp. 85-86)
ca/era, thus empowered by recitation and bhakti, enabled Baba to
Vi~i:iu's
cut down thirty-six crores of spirits from Rakistan (sic] and fifty-nine
crores from Pakistan. (p. 87)
Numerous epic protectors were also among Baba's weapons, as
shamanic spirit helpers. (p. 90) He declared:
I have been given so many "automatic" [.JU) weapons. For example, the
kalpaurkta- the flower of kalpavrk;a- that is on the lo/ii [offering pot at the
havana). No [ordinary) person can see it. It is invisible. Only the yogi and
mahayogi can see it. We [also] have hundreds and thousands of weapons
that protect our house [including Gat;1esa, Hanumin, Kumbhakart;1a and
Vikramiditya]. (p. 89)
Gat;1esa, Hanuman, and others served to protect Baba, while the two
birds Garu<;la (Vi~t;1u's vehicle) andJa1ayu (king of vultures) more actively
participated in his thaumaturgical exploits. Baba explained:
So, the magic cakra continues cutting and cutting, and all these spirits get
into the oven. If I order them [Garuqa andJa1ayu] to a...sume the form of
vultures and eat [the bad spirits that magically were made to assume the
form of snakes] up they will obey my orde.rs. (p. 90)
Baba occasionally referred to the superior effectiveness of his weapons.
Ofhisyantra, for instance, the healer declared unequivocally,
this ball strike?' He said, 'This is gola [round thing).' I said, 'This is not gola,
it is an earthen pot. This is used for killing others.' There was a big brick kiln.
Near the kiln was a potter. This earthen pot hit that potter. It was moving
up and down (flying]. This is /cal/cha. It moves with the heart of a goat or
sheep.'' ( p. 95)
According to local folk tradition the kalkha rrtums to strike and kill its sender if unable
to attack the enemy. It may also happen that a third person knowing the tantric art may
divert this kalkha to any direction at will. Here, Biibii may be suggesting that he possesses
tantric powers. (One Sanskrit scholar in Roorkie suggests that the term "kalklla" is not
of Sanskritic origin, but is a corrupt<d (apabhral,iia) form derived from some regional
dialects of the seventh or eighth century.)
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1llze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
360
VICTORIA URUBSHUROW AND T.R. SINGH
There is such an "automatic" [s i;;] yantra we heard of that Paramatman
used to wave in his hand. But no one has performed the kind of miracle
[that I did] in which forty dumb people spoke. No muni or ui has such a
palm. Here forty dumb people have spoken. History proves that no one
[else] is able to cure dumbness. (p. 109)
Baba also claimed that his oven was more effective than the spirit
gravestones [pretafilal used by others in his region. Whereas stones merely
pacify potentially harmful spirits, Baba's oven completely destroys them.1 8
Baba's synergistic embodiment of the functions of bard, shaman, and
bhakta exerted exceptional influence over numerous epic characters
and spirits. This eclectic vocation, imaginatively amalgamated from the
north Indian cultural respository, allowed Baba to deal with malevolent
spirits in a manner superior to many other traditional methods. Baba's
bardic vocation enhanced his shamanic vocation, as without narrative
command of the epics he would have no knowledge of weapons or helpers.
Yet, without bhakti, or devotion, he was powerless to employ them.
IV. Biibii as Bhakta: Healing through Failh and Devolion
The Baba ofSahavali might be viewed as a bard who reconstituted epics
for those who lent ears and imaginations. He might be viewed as a shaman
who, with a toehold in various cosmic realms, diagnosed and cured ills
caused by malevolent spirits. Above all, however, in the eyes of others
and in his own, Baba was a bhakta. The people who flocked to Sahavali
may have known generally that from an early age Baba "was greatly
interested in reciting the Riimaya71'1," for this fact was noted in his biography
(p. 2); but they would not have been privy to the astonishing details of
his epic involvement. Fundamentally, Baba was considered to be a
Vi~Qu
bhakta, as both pamphlets and photographs for sale at the mtlii billed him
thus. Himself recognizing the primacy of bhakti, Baba declared: "I have
done alot of 'research' [sic] [on the epics and spirits]. Otherwise, I am
supposed to be doing bhajan." (pp. 95-96)
Bhakti was the key to Baba's success. As disciple, the bhakta had
Vi~Qu's
access to divine guidance not so much through shamanic techniques of
ecstasy such as drumming and dancing, but through traditional Hindu
devotional methods. Communication with was effected principally ·
Vi~QU
11 In Hardwar is a kind of spirit graveyard called "t/rDn" [Jthana) where powerful and
troublcrome spirits are buried under special carved or painted spirit rocks [pTttaJili].
When p<>tentially harmful spiriu of the dead are properly installed and given offerings,
they wlll not get out from under 1hc stones and bocher anybody.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THt: BAlTLf. Of KUR\;K$ETRA IN TOPOLOGICAL TRANSPOSITIO:>: 361
by means of bhajan and pujii. As the fruit of such devotions came dreams
and visions of Vi$1)U. From Vi$1)U came weapons that Baba used to deal
with spirits- rather than more typical shamanic props such as the mask,
drum, horse, mirror, and so on. And with weapons came the power to
shape the living history of the battle of Kuruk$etra. Through participation
in epic history, topologically transposed into the spirit realm of contem
porary Aryavarta, Baba participated in Vi$1)u's work of restoring dharma
to the world, manifest in the restoration of health to the faithful.
Though Baba may not appear to be a conventional bhakta in the sense
that Caitanya (d. 1533) was a bhakta, for example, their spiritualities
share a common structure: For Caitanya the earthly Vrndavana was
transformed into the divine Vrndavana through the power of bhakti. For
Baba, the epic Kuruk$etra with its telluric history was transformed into
the spectral Kuruk$etra with its thaumaturgic history through the power
of bhakti. In spite of the fact that Baba was transported to a gruesome
battlefield, while Caitanya was transported to a paradisal landscape,
Vi$1)U was present to both of them. Baba's and Caitanya's
Kuru~etra
Vrndavana are both abodes of Vi$1)U, and both Vai$1)avas promote the
deity's dharma as they participate in a history topologically transposed.
As bhakti was at the heart ofBaba's vocation, it was also the key to his
patients' success. To be healed, the sick needed faith that Baba was a
channel of Vi$1)U's power, and that the well water was made into nectar
through the influence of Mansa Devi.19 Baba did not expect that all of
the thousands who came to see him in Sahavall village would be healed.
He estimated that 50 percent of the people benefited from his healing.
The 50 percent who did not respond to treatment were either curiosity
seekers who were "not aware of my powers," or people of weak conviction
who moved into rows more than once to get a double blessing, lacking
faith that one was sufficient. (p. 107)20 Baba explained:
" Both Vi11,1u and l'lania Devi were directly involved in the genesis of the nectar-water
miracle cure, and gave Baba the authority to adminiSler it. According to his biography,
Babii used to pour the water offered during prayers 10 Kubera, Lord of Wraith, inlo his
tube-wdl. Wi1h 1ha1 well wa1er Baba first cured a boy of high fever whose mo1her dreamed
that the bhak1a oflivara fBaba] alone could heal her son. (p. 8) Afler <his success. through
1he mediumship of <his daugh<or, Baba requested permission of l\lania Devi to serve 1he
world with the healing water. At first, the goddess did not allow it; but after curing
another patient with the water, by the grace of Vi11,1u, 1hc bh11ktn repeated his request to
l\·lansa Devi. She granted his wish, and blessed him. Vi11,1u also appeared in person and
told the bhaktn that "besides serving his family, he could serve the 1roublrd people of the
world." Afler that Baba "began curing troubles with blessing and wa1er." (p. 8)
,. Bilba's observation tha1 those with faith can be heakd concurs with what Claude
Uvi-Strauss observed in "The Sorcerer and His l\fagic." Noting 1aft<r \\'.B. Cannon)
that physiological disturba11t·t"s ln i11divlduals affiirtrd by spells or spirit i\r('
pos~l·s.~ion
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
362
VICTORIA URUBSHUROW AND T.R. SINGH
Those who have full confidence (vifviis) are cured. ... Patients are tired of
doctors [and lose faith). Those who are theist and believe in God are cured.
(p. 108)
In response to treatment, a handful of the faithful wrote Baba letters
of appreciation, and one wealthy patron provided funds to build a road
into Sahavali. Yet, among all the thousands, Baba said that "only twelve
people offered bhaktidan" and became his disciples. (p. 108)21 In the
attitude of these twelve, however, is embedded a clue to the more general
success of Baba's exploits. Bhakti motivated both the healer and the healed.
The faithful did not need to understand the technology of weapons, and
the habits of spirits and epic heroes. They needed to know that Baba was
faithful to his tradition. Baba, too, was convinced of his own fidelity. A
newspaper claimed that Baba could cure neither himself (who had leg
pain and pyorrhea) nor his nephew (who sought traditional medical
attention)-much I= those affiicted with polio, dumbness, and so on.
Baba answered these charges saying, Bhagavan has given me
"Vi~Qu
directions to cure the ailments of the world. If I get busy curing myself,
how will I serve the people?" (p. 28) As a devotee, Baba expressed
willingness to sacrifice even his own health in order to promote
Vi~Qu's
work in the world. In the final analysis, Baba conceived that all his efforts
and success stemmed from bhakti.
V. "No Basis in Reality for these Things"-True or ..... ?
Local journalists accused Baba of throwing people into the jaws of death
(not having cured even a simple headache), promoting the threat of
disease by amassing huge crowds under unsanitary conditions, disrupting
quelled in the course of exorcism, he states:
"There is, therefore, no reason to doubt the efficacy ofc ertain magical practices.
But at the same time we see that the efficacy of magic implies a belief in magic.
The latter has three complementary aspects: first the sorcerer's belief in the
effectiveness of his techniques; second, the patient's or victim's belief in the
sorcerer's power; and, finally, the faith and expectations of the group, which
constantly act as a sort of gravitational field within which the relationship
between sorcerer and bewitched is located and defined."
Lrvi-Strauss, Str•ctural Anthropology, p. 162.
11 In claiming LO have twelve disciples is Baba identifying with Jesus who also, according
to tradition, had twelve disciples? N Baba often thematically identified with the Indian
epic heroes, he might easily appropriate details of other heroic lives (as they become
culturally available) into his personal story.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig111z..,by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
363
THE BA'ITLE Of Kt;RUK$ETRA IN TOPOLOGICAL TRANSPOSITION
the agricultural life of the community, and making money hand-over-fist
through commission from his lackeys who sold bottles, photographs,
mustard oil, rosewater, and pamphlets. One newspaper cynically reported
that when questioned about the darfana given to him to Vi~r;iu, Baba "was
evasive and said: 'If it was not a miracle, then why are patients from
Israel coming here?'" (p. 23)
A booklet distributed with the December 1983 issue of Srjan bore the
quizzical title "The Story of Sahavali's Water Baba: How True?
How ..... ?" Under a section called "Unbelievable and debatable points"
the following observations were made:
Several debatable points are raised that cast a question mark over the
entire miracle story of Kanval Das. For example, in Baba's own words,
"[My] elder brother Ami Cand (deceased) is at present a plr in Gujarat
and his name in this incarnation is Alaudclin. [His) entire ghost family
helps [my family]." .. . Is this possible? Can people from one family come
back after death the same family and become a part of Kanval Das's
10
story? Whereas we also hear that Kanval Das's daughter Satyavati claims
to get personal dar!ana of Mansa Devi. {p. 60)
Several more "debatable points" were raised in our interviews with Baba
that, indeed, "cast a question mark over the entire miracle story ofKanval
Das"! Did Baba really see before his very eyes [silklatJ? Did Baba
Vi~r;iu
really have ayanlra in his palm with which he trapped bhiitas? Was Baba
correct in declaring that Hanuman has a wife? Do the evil spirits of
slain members of Duryodhana's army continue to linger in contemporary
Aryavarta?
A still larger question looms: How might the "truth value" of Baba's
anomalous claims be judged? Though their assessments of his work were
diametrically opposed, both the journalists and the faithful judged Baba's
credibility on the basis of the literal truth value of his statements. Those
who figured that his claims were false discredited Baba as a charlatan,
while those who figured that his claims were true came to Sahavali for
nectar-water. Now, it would be hasty if not foolish to accept the florid
output ofBaba's fertile imagination as literal, historical fact. Yet, it would
be too simple to decide, along with "progressive" journalists, that Baba
was a fraud with no trace of spiritualism.
In principle, it would be a legitimate interpretive enterprise to examine
the structure and content ofBaba's states of consciousness, seeking insight
into the psychological (or even metaphysical) authenticity of his claims.
However, to engage in such analysis with respect to Baba's account would
be irresponsible mainly for two reasons: (a) there is an insufficient body
of evidence, and (b) the evidence at hand is too haphazard, harboring
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
364
VICfORIA URUBSHUROW AND T.R. SINGH
many potential inconsistencies.22 For a study of the "psychological" or
"mystical" nature of Baba's experience to be fruitful, the text must be
complete and coherent enough to provide evidence of probable cause and
effect relationships between his ritual activity and the extraordinary
experiences claimed. This is not to discount the possibility that Baba had
certain authentic and transformative religious experiences. It is, however,
to insist that a responsible analysis of the literal-or metaphorical-or
symbolic-"truth" of his claims would require a more extensive, informa
tive, and integrated body of materials.
There are other perspectives from which the phenomenon ofSahavafi's
Water Baba fruitfully might be analyzed, though they may not decisively
preclude the possibility of the literal truth of his claims. Baba's activities
might be interpreted in light ofp sychopathology, sociology, or economics,
for instance. Thus, on the basis of information at hand one plausibly
might consider his claims to be evidence of megalomaniacal raving, the
social climbing of a downtrodden fiidra, or the cunning of an indebted
villager. Yet, such interpretations would neglect the positive and peculiar
value of this fiidra's audacious activities. To judge Baba's motives as based
in mere lunacy or ambition would be to undermine his particular genius
and its cultural value. One can hear many mad ravings and witness
countless cases of social or financial ambition that arc void of the color,
genius, and social impact of Baba's activities.
To capture the positive and peculiar value of Baba's creative vision
one might, instead, consider the cultural ingenuity reflected in it. Baba
was an exceptional character insofar as he embodied a tremendous portion
of his great and little Indian tradition accumulated over millennia.
Permeated by traditional symbols he had an uncanny ability to absorb,
transmit, and promote the stuff of his culture in a way that most people
never even dream of- be they mad or sane. As a repository and harbinger
of culture Baba proved to have tremendous public appeal, such that
" The hostile news media tirelessly pointed out discrepancies betwttn what Bibi
reportedly claimed and what they had discovered through investigation. For
instan~,
whereas Baba claimed that water from his tube-wdl could heal, the journalists claimed
that it could kill, etc. (p. 49) Within Baba's own account (gleaned from our interviews),
inconsistency was less ofa problem than the haphazard character of the exchange. Perhaps
unfortunately, we did not cJicit a more exacting account from our informant. Y ct,
considering his personal style and mentality, it is unlikely that Bibi could have been
persuaded to render his views in a strictly systematic fashion. Overall, Bibi was
cooperative, but maintained the force of his idiosyncratic and authoritative personality
throughout. For instance, he had us tum off the tape recorder when "nothing important"
was happening, and would not relinquish the letters from former patients becauS<
"Abraham Lincoln" had advised him not to.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1t1zcoby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
365
THE BATfL£ OF KURUK$£TRA IN TOPOLOCICAL TRANSPOSITION
thousands came to him by train, bus, tonga, bicycle, foot, and the strength
of others who carried them in arms. He captured the imagination of the
masses, and (whether they liked it or not) the imagination of modernists
whose self-appointed task was to purge folk India ofs uperstitious elements.
The progressive journalists and outraged public might have been able to
ignore Baba alone, but they could not ignore the overwhelming impulse
oft he thousands who sought to be part ofw hat was engendered in Sahavali
village.
VI. Conclusion
The cultural tenacity of sacred places is well-attested in the history of
religions. Despite intensive revalorization ensuing from exogenous influ
ence and indigenous development, sacred places persistently maintain
sanctity and significance.2 3 Such topographic tenacity was evidenced in
the village of Sahavali, whose connection with the Mahabharata war
bespeaks the power of a sacred place to capture the imagination of people
after untold generations, in spite of numerous, culturally mitigating
influences. Living on the land of ancient Aryavarta, Baba envisioned
himself as a principle protagonist in the battle ofKuruk$etra topologically
transposed, while thousands who came to Sahavali found a place made
sacred by its Vi$1)U bhalr.ta who had a toehold in epic history.
Over millennia Aryavarta was permeated by uncharted cross-cultural
influences that variously have nourished or sapped the vitality of
traditional sacrality. How did Baba weather the impact of such plenitude
without losing sight of ancient stories? And how were uncounted folk (to
23 Apt are Mircea Eliadc1s ol1srrvations on the- tcnacit)' and religious \·alur of sacred
places:
••. .. a sacred place involves the notion of repeating the primeval hierophany
which consecrated the place by marking ii ou1, by Culling ii off from the
profane space around it .... That the Australian aboriginals went on visiting
their traditional secret places was not because of any pressure of economic
circumstances. . .. \Vhat they sought from these places was to remain in mystical
union with 1he land and with the ancrstors who founded the civilization of
their tribe. The need the aboriginals felt to preserve their contact with those
scenes ofhicrophany was essentially a religious one .... And these centres were
only with 1hc greatest difficulty robbed of their importancc--they were passed
on like an heirloom from tribe to tribe, from rdigion to religion. The rocks,
springs, caves and woods venerated from the earlirst historic times are still, in
different forms, held as sacred by Christian communities today."
Mirc("a Eliade. Pattnn1 in Compa1tltitrr Rrligion. trans. Rosemary Sheed (New York:
t>·lcridian, 1958). pp. '.168-'.!69.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
366
VICTORIA t;Rt:BSHt:ROW A:-.:D T.R. SINGH
the dismay of modernists) summarily entranced by his traditional
production? What factors adventitiously coalesced to produce the spec
tacle that endured for four months at Sahavali, where "Kuruqetra" was
once again overwhelmed by multitudes engaged in a ritual of battle?
Surely, Baba's sheer proximity to Kuruqetra promoted some fam
iliarity with the epics, and his fertile imagina1ion promp1ed a feeling of
affini1y for 1heir spiri1ed charac1ers. Yet, how is ii that Baba so fully
embraced the tempestuous mariial epic themes in spite of predominant
social tendencies favoring loving devotion to peaceful embodiments of
divinity? As a low-caste camiir Baba migh1 have lacked interest in the
Mahabharata war. Typically in western Uttar Pradesh, members of his
jiili identified with peaceful saints such as Raidas, whereas riijputs of the
region take Rama and other heroes for role models. 2
k~atriya '
Moreover, how is it that throngs gravitated from near and far to
participate in an event deemed sacred os1ensibly by force of little more
than rumor? Certainly, a turbulent regional his1ory may have nourished
a deep collec1ive affinity for impetuous themes of battle and conflict. And
the embedded Indian propensity for devotion, coupled with an archaic
attraction to sacred water (from whatever cultural or psychic depth they
come) may have drawn the multitude to seek Baba's darsana and healing
nectar-water. Yet, the Aryan, Mogul, British, and international touristic
influences that seeped into Baba's region over centuries might have
dimmed the radiance of the epics irrecoverably, and paled the face of
ancient tradition.
What accounts for the persistence of the Indian epics such that the
battle of could be preserved by virtue of its topological
Kuruk~etra
transposition in Sahavali village? Of the numerous and diverse comple
mentary influences, one was selec1ed for particular inspection in this essay:
the culturally creative genius of Sahavali's Waler Baba.
Baba was not unique. If he was unique, not only the fatt but also 1he
content of the Indian epics would have been sealed long ago. Wi1hout the
likes of Baba the epics might have perished or petrified in 1he face of
history. Due to the unleashed imagina1ion of such bold characters, heroic
tales have thrived over millennia despile awesome and torrential winds of
cultural change. While Baba was not unique, his 1alen1 was rare. The
intensity with which 1his cultural en1husiast immersed himself in
Aryavana afforded nothing less 1han a boon to the epic heroes of
Kuruk~etra.
" J.
l'vlichacl Mahar. personal <Communication ofJ une 1987.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
THE BATTLE OF KURUKSETRA IN TOPOLOGICAL TRANSPOSITION 367
The case of Sahavali's Water Baba suggests that (true to Olden berg's
observation echoed by Rice) "the Mahabharata is the strongest link
between old and new India, the India of the Aryan and of the Hindu."2
'
What should not be forgotten is that this link exists only as long as there
arc psyches sufficiently creative to amalgamate the old and the new. The
epics are sustained in the midst of a radically evolving India because
there are folk with skill enough to weave together sundry strands of
cultural lore. The battle of thus was preserved in topological
Kuruk~etra
transposition because Baba's imagination was formidable enough to
sustain the vocations of bard, shaman, and bhakta- each delitescent in
the ground of India.
For the Baba of Sahavali the epics were indeed "the music and color
of life." If Stanley Rice could hear the new talc of Kuruqctra he would
be reassured that the epics still are "living and throbbing in the lives of
the people of lndia"- though he might be discomfited with the turns of
Baba's imagination. After noting the pervasive influence of the epics on
Indian life, Rice bemoaned an overloading oft he Indian epics that became
"swollen by ... inventions," declaring that
the portentious volumes are enough to damp the spirit of the most ardent
who, starting off gaily upon their journey arc soon faced by the deserts of
Levitical doctrine and the morasses of primitive speculation interesting only
to the antiquarian. 21
Yet, as Baba was not a brOhmaT]a and had no "Levitical doctrine" to
promote, perhaps the spirit of Stanley Rice would not be damped by
hearing of the battle of topologically transposed after all. And
Kuruk~tra
if he would judge Baba's ramblings to be an overwhelming "morass of
primitive speculation" devoid of any religious value or contemporary
interest, we would only ask in the spirit of Baba: "lfit was not a miracle,
then how has a worldwide public come to hear of it?"2
'
Bibliography
J.
Baines,J<rvoise A. Ethnography: Castts and Tribts. S1rassburg: Vrrlag von Karl Triibn<r,
1912.
Bhauacharyya, Narendra Nath. Tht Indian ,\4othtr Goddtss. 2d ed., rev. New Delhi:
Manohar, 1977.
" Rice, Ta/ts from tht :\1ahiibharata, p. 9.
2 Ibid., p. 11.
•
" The on·sile research of V. Urubshurow was suppor1ed by a fellowship award from
the American lns1itu1e of Indian S1udics, wi1h funds provided by 1h< Smithsonian
Institution.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
368
VICTORIA URUBSHUROW ANO T.R. SINGH
Eliade, Mircea. Pallnns in ComfNITalive /Uligi<m. Trarulated by Rosemary Sheed. New York:
Meridian, 1958.
--. Shamanism: Archaic TechniqMes of Ecstasy. Translated by Willard R. Trask. New York:
Pantheon Boob, 1964.
Hiltebeitel, Alf. Tiu Rihlal of Batlle: KriJltM in llu Ma/tUlrMa14. Ithaca: Cornell Univ.
Pins, 1976.
Uvi-Strauss, Claude. Stn1<lural AnJJiropoloo. Translated by Claire Jacobson and Brooke
Grundfest Schoepf. New York: Doubleday & Co., Inc., Anchor Boob, 1967.
Lord, Albert B. Tiu SinltT of Tatu. New York: Atheneum, 1974. Originally published by
Harvard University Press, 1960.
Mani, Vettam. Purii,,U Enqe/4/>tdia. Ko11ayam, Kerala: n.p., 1964; reprint td., Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1984.
Rice, Stanley. Taksfrom llu Mahahloiiral4. London: Selwyn & Blount, 192+.
Singh, T.R., Mahar,J.M., and Urubshurow, Victoria. "Babi Project: Material Collected
during 1983-1984." Unpublished manuscript.
Google rron1
Origi~al
Digll1Ze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARTHASASTRA CATEGORIES IN THE MAHABHARATA:
FROM DA.Jfl)AN!TJ TO RAJADHARMA
BRAJ M. SINHA
Introduction
Historians of Hindu political ideas have incessantly emphasized the
Machiavellian orientation of the Mahab!W.rata by suggesting that the
Mahabharata maintains unqualified allegiance to the ArthaJii.stra political
categories.' However, it is important to recognize that in the Sii.ntiparvan of
the Ma/W.bharata, a new conception ofr ajadharma emerges which attempts to
synthesize the datµ/an£ti categories of Arthaiii.stra with the riijadharma notion
of the Dharmasiitras.
It is true that the Mahab/W.rata accords a very important place to the
ArthaJii.stra categories in its speculations pertaining to the nature of
riijadharma. However, it is inappropriate to suggest that there is, in the
Mahabharata, the wholesale incorporation of the ArthaJiislra categories.' On
the contrary, BhI~ma in the Santiparvan has taken a very bold step in
attempting to provide a comprehensive conception ofr ii.jadharma in which
the da1Ji/anfti categories of the ArthaJiistra tradition is combined with the
dharma categories of the Dharmasiitras. The present paper atternpts to bring
out the implications of the attempted synthesis for a comprehensive
understanding of the Ma!W.bhiirala conception of riijadharma as it relates to
the conduct of the Righteous King (dharmaraja).
The original impetus for the symbiotic categories in the Ma/W.bhiirala can
be understood only ifo ne keeps in mind the chasm that had occurred in the
pre-Kau1ilyan and Kau1ilyan ArthaJiistra tradition between dal}4anfti and
riijadharma.3 It is apparent that both, the Arthasiistra and the Ma/W.bhiirata,
are concerned with the art of statecraft in a monarchical state. However,
' See U.N. Ghoshal, A Hi1toryef Indian Political lihas (London: Oxford University Press,
1966); Trevor Ling. Tht Buddha (London: Temple Smi1h, 1973).
' U.N. Ghoshal, op. cit., p. 73; T. Ling, op. cit., p. 144.
' Both Kau1ilya in his Artha101tra and Kamandaka in his .Niti1aro allude to this gradual
development of the science of polity, i.e. dm}¢aniti in the direction ofi ts autonomy by freeing
it of its connection with the restraining categories of the sacred knowledge, i.e. lrayi. This is
the position attributed to the Arthal01tro School of Usanas. who is listed as the last and
probably the latest 1<achcr of the ArthaliiJtro. Vidt, Kou(i/yo ArthaJO,tro, Book
prc-Kau~ilyan
I, Chapter 11; Kamandakiya }fitisaro, 11.1-5.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
370
BR!\J M. SINHA
while the Arlha!astra confines itself exclusively to the investigation of the
phenomenon of the State as the wielder of coercive authority (da1!4a), the
Mahi.bhiirala deals with the same as an incident in a comprehensive scheme
of duties of the King in terms of the dharma categories of the Dharmasiilras.
The specific objective of the Mahiibhiirala synthesis of the Arlha.faslra
tradition ofd arµ/anfti with that of the dharma categories of the Dharmasiitras,
is to infuse in the structure ofs tatecraft an element ofe thics that can only be
characterized as universal. The darµJan£ti of the Artha.faslra tradition is
subjected to the restraint of the universal principles of dharma. There
emerges a new conception ofktatriyadharma (dharma of the ruling classes),
which according to the Mahi.bhiirata, is seen to be the very foundation ofa ll
dharmas. •Thus, in the Mahiibhi.rala, there takes place a metamorphosis not
only of categories of Artha!astra, but also dharma categories of the
da~4anfti
Dharmasiitras.
The significance of this new development in the Hindu political theory
can be understood and appreciated in a larger context with reference to
similar developments in the Buddhist notion ofc akravartin as the dharmariija.
The notion of cakravartin as the Ruler, who is an embodiment ofd harma,
has been seen as the most significant contribution ofB uddhism to political
thought in India. One of the most articulate expounders of this position is
Trevor Ling who perceives in the cakravartin ideal, a real departure from
the Hindu notion of King.• Ling's basic contention is that the linking of
cakravartin with dharma and sairigha in Buddhism is an attempt to provide
a structural basis for the transformation of State into an ethical category.
State is the institutional framework within which universal ethics become
possible, precisely because the political structure is seen integrally linked
with the structures of dharma.'
The present paper is an attempt to offer a comparative analysis of the
notion of cakravartin in Buddhism and the idea of dharmariija in the
Mahiibhi.rata. The innovative character of these notions in the two
traditions stands out only in contrast with the machiavellian notion of
State that one discerns in the Arthafiistra. The two notions, emerging in
both the traditions concurrently, mark a new beginning in the Indian
political thinking that offers a different model of Ruler by relativizing the
absolutism and autocratic character of the State. \'\'ith this development,
the emphasis on the (coercive authority of the State} takes
da~4anfti
• A1ahiibhiirata, 64.19-29.
' T. Ling, op. rit .. pp. 14-0-147.
• Ibid.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARTHA!.:fSTRA CATEGORIES IN THE ,\f.~HJBH.:fRAT.~ 371
backstage; thus enabling the emergence of State as an ethical category
based on the universal principles of dharma.
The earliest statement io the effect that the Hindu conception ofS tate is
fundamentally different from the Buddhist conception, and that the basis
of this difference is the respective understanding of Kingship in relation to
dharma category was made by Paul Masson-Oursel.' He sees a basic
antithesis between the Brahmanical and the Buddhist perspectives on
dharma and its bearing on the two approaches to Kingship. According to
Masson-Oursel, the Hindu conception, as delineated in the S111rti
literature, looks at dharma in a particularistic context of the van}a dharma,
and thereby reinforces a social divisiveness that prevents the emergence of
"a political spirit". The implication of this position from the point of view
of political theory, according to Masson-Oursel, is this: that the Hindus
failed to develop a notion ofU niversal State. On the contrary, the Buddhist
political theory, built on the principle of the universality of dharma,
successfully undermines the particularistic ethical structure of the Hindu
van}a dharma. Moreover, the Brahmanical notion of King, Masson-Oursel
argues, tends to be conservatist, since the King is the custodian and
preserver of the eternal social order, i.e. the objective realm of van}a dharma.
The Buddhist King, according to Masson-Oursel, not only causes dharma to
reign, but in significant ways functions as an innovator, or revolutionary,
for he contributes to the ongoing dynamic structure ofd harma, which, true
to the early Buddhist notion of flux, is not seen to be a fixed order.
U.N. Ghoshal has pursued his argument in a somewhat similar fashion.•
Ghoshal maintains that dharma in the Brahmanical literature connotes the
comprehensive law of the social order which contains the King as only
another element of the total structure. The Buddhist notion of dharma,
according to Ghoshal, is primarily to be understood as carrying the
connotation of righteousness. By identifying righteousness as the central
connotation ofd harma in the Buddhist canonical literature, Ghoshal is able
to suggest the impossibility of any compromise by the Buddhist canon on
the ethical basis of the character of Stale, since the King both governs by
and is governed by dharma, the principle of righteousness. It is this
' Paul Masson-Oursel ti al., An<imt India anti Indian Cirili;.ation (i\rw York: Barnt.'S and
Noble, 1967) pp. 93-95; cf. U.N. Ghoshal, op. cit., p. 73.
• It is interesting 10 note that Ghoshal's earlier work, A Hi11ory of Hindu Political Thtoriu,
dors not rrfloct this bias towards Buddhism vis-a-vis Mahabharata. Sec U.N. Gho.hal,
A HiJtory of Hindu Political Thtorin (London: Oxford University Prrss, 1927), p. 117. He,
however, here too makes the claim that in the 1Wahiibhiirata and the ManUJamnild, the
ArthaJiistra clement is preponderant, "though it is occasionally transmuted and softened b)'
contart with the prevailing religious and ethical ideas" (p. 116).
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
372
BR;\J M. SINHA
centrality of dhanna that prevents the developments within the Buddhist
tradition from being comparable to the Arlhaiii.slra understanding ofS tate
in which the principle of righteousness is not the sole criterion governing
the fundamental structure of State. Thus writes Ghoshal:
In its political aspect the Brahmanical dharma stands particularly for the
whole duty of the King (riijadltarma) which from the first is conceived in
sufficiently elastic terms to provide for the needs ofK ingdom and to permit in
Manu and still more in the Mahii/JlriiraJa (after the wholesale
Bhi~ma)
incorporation of the ArthaJiistra categories and concepts relating to the
branches of the King's internal and external administration. On the other
hand the Buddhist dharma in its relation to the King involves the application
oft he universal ethics ofB uddhism to the State administration, this principle
being even extended, ... to the concept of the World Ruler (chakriwartin).•
It is this position ofGhosal, that Ling•• buys wholesale; lock, stock and
barrel. Ghoshal is a perceptive and meticulous scholar of Indian political
ideas and rightly deserves to be identified by Ling as "one of the most
outstanding of historians of Indian political thought" .11 Ling, in his
evaluation of Ghoshal's interpretation of the Buddhist notion of State
totally agrees with his ideological Guru, A.L. Basham who has already
of
gone on record to suggest that Ghoshal's work A Hislory Indian Political
Ideas "is the most scholarly and comprehensive work on the subject ever to
have been written".12
It is not my intention here to somehow undermine the towering
personality and significant contributions ofGhoshal to the study ofI ndian
political ideas. However, the time has come for l ndological scholarhip to
apply the tools of the sociology of knowledge to the lndological studies to
raise the question of the possibility that caste, class and other categories of
socio-cultural affiliations of the early pioneers of indological study have
significant implications. On the indigenous scene of lndological studies,
the cultural conditioning oft he scholars seems to determine the direction of
their scholarhip. One has only to skim through the literature to identify
that phase of scholarship where Brahmanical stock tends to elevate the
Hindu conceptions to the point that fails to see any significant contribution
having been made by the Buddhists to Indian political theories. As
a interesting example of this is provided by the London-trained disciple of
A.L. Basham, Bhasker Anand Saletore, a Maharastrian Brahmin, the
' U.N. Goshal, op. tit., p. 73.
10 T. Ling, op. tit., p. 144.
Ibid.
II
" A.L. Basham. as cited in T. Ling, op. cit., p. 258, n. 60.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARTHA.SJSTRA CATEGORIES IN THE ,WAHJBHJRATA 373
retired Director of National Archives, Government of India. In his
otherwise perceptive work AncienJ Indian Political Thought and Institutions, he
writes:
It may be safely maintained that, so far as the ancient Indian political
thought relating to kingship is concerned, the positive contribution of the
Buddhists to it was practically nil."
If I have touched a hornet's nest, I need not apologize, since it is
completely intentional, and not incidental. The ideological context of
lndological scholarhip deserves serious attention.
Ghosal fares no better than Saletore in expressing a biased opinion by
downplaying the positive contributions of Hindu political thought as
contained in the Mahiibhiirata. Our analysis will clearly demonstrate the
falsity of his arguments when he affirms that there is in the Mahabharata, an
unqualified acceptance of the dal]t/anfti elements of the Arthafiistra without
any attempt to develop a comprehensive theory of the nature and function
of State as embodied in the person of the King.
Riijadharma in the M ahabhiirata
It is important to recognize that Bhi~ma in the Siintiparvan of Mahabharata is
very much concerned with the transmutation of the Arlhaiiistra categories
by synthesizing them with the dharma categories of Dharmasiitras. It is my
contention that this attempted synthesis by goes far beyond what is
Bhi~ma
implied in Ghoshal's observation that there is "in the Mahabharata the
wholesale incorporation of the Arthaiiistra categories".'• Ling reads and
interprets this to suit his contention that there is a fundamental opposition
between the conception ofr iijadharma in the Mahabharata and in the Nikii;·as
and the Jiitakas.,,
To recognize the far reaching consequences oft he Mahiibhiirata synthesis,
we need to trace certain developments within the Arthaiiistra tradition
itself. According to Kau1ilya, the most significant representative of the
Arthaiiistra tradition, traditionally there were four sciences (vidyiis), namely:
the Vedic canon (trayi); logic (iinvikiik'i); the politics (daTJ!fantti}; and
economics: the art of agriculture, cattle horticulture, and commerce
(l'iirllii). 16 At least three oft he Arthaiiislra schools preceding Kau1ilya tended
" B.A. Salrtort. Anrirnl Indian Polili<al Thought and lns1i1u1ions <Bombay: 1\sia Publishing
House, 1963) p. 326.
" U.N. Ghoshal, op. tit., p. 73.
" 1'. Ling. op. cit .. p. 1~4.
" A'au!i(ro Arthafiislro, Book I, Chaptrr 11.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig111z..,by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
374 BRAJ M. SINHA
to reject the claims of all the four branches of the sciences which evidently
gave due weight to both the sacred and secular branches ofknowledgc.17
The school ofManu rejects the claim ofa nvilcfi/d, for this is seen to be merely
a branch oft he Vedas. However, offorts oft he other two radical schools arc
more devastating. The Arthaiiistra system ofBrhaspati rejected not only the
but trayi (i.e. Vedas) as well. This prince of the materialist school of
anvik~ilcf,
thought concedes only to da'14an£ti and vartta the status of valid forms of
science (vidyiis). This in itself was an extreme swing in the opposite direction
from the position of the Dharmasiitras, for according to the Dharmasiitras,
rajadharma was held to be part and parcel oft he canonical scheme oft hings.
However, Brhaspati's position seeks to recognize daTJ4an£ti as the only valid
basis of rajadharma. T he apex of this extreme secular vision of daTJ4anfti,
divested of any constraints of dharma categories, is reached in Usanas
(Sukra) who took the bold step of proclaiming da1J4anfli to be the only
science. T he basic orientation of da1}4an£ti, so conceived in the early
Arthaiiistra tradition, seems to be the immediate context of the scathing
criticism of the kshattivijja in the Buddhist Nikayas on the ground of its
utter disregard for the universal principles of dharma as the fundamental
ethical categories. 18
The purpose oft his analysis is to suggest that the Mahabharata synthesis of
the Arthaiiistra tradition of daT}qanfti with that of the dharma categories of
Dharmasiilras is precisely an attempt to infuse in the structure ofs tatecraft
the element ofe thics that can only be characterized as universal. The ethics
ofr ajadharma is seen in the Mahabharata as the fundamental ethical principle
in which all ethical categories of particularistic dharmas are grounded.
This synthesis of the dharma and dQT}danfti categories probably was
occasioned by the need to alleviate the negative effects of the separation
of the darJdanfti and rajadharma in the pre-Kau1ilyan and KauJilyan
Arthail.stra. To realize the fuller significance of this we must have a
comparative perspective on the Arthaiiistra's notion of the duties of a
King and that of the views of the canonical Dharmasiilras on this subject.
A careful reading of the texts makes it abundantly dear that both are
concerned with the art of government in a monarchical State. Arthaiiistra,
however, confines itself exclusively to the investigation of the phenomena
of the State, while the conception of rajadharma in the Dharmasiitras deals
with the same as an incident in a comprehensive scheme of duties deriving
their source from the external Vedas. Hence, while the canonical writers
" Ibid.: also Kiimandaki1a JVitisiira. 11.1-5.
18 For the con1cxt and 0implications of 1hi.s criticism, s~c the following discussion in this
paper.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARTHASASTRA CATEGORIES IN THE MAHABHARATA 375
of Dhannasiitras mention only the rudiments of public administration, the
political writers are able to treat their subject on a vastly enlarged canvas.
Secondly, it must be noted that since Arlhafiistra is independent of the
sacred canon, and is the product oft he independent schools and individual
teachers, it lacks the positive character attaching to the riijadharma by virtue
of the latter's association with the great concept of dharma as the universal
principle of ethical conduct.
anticipates the essential principles of riijadharma in his very
Yudhi~rhira
first query addressed to According to YudhiHhira, riijadhannas
BhI~ma.19
are the refuge of all creatures; and not only the threefold end of life, but
salvation itself depends upon them. 20 There are echoes of the Nikii.yas
conception of a righteous King and the socio-political and cosmic
significance of such a righteous King.2 The Mahiibhii.rata, contrary to the
'
Arthaiiislra postulations, categorically declares the fulfillment of right
eousness to be the bounden duty of the King.22 Dhanna is the fundamental
principle of human conduct. The King upholding dhanna is the very
epitome of ethical conduct. The creatures are grounded in the King. The
King who rightly upholds dharma is indeed a King.23
How far removed the Mahiibhii.rala notion of riijadharma is from the
Arthaiiistra injunctions to the King becomes abundantly clear in the
passages describing the significance oft he principle ofr ighteousness in state
administration and public policy. Thus the text declares:
Righteousness is called dhamw.. The sages, 0 King, have declared that dhanna
restraints and sets bounds to all evil acts ofm en. The Lord created dhanna for
the advancement and growth ofc reatures. For this reason, a King should act
according to the dictates ofd hanna for benefiting his subjectS. For this reason
also, dhanna has been said to be the foremost of all things. Disregarding lust
and wrath, observe then the dictates of righteousness. Among all things that
conduce to the prosperity of Kings, righteousness is the foremost. 2
•
The supreme ethical significance of the principle of dharma is the
fundamental raison tf elrt of a King who is governed by, and governs by the
principle of dharma. The righteous King is not simply pursuing his own
personal dharma and seeking his own personal salvation as Ling would want
us to believe. On the contrary, the righteous King in the Mahii.bhiirata is
09 .\faltabharnta, Xll.56.3-7.
0 Ibid.
'
" Pkase refer 10 the dis.:ussions in the following section dealing with parallel
developments in Buddhist political thought in India.
" l>faltiibhorata, Xll.90.3- !'>, 13- 1!'>, 27.
" Ibid.
" 1Waliiibhiirat;r, Xll.91.3.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig111z..,by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
376
BRAJ M. SINHA
precisely the righteous King of the Buddhist canons and Jatalcas. The
righteous King is the very foundation of social, moral and cosmic order.
When the King ceases to be righteous, neglecting his rajadharma, untold
miseries afflict his kingdom: there is cold in the hot season, and vice versa;
there is drought as well as heavy rain; diseases overtake the people; comets
fall towards the earth; inauspicious planets appear. Righteous pursuit of
rajadharma, on the other hand, destroys all evil consequences in this world
just as the rising sun dispels unholy darkness.
2~
Lest it be construed that the above portrayal of the rajadharma simply
implies exaggerated importance of the King and provides a sacred basis for
the autocratic power of the King that the Artha.faslra prescribes, I would
argue precisely the opposite being the case here. It is not the particular
duties (dharma) of the King belonging to kfalrfya classes that are being
lauded here to ensure people's unqualified allegiance to the King. Rather,
beyond the functional value ofr ajadharma for the maintenance ofs ocial and
cosmic order, there is clear affirmation of the universal principles ofd harma
having deep and significant ethical implications. Instead of putting the
interests of the King and the State above all interests, i.e. the way of
darµ/anfli of the Arlha.fastra, the Mahabharata makes dharma raja subservient
to the interests of all. The scope of rajadharma is expanded to include
virtues far beyond the compass of particularistic va77}a dharma of kfalrfya
of casting away life in battle, protecting the realm, and preventing the
intermixture of var7}a. Rajadharma comprises compassion for all creatures,
knowledge of ways of the world, and relieving the distressed and the
oppressed. While Kau!ilya specifically describes the objective of the
darµ/anfJi of the Artha.fastra to be the acquisition and protection of the
land,25 Afahabharata declares that those misdirected towards the pursuit
of worldly objects without restraints are men of the nature of beasts.2
'
Transmutation of Arthafastra Categorns and
the Notion of Rajadharma i11 Early Buddhism
The significance of the Buddhist understanding of a righteous king can
only be appreciated in the wider context of the infusion of the dharma
principle in public administration and policy. As indicated earlier, it is my
contention that the Buddhist Nikaya and Jataka literature on the one hand
and Dharmasiitra and the Hindu S'!lrli literature on the other hand, were
" .Hahabhiirala, X 11.63.6.
" ArlliaiaJlra, Book I, Chap1cr l.
" ~lahabharala, Xll.69.3.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARTHAS.-:fSTRA CATECORIES IN THI:: !•IAHABHARATA 377
dealing with the specific phenomenon of the state autocracy and the
supremacy of the principle of expediency in state administration and
policy. The classical expression of this principle is found in the Artha.fiislra of
Kau1ilya. However, Kau1ilya's Artha.fiislra, though the oldest extant
document available to us, is either an attempt at regeneration of the
ancient Arthafiislra tradition, which Kau1ilya himself laments was waning,
or a final refined culmination of an even coarser form of the Arlhafiistra
principles, propounded and propagated by his predecessors. 28
This tradition of the principle ofs tate administration and public policy
was prevalent during the Nikiiya period and was referred to by the Buddha
as the khallivijjii (ktalrrya science) for which the Master is reported to have
nothing but contempt. This khativijjii corresponds much more closely to
the early Arthafiistra conception of da1Jtfanfti and is certainly a synonym
for the riijavidyii of later times. The Digha Nikiiya recognizes khattivljjii as
a low art (lirachcchhiinavijjii) practised by individuals thriving on wrongful
occupations (michchhiijiva). This is the science by which false ascetics and
Brahmar:ias earned their livelihood by counselling the kings in state
administration. Thus the Brahmajiilasutta distinguishes the perfect Buddha
from these false ascetics and Brahmar.ias.29
The question that may be raised at this point is: in what way is the
perfect Buddha different form the false ascetics and Brahmar:ias engaged in
counselling the King in state administration and policy? This is all the
more significant as there exist well-known instances of the Buddha himself
having played the role of royal counsellor to the contemporary monarchs.
Indeed, the Buddha maintained active and close association with the royal
courts of his time. Both Bimbasara, the powerful King of Magadha, and
Pasendi, the ruler of the kingdom of Kosala, were his lifelong supporters
and friends.30 As we gather from the Kosa/a Samyutta section of the Samyulla
;Vikiiya, Pasendi visited the Buddha frequently and constantly sought his
counsel. The discourses dealing with the Buddha's counsel to the royalty do
not merely contain the basic principles of Buddhist teachings in terms of
personal piety. There is clear evidence of instruction pertaining to state
administration and public policy.31
In this respect, then, the Buddha was no different than the false ascetics
and the Brahmar:ias involved in similar enterprises of royal counselling.
" for details of the drbatt as lO th<" authorship and datt of tht Anu/ii)'n Arlhn.>,i.,lrn. st<"
R.P. Kangle, Th< Kau/i(>• Arlha.!ii.<l•n (Bombay: I..:nivc·rsity of Bomhay. 1965'.
" Bralima-]ala Sul/an/a, /)~~ha , \.ik~)'n.
0 See T. Ling, op, <ii .. p. 141.
'
" Ibid.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
378
BRAJ M. SINHA
What distinguishes the perfect Buddha from the other two is precisely the
deprofessionalization of this art of royal counselling, which is a central
assumption oft he Arthafaslra, as well as a clear emphasis on the principle of
dharma as the fundamental basis of such counselling. It is even more
important to realize that several canonical sullas bring to our notice the sad
plight of a state that is run by a King who does not seek advice from
a counsellor who is well versed in the principle of dharma."' On the
other hand, a King listening to and following the dharma counsel oft he wise
ones not only gains wisdom but also brings good fortune to his realm, is one
of the significant themes of the well-known Sihanada Sulla.""
What distinguishes the practitioners of khallivijjii from the perfect
Buddha and the wise counsellers of the kings is precisely the element of the
dharma principle which is the touchstone ofw holesome state administration
and public policy. It is this that accounts for classification of khalliuijjii
under the category of low arts (tirachchhiinauijjii) and its practice as
a wrongful occupation (michchhajiva). That this concern with the un
scrupulous character of the Artlrafaslra elements was at the root of the
Buddha's rejection of this art is even more clearly evident in a later ]iitaka
story which conveys an unqualified censure of this art. These stories, in
a striking manner, bring out the non-dharmic character of the khattivijjii.
The Mahiibodhi-Jiitaka tells us about a King with five ministers, one of
whom professed the belief in khattivijjii which involved the teaching that
one may accomplish one's goal even by killing one's parents. An ascetic,
who was requested by the King to assist in the administration ofj ustice, was
falsely accused by the five ministers of treason. Subsequently, when the
ascetic had occasion, he demonstrated to the King the untruthfulness ofh is
ministers, and the falsity of the doctrines that they professed. The ascetic
explicitly rebuked the fifth minister, the follower of the khattivijjii for the
unethical and immoral doctrine professed and practised by him. The text
admonishes that the practitioners oft his science are: "poor simple fools that
think themselves wise" in preaching that "a man may kill his parents, or
elder brother, children, and wife, should occasion justify and need of it
arise''. 34
In a similar vein, the 1\Jaha-Ummagga-Jiitaka censures the mysterious and
senseless doctrine of (khallryamiiyii) that suggests that one should
k~atriya
re>cue one's distressed self by any means gentle or severe." The Maha-
" Ibid.
" Sihaniida Sultan/a, Dlgha JVikaya.
" .Maliabodlti Jato/ca, No. 528.
" Malia-Ummagga-]ataka, l'io. 546.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
.1RTHA.~JSTRA CATt:CORlt:S IN THt: ,\fAHJB/fJRATA 379
Sutasoma-Jataka mentions the virtuous King repudiating the kkatlidhamma;
the duties pursued by kkatti doctrine, being opposed to morality. The
prince here maintains that those who arc versed in kkallidhamma, and live
by it, are destined to suffer in hell.56
The passages conveying these trends in Buddhist political thought are
very significant for our purpose. There are two implications that I would
like to suggest here. First, in the Buddhist canon the kkallivijja is not seen as
a haphazard, sporadic and diffused science. In the Makabodhi-Jataka,
khativijja is already conceived at par with such philosophical systems as
theism (issarakaranavadaj, determinism (pubbekatavada) and nihilism
(uchchhedavada).3 7 Khattivijjavada, consists of a systematized body of know
ledge, specialization in which entitles one to become the counsellor of the
King in the matters of state administration. For all practical purposes, this
is the science that may be identified with the Arthaiastra tradition which as
we know, is primarily the science of polity, which places the interest ofs tate
and inter alia of King, above all other interests. Evidently, the censure and
condemnation of this science is on the grounds of its creed of unbridled
selfishness and ruthless cruelty. Thus, kkatlivijja stands for that brand of
politics, the science of polity, which can only be an antithesis ofe thics, i.e.
code of conduct governed by the highest ideal of dharma.
What could be the immediate context for this extreme injunction against
the science of politics? One docs not need to delve too deep to see in this the
Buddha's ethics reacting in a very strong way against some of the extreme
tendencies of ArthaJastra statecraft which affirms the interest oft he state and
the King above all other interests, and enjoins that all other interests must
be sacrificed to this end. The conflict between the two perspectives is rooted
in the fundamental difference between the two standards or two sets of
thought. The ArlhaJaslra tradition, i.e. the tradition ofk halliiiijja, is inspired
by the avowed end of ensuring the security and prosperity of the state and
the King. To this end it is willing to condone and even justify breaches of
morality. However, the early Buddhist perspective, committed as it is to
the principle of dharma in all spheres of human endeavor, politics being no
exception to that, affirmed the unqualified supremacy of the universal
ethical principles, even over the affairs of the State. This point is well
understood, and has definitely provided a clue to the extreme onesided
injunction against the khattiz•ijja, both in the Nikayas and the Jatakas. This
has been duely noted by a host ofs cholars, among whom both Ghoshal and
" 1Wana-Su1(1Joma·]a1aka. :\o. 537.
" 1Wahabodni Jiitaka, op. tit.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
380 BRAJ M. SINHA
Ling stand out in their comprehensive treatment of this dimension of the
Buddhist contribution to the Indian polity.
However, what appears as problematic is the apparent contradiction
between this perspective on the khattivijjii and khattidhamma on the one hand
and the Aggailila Suttanta's closing statement where the Master is reported to
have said:
I too Vasettha, say:
The Khattiya is the best among this folk
Who put their trust in lineage. 38
It is equally intriguing that in almost all instances of the Jiitaka story,
words ofs evere condemnation of the khaJtivijjii and khaltidhamma is put into
the mouths of the princes and kings themselves, who see a fundamental
incongruity between the way of the universal dharma and the particular
dharma oft he kfatriya concerned with the ultimate security oft he interests of
the State and the person of the King.
It is my contention that here and indeed elsewhere Buddha sought
to transform the fundamental orientation of the kfatriyadharma."' In
a significant way Buddha, who is identified with cakravartin and the
dharmariija, as indeed we will shortly recognize. Yuthisthira, the Hindu
dharmariija, represents a significant moment in the kfatriya conscience and
kfatriya consciousness. Both in the Buddhist Nikiiyas and Jiitakas, on the one
hand and in the Mahiibhiirata on the other, this conflict in the kfa.triya
conscience is resolved by removing the kfatriyadharma from its particular
context of the specific vartµJ dharma and raising it to the level of universal
dharma, where kfatriya dharma is seen as the very epitome of the universal
dharma, tht fundamental source of all dharmas. Ofc ourse, the kfatriyadharma
itself, in both the cases, have to undergo a significant metamorphosis,
before it can really become the true riijadharma, dharma of the riijii, "the one
who pleases", the unqualified adherence to which is what makes a dharma
riija.
«>
The Buddhist conception of dharmariija is formulated in the canonical
text of Aiiguttara Nikiiya where the question is asked as to who is the King of
the righteous King. The explicit answer given there is that it is the dhamma
itself.•1 The formula is further amplified in the Jiitakas giving detailed
" Aggaiflla Sulla11la, Digha ,\lka;·a.
" Sec Braj M. Sinha, "Religion as Vioknrc: An Early Buddhist Perspective", ARC:
Journal ojlhr Fatu!IJ of RtligiouJ Studi", Vol. XIII, No. 2, 1986.
•• l>lahabharala, Xll.63.24; D~(ha ,\'rkaya, XXVll.
" Angullara ,\'ikaya. 111.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oigrtlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARTHASASTRA CATEGORIES IN THI-: AfAllABHARATA 381
descriptions of the King that ruled by the dhamma. The ]atakas are replete
with stories telling us how the dhamma King (dhammaraja} practised dhamma
in personal piety as well as in conducting the public affairs of the state. All
these stories identify the dharmaraja as one who shunned the four wrong
courses of life comprising of excitement, malice, delusion and fear.42 The
royal duties (rQjadhamma) practised by them consisted of alms giving,
morality, liberality, straightforwardness, refraining from anger and from
injury, forbearance and refraining from confrontation. The well-known
ten stanzas relating to the practice of righteousness (dasadhamma-chariya
gatha} by the King presents a strikingly different conception of the ktalriya
than the one professed by the specialist of the khattivijja cited earlier. Here
the ten principles of righteous behaviour by a dhammaraja consist of:
righteousness towards the mother and father, the wife and the son, relatives
and ministers, draught animals, the realm, recluses and Brahmar,ias, birds
and beasts.0 Allusions to the ten rajadhamma are to be found in several of
the ]ataka tales, including Tesakuya-]ataka; Cullahamsa Jii.taka and
Mahamsa-Jii.taka, just to mention a few.•• Through all these Jii.taka tales the
point is brought forth in unequivocal terms that what makes a state
a righteous state is the total and uncompromising application of the
principle ofd harma to all aspects ofs tate administration and public policy.
h is equally important to be reminded that the .Nikayas and the ]atakas
never tire of emphasizing the immense social, political, and above all
cosmic significance of the King's righteousness. The rajadharma, i.e. dhamma
of the kthatriya, acquires a paradigmatic importance. The most powerful
statement to this effect is made in the Aflgut/ara .Nikiiya. To paraphrase the
passage:
When Kings become unrighteous, the King's officers (riijayuttas) also become
unrighteous, this being so the Bralrmal)QS and the mass of ordinary house
holders (gahapatis), the townsfolk and the villagers in their turn become
unrighteous; this being so the sun and the moon, the stars and the
constellations go wrong in their courses; days and nights, months, seasons and
years are out ofj oint; the winds blow wrong; the dtvas being annoyed do not
bestow sufficient rain. This being so, the corps ripen in the wrong season and
consequently men art short lived, ill favoured, weak and sickly. Conversely,
when kings become righteous. all the reverse (onsequenccs follow."
" s,. ..
]atokar. :-;o. '.J21. 533. 534, 540, etr.
" Rohanto-.\1i ,ea-Jiitaka. :\o. 50 I.
•• Ir is important 10 1101c that thrsr )lztaA·a talcs. though oflat('r orig:in tha11 tftc . \'ik4l't1
lit<'raturC', continue- in significa111 '"''<tys 1hr earl~· Buddhist \'i$ion of the- ,,~jadhamma.
" .1n;;uttaro _,\"ik4»•. 11.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
382 BRAJ M. SINHA
The above view of the tremendous significance of the political right
eousness is reflected in several of the Jataka stories.
Mahahhiirata: A Comparative Perspective
The central thrust of this portrayal of the Buddhist conception of the
dhammaraja is to recreate for us the context in which we can appreciate the
developments within the Mahiibharata. There simply is no denying the fact
that the ideal ofd harmaraja in the Nikayas goes a long way in repudiating the
central thrust of Arthaiiistra categories which probably were the governing
themes of most of the little princely states, and to a great extent of the
contemporary empires. That this idealistic and onesided theme of the
dhamma rule was not seen as an easily accessible doctrine and to a great
degree somewhat bewildered the qatriya rulers is obvious by the prominence
of the doctrine and repeated reinforcements through tales in which Kings
want to be instructed in this new science of polity. That both its boldness
and its idealism, with significant disregard of the pragmatics of the
statecraft, made it too difficuh and opaque, is evident from many of the
Jataka stories designed to remove the doubt and inculcate an attitude of
righteousness among its listeners, the Kings who sought to understand the
principle of rajadhamma.
Reminiscent oft he Nikqyas and the ]atakas, the Mahiibharata also seeks to
reverse the class hierarchy of brahmarµis and the kfatriyas, and beyond that
causes the kfatriya dharma to undergo a metamorphosis by freeing it of its
particularistic context of the va1"1]a dharma. This enables the Mahiibharata to
establish the kfatriyadharma not in accordance with the particularistic
framework of va,.,,a dharma, but on the universal principle of social and
moral law. It is the universalization oft he kfatriya dharma that also accounts
for the countervailing notion of rajadharma contrasted with the ArthaJiistra
conception ofd a1Jt/anfti in the Sanliparvan which, in a very significant way, is
resonant with the Nikqya and Jataka conceptions.
The da1J</anfti of ArthaJiistra tradition, corresponding to the khattivijja of
the ;Vikayas and ]atakas, is subjected to the restraint of the universal
principles ofd harma. There emerges here a new conception ofk falriyadharma,
a conception that is far more noble than any previous body of Hindu
literature had suggested. This metamorphosis of kfatriyadharma is the need
of the hour; nothing less than this will satisfy the anguished cry of the
Only this transformed character ofk fatriyadharma can qualify
Yudhi~!hira.
it to be the fountainhead of all dharmas. In a manner reminiscent of the
Buddha's statement in the Nikayas, kfatriyadharma now is declared to be
supremest of all, nay the very foundation of all dharmas. The dharmas of the
four orders (va,.,,as) we are told, are established upon the dharma of the
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
ARTHAS:JSTRA CATEGORIES IN THE MAHIBHIRATA 383
kfatriya. Kfatriyadharma, the text tells us, flowed from the Primeval Deity
and then came other dharmas, which are, as it were, its
(Pu~a),
appendages: all other dharmas are included in this dharma, and therefore it is
declared to be the highest.46
It is my contention that this is not an isolated phenomenon where the
tenets of the politics and the statecraft was seen to be in conflict with the
principles of dharma. The Mahabharata in a very significant way presents to
us the general context in which the kfatriya ruling class seeks resolution of
its own conflict of conscience. YudhiHhira, the kfatriya prince, called
dharmaraja in the Mahabharata, is the epitome of that tension. In this
particular situation the tension is clearly perceived between the ArthaJiistra
principles ofs tatecraft that Bhi$ma is laying down for Yudhi$fhira and the
dharma categories of conduct, that Yudhi$1hira operating within the
framework of the S'!lrti tradition of Dharmasiitras holds dear to his heart.
His anguish, as we all know, is borne of the tension between the kfatriya
dharma in its particularistic context, and what he perceives to be the
universal principles of dharma. As R.C. Zaehner points out in a somewhat
oblique way, Yudhi$1hira "has no quarrel with the ten commandments
which sum up what is obligatory on all men, irrespective of class and caste
for these are in accordance with his own nature-fortitude, patience,
self-control, not to steal, purity, control of the senses, insight, wisdom,
truth, and the avoidance ofa nger. What he protests against, time and time
again, is the dharma peculiar to the warrior class particularly as it applies to
kings."47 In effect YudhiHhira wants to reject the particularistic claims of
the kfatriya dharma. This much is known. It is also a common knowledge
that in the Santiparvan of the Mahabharata one finds the Machiavelli of
ArthaJiistra raising its head again and again. What is intriguing, however, is
that Bhi$ma's answer always leaves Yudhi$1hira perplexed and bewil
dered, still probing; for him the conflict is not resolved. And what is equally
intriguing is that our modern scholars have failed to sec the other strain of
the lvlahabharata polity, which constantly seeks to counterbalance the
ArthaJiistra categories by resorting to the universal principles of dharma as
the foundation of the Mahabharata notion of rajadharma.
" ,waJrabhorata, XI 1.64 & 65.
" R.C. Zachner, Hinduism (London: Oxford Univer<ity Press, 1966) p. 116.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SNAKES, SATTRAS, AND THE MAHABHARATA
CHRISTOPHER MINKOWSKI
ABBREVIATIONS
AB Aitarcya Brihmaoa
AGS Afvalayana Grhyasiitra
ApGS Apastamba Grhyasiitra
ApSS Apastamba Srautasiitra
Al}
Af'lcyakalpa
ASS Afvalliyana Srautasiitra
AV Atharva Vc da Sa Ill hi ti
BGS Baudhayana Grhyasiitra
BP Bhagavata Pural)a
BrP Brahmlit14a Puriil)a
BSS Baudhiyana Srautasiitra
GP Garu(ja PuriiQa
HGS Hira9yakdi Grhyasiitra
HSS Hiral)yakes1 Srautasiitra
Hv Harivarp!a
JB Jaiminiya Briihmal)a
JUB Jaiminiya Upani1ad Brahmai:ia
KB Kau1i1aki Brahmat1a
KGS Khadira Grhyasutra
KS Ka1haka SalJlhita
KSS Kiityiiyana Srautasiitra
LSS La1yayana Srautasiitra
MBh Mahabharata
MP Mauya Purlil)a
MSS Manava Srautasiitra
PB Paiicavi'lls• BrihmaQa
PCS Paraskara Grhyasiitra
R Rlimliyal)a
RV ~gvcda Sa'llhiti
RV Khila ~gvcda Khila
SaB Samavidhana Brahmal)a
SB Satapatha BriihmaQa
SGS Sii'llkhayana Grhyasiitra
SSS Sa'llkhayana Sraurasiitra
sv
Samavcda Sa'llhita
TA Taittiriya Aral)yaka
TB Taittiriya Briihmar:ia
TS Taittiriya Salllhita
VamP Yamana Puriil)a
ViiP V.iyu Puril)a
VP Vi1r:iu Puraoa
VS Viija.<asaneyi Sa'llhitii
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
385
SNAKt:S. SATTR.~S AND THE AfAHABHJRATA
In an article that will appear elsewhere I discuss the frame stories of the
Mahabharata, the embedding structure that they presume, and the
Vedic ritual structures that may be their inspiration.' This article is
intended to complement that more theoretical one with a consideration
of the specifics of Janamejaya's sarpasattra or snake sacrifice, its Vedic
precedents, and its connection with the Bharata story. In examining
these specifics, more global considerations arise, having to do with
continuities between Vedic and epic, with snake lore, with the thematics
of the Mahabharata and with the history of its formation. I will argue
that Janamejaya's sallra is an artfully chosen frame story and that it
appropriately foreshadows the wider theme of the epic that it introduces.
Janamejaya's Sarpasattra
The story of Janamejaya's sal/ra belongs to the Astika parvan of the
Mahabharata's first book ( 1.45- 53).2 The events of the Astika parvan,
the curse ofKadrii (1.18), the death of (1.36- 40), and the birth
Parik~it
of Astlka ( 1.33- 44), culminate in the story of the snake sallra, which
begins withJanamejaya learning that his father was killed by the
Pari~kit
serpent Seeking revenge, Janamejaya asks his priests whether
Ta~aka.
they know a rite that would enable him to propel and his
Tak~aka
relations into blazing fire ( 1.47.4). The priests reply that there is a rite
that will accomplish such a task, created by the gods especially for
Janamejaya (tvadartham devanirmitam), known as the sarpasattra, and
described in the Pural)ic lore (pur"il1}t kathyate) ( 1.4 7 .6). J anamejaya is the
only man eligible to sponsor this rite, and the priests have the training to
perform it (1.47.7). Janamejaya agrees and orders the priests to prepare
(1.47.8- 9). As they are laying out the sacrificial enclosure one paural}ika
descries an omen that, because of a Brah min, the sacrifice will be halted
before completion (1.47.13- 5).
Janamejaya orders that no strangers be allowed to enter and begins his
rite. The priests, wearing black, begin their necromantic oblations, and
snakes begin falling in large numbers into the sacrificial fire ( 1.47.16-
25 ). feeling the pull of the fire, finds a hiding place in
Tak~aka,
Indraloka ( 1.48.14- 18), but the other snakes are not so well favored by
Indra. l\lfany of them are destroyed. Astika, the son of the Brahmin
' ..J anamejaya's satlra and Ritual Structure", JAOS 109.3 (1989') 401- 20. I am
greatly indebted ro David Pingree for hi~ advice and ideas in prrparing this work.
' All reference$ are to the Cri1ical Edition of Sukthankar er al.
Google rron1
Origi~al
Digll1Ze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
386
CHRISTOPHER MINKO\VSKI
J aratkaru and the snake woman Jaratkaru, goes to the sallra to try to
save the snakes (1.48.24- 49.24).
Astika enters in spite of the guards and sings an ornamental stuti in
tri.f/uhh meter, praising Janamejaya and his yajifa, and likening him to
gods, sages, and kings as legendary Yajamanas (1.50). J anamejaya
wishes to give a boon to Astika, against the advice of his priests, who
warn him to wait until Tak$aka is safely incinerated (1.51.1-3). J an
amejaya urges the priests to finish the rite, and when he learns that Indra
is protecting he orders the priests to force Indra into the fire as
Tak~aka,
well ( 1.51.4- 11). Indra abandons who begins to plummet
Tak~aka,
toward the flames, and the priests allow J anamejaya to give Astika his
boon (1.51.12- 15).
By his Brahminic power, Astika dramatically stops Tak$aka in mid
air and requests from j anamejaya that the sarpasaltra be halted (1.51.16-
20). J anamejaya reluctantly agrees and concludes the rite, distributing
dalqiT}ii, performing the avabhrtha, and sending the priests home (1.53.7-
14).
It is at this snake sacrifice that the Bharata story, the story of
J anamejaya's ancestors, is first narrated by Vaisarp.payana in the
intervals between the ritual actions. Both of these story traditions, the
telling of the Mahabharata and the boon of Astika, belong to the
sarpasallra legend, and it is not made clear how they int-=ract, except that
at the end of the Mahabharata, the siita at 18.5.26- 7 describes how
Vaisarp.payana finished his narrative; J anamejaya marveled; the priests
stopped their rite; and Astika was pleased at saving the snakes.
Presumably we are to understand that Vaisarp.payana finished his story
before Astika's intervention.
Why should this story about snakes and rituals serve as the introduc
tion to an epic about cousins at war? First of all, there is the question of
tradition and continuity. The sarpasattra is nothing new. It is not the
invention of a late redactor of the epic. In fact it has more Vedic
precedent than the Bharata story itself.
Vedic Sarpasattra
There is a ritual antecedent to the Mahabharata's snake sacrifice in the
sarpasallra described in the Pai'icavirp.sa Brahmat;ta and in the frautasiitras.1
' PB 25.15; BSS 17.18; ApSS 2314.18-9; !'.fSS 9.5.4.37- 9; SSS 13.23.5- 8; KSS
24.4.50; ASS 12.5.1-5; LSS 10.20.10- 2; Also BGS 3.10; A11 1 l.8f-10b. Dcvayajiiika
on KSS rites the lost Ka1haka sutra, which provides thr same details as ApSS.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SNAKES, SATTRAS AND THE MAHABHARATA 387
But this is not a rite that draws snakes into the fire. Rather, it is made up
of the ordinary ritual components ofs allras, i.e. Soma sacrifices. As are all
sallras, it is subject to unusual rules. Only Brahmins are eligible to
perform it; there is no separate Yajamana or sponsor; no dakfi1}4, or
sacrificial fee, is given.• Thus it is different from Janamejaya's satlra, he
being a K}atriya who pays substantial dakfi1}4s.
The sarpasattra is to last for one year. Like some other year-long rites it
is arranged symmetrically around a vifuval or central day. In the PB
version, for example, the rite begins with an Atirata Soma sacrifice.
Then for six months are performed which use two different
Agni~tomas
sets of Samaveda slolras on alternate days. 5 On the vifuvat day itself a
standard is performed, only using for the sUilras the sar
Agni~ioma
pasii.mans (Arar;iyageyagana 2.a.1-3).6 After the vifUva/ day the Agni~-
1omas are performed in reverse order for six more months. 7 The rite
concludes with another Atiratra.8 Other schools follow the same struc
ture but with variations.9
The distinctive characteristic of the sarpasattra is that it is daiadafi,
"done by tens and by tens". '0 This means that at all three Soma
pressings only 10 verses of Samaveda are sung in the stotras, rather than
the 9, 15, 17 or 21 verses typically recited in an Agninoma." At the same
' S..e Harry Falk, "Zurn Ursprung der Sattra·Opfcr", ZDMG Suppl. VI (1985) 275-
81. I am indebted to Stanley lnsler for this rercronce.
' A~. 11.8r- 9a.
' The sarp.isamam are Arat;tyageyagiina 2.a.1.1- 10 and arc based on RV 3.51.1. (=SY
1.374); 7.32.16 (=SV 1.270); 9.75.I (=SY 1.554); 9.97.58; 1.84.IO(=SV 1.4-09).
Inserted in the verses in Ara.Qyagcyagina arc, among orher expressions, prasarpa, sarpa,
11/sarpa. Sec bdow for more on this wordplay.
' i.e. bcfor< the vi/uval ababab ... , arter the vifuoot bababa. . . .
' lkcause PB 25.15.3 mentions the Abhigara and Apagara, the praiser and reviler,
who apixar properly only in a l\clahiivrata, the question arises in Siiya11a's commentary
on PB whether this mention is injunctive of a performance or a Mahiivrata, which would
mean that the so/Ira as a whole should be moddlcd on the Gaviimayana sallra with it.s
much more complex structure. The answer is that since the A~yakalpa l l.8f- 10b has
spdlcd out the format of the rite exactly, there is no need for such inferences. Similarly
LSS 10.20.10- 2 and Agnisviimi's commentary there; also noticed in Devayiijiiika on
KSS 24.4.50.
' Asvalayana prescribes alternating Gonoma and Ayul:utoma rites, with a Jyo~
Joma for the viiuvat day. Kiityayana (according to Karka and Yajiiikadcva) pr<scribcs
alternating Virii! sacrifices with the trivrt Agninoma rite that is performed on the second
day of a Kausuf!1binda 10.<fay sattra. Baudhiiyana alternates days of 10 stomas with days
of 12 sU>mas. Apastamba, Miinava, and Siil)thkiiyana are roughly equivalent to
Paftcavil')'lSa Brahmana.
0 PB 25.15.1; ApSS 23.14.9; SSS 13.23.7; BSS 17.18 (da!tulaJa); MSS 9.5.4.37;
'
Kii1haka siltra as cited in Dcvayajnika on KSS 24.4.50, sarvo da!aJafi sa'l'valSaro dviidafi
1·iJuvOnt sarpQ,,Qm ayanam.
" BSS alternates IO-stoma days with 12-stoma day< a• noted above.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
388 CHRISTOPHER MINKOWSKI
time, the vi.pwat day is to be a 12-stoma day,12 while the Atiratras at
beginning and end are to be 16-stoma days.
The saltra is daiadafi because of the wordplay with the bite verb da'lLf
(daiati). Baudhayana SS 17.18 makes this connection explicit, sa yad
daiadaitti tasmiit sarpa da11LfuJcii da'lLfuviryiil,, "because (it was per
formed) by tens and by tens, therefore serpents (have become) biters
(dllJ!lfuka) and wondrously brave (da'!lfuvi"rya)."
As for results, the predicted benefits of the Jraula sarpasattra are all
beneficial, and far from the apocalyptic effects of Janamejaya's sattra.
The Pancavirp5a Brahmat;1a promises that the performers of this rite get a
firm support in these worlds (25.15.2), that just as snakes slough their old
skin, so do the performers conquer death and attain a splendor as if of
the Adityas (25.15.4) .14 Apastamba SS promises the same splendor
and also the prevention of old age (23.14.8). Manava SS urges this rite
on those desiring the wealth produced by all sattras, those desiring
immortality and those desiring heaven (9.5.5.39). Baudhayana SS 17 .18
declares that the sarpasattra wins worlds, sons, and cattle, and, more to
the point, that whoever performs it will not be harmed by snakes.
More significant is the aetiology provided for the sarpasattra by the
Pancavirpsa Brahmat;1a and Baudhayana SS. u Both texts list the original
performers of the inauguratory snake sattra. As it turns out, the first
offerers of the sarpasattra were the snakes themselves, who, as noted
above, became venomous by completing it. Below are given the three
versions of this list as found in PB 25.15.3; BSS 17.18; and BGS 3.10.
Priest PB BSS BGS
Grhapati Jarvara same Jirvara
Brahman same Datta Tapasa
Dhr1ar~1ra
Airavata
Udgatr Prthusravas same P. Diiresravas
Dauresravasa
Prastotr Glava same same
Pratihartr Ajagava same Ajagara
Hot r Datta Tapasa same Varui;ia
11..faitravarui;ia Sitip~1ha same same
" So PB, i\pSS SSS, ASS. Jl.1SS, Ka1haka and c:omms. on KSS.
" This wordplay of daia and daiaJi is, so to speak, an old joke. Sec below.
" Similarly ASS prescrilx-$ the rite for those who desirr splendor (prakoJa).
" Also it appears in BGS 3.10 and is referr<d to in t.ISS.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
389
SNAKES, SATTRAS AND THE MAHABHJRATA
Brahmana- Ta~aka same T. Vaisalika
ccha!Jlsin Vai5aleya
NeHr Sikh a same same
Pot r Anusikha Atisikha AtiSikha
Acchavaka Arui;ia A1a Arui;ia Ahya Cakra
Agnidhra Timirgha Cakra and Pi5anga
Daurc$ruta Pisanga
2 Adhvaryus Arimejaya same Dhr1ar~1ra Airavata
Janamejaya
Kautustau
Grliva.~tut Arbuda same same
Subrahmanya Ajira Ajira Maheya Ahira Maheya
Unnetr(s) Cakra Sa1:11;la Sanda
Pisanga
Abhigara Sai;ic;la
Apagara
Ku~ai;ic;la
Dhruvagopa Pa.Sukra Pasago
Sadasya Upariti U paniti Tark~ya
Tlirk~ya
Dhurimejaya Kaustuka
Janamejaya'6
The listing here of names that are prominent in the Bharata epic,
especially J anamejaya, and Tak$aka, prompted Caland to
Dhrtar~tra,
conclude that the vedic sarpasallra was the prototype for the epic one."
It is clear that in the passage from ritual to epic text, however, important
transformations have taken place. In specific terms, the list of officiants
has changed from reptilian to human; the serpent patriarchs are replaced
with Brahmin nis.'8
Hotr Cai;ic;labhlirgava descendant of Cyavana
Udglitr Kautsarya Jaimini
Brahman Sarilgarava
Adhvaryu Bodhapingala
" Th<Se lasi iwo arc Adh"aryus according to 1he kha nu. in R. Sha ma Sa<iri·s edi1ion.
The reading of BGS i.s apparently corrup1ed, so that familiar names arc garbkd and
S\\'itched.
" Caland on PB 25.15.3.
" ~.fBh 1.48.4- 10. There ar< many \'ariancs in che names lisccd in chc rricical
apparat,1$.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
390
CHRISTOPHER MINKOWSKI
Sadasyas Vyasa, Samaihaka, Uddilaka, Svetaketu, Asita Devala,
Nirada, Pirvata, Atreya, Kufighata, Vlilsya
Sruta.!ravas, Kah<>Qa, Deva.!anna, Maudgala,
Samasaubhara.
Curiously, the four main priests are hardly found elsewhere in Vedic or
epic texts, while the sadasyas arc well-known Vedic uis. As for the
19
snakes, of those named in the Vedic passages only two appear at the epic
sarpasaltra, but that, ironically, is because they arc consumed in its
flamcs.2° Dhrtarli$1ra Airavata appears as a snake from the Atharva
Veda onwards.21 Tak$aka Vaisaleya and Arbuda Kadraveya are also
well known as snakes even in the Vedic period.22 Janamcjaya appears as
the name ofa snake in the Mahabharata (2.9.10). On the other hand, he
appears as a Yajamana in the Brahmar;ias.23
As for the site of the snake saltra, there is significance in its Vedic
location and in its epic relocation. Baudhayana SS 17.18 states that the
original sarpasaltra took place at Khar;ii;lava Prastha. In the epic, of
course, Khar;ii;lavaprastha is another name for lndraprastha, the city
that the Par;ii;lavas built on the site of the Khar;ii;lava forest, the erstwhile
home ofTak$aka. Krishna and Arjuna burn down the Khar;ii;lava forest
in a manner that appears unusually cruel, by preventing the wild
animals, including snakes, from escaping the flames (1.214- 223).
Tak$aka is only saved by being away in Kuruk$Ctra. His son is saved by
the special intervention of Indra, who is regularly Tak$aka's protector,
but his wife is killed by Arjuna (1.218.4-9).
These events, the burning of Khar;ii;!ava Prastha, the slaughter of his
people, his mate, and the near death of his son, establish a basis for a
personal vendetta between Tak$aka and the Bharata clan. The existence
" Cat14a appears in a list of Bhiirgavas, ti.IP 195.24; Siirr\garava appears once, VP
41. 73.
'°
Cakra and Pisanga, MBh 1.52.5;15.
" AV 8.I0.22;JUB 4.26.15; MBh 1.3.142; 1.41.13; 1.52.13; 2.9.9; 4.2.14; 5.101.15;
8.24.72; 16.6.14; Hv 3.88; 6.23; BP 5.24.31; BrP 3.7.34; VaP 69.71; MP 6.40; 10.20; VP
6.8.95.
8.10.29; 8.14.14; and Kauiika Sutra on AV 4.6; 5.13; 6.12;JB 2.284;
"Ta~aka-AV
in the MBh Tak~aka is ubiquitous-sec S. Sorenson, An Index to tlu .Namts iR tlu
il-fahiibhiira/Q (New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1963) 672- 3; BP 1.12.27; 1.18.21 5.24.29;
9.22.36; 12.11.35; BrP 2.17 .34; 3. 7. 32; MP 6.39; 8.6; I 0.19; ViP 39.54; 50.23; 54.91; VP
1.17.28; 2.10.7; etc. Arbuda- RV 2.14.4; 8.3.19; 8.32.3; 8.32.26; AB 6.1; KB
2.11.2~
29.I; SB 13.4.3.9;JB 1.345; 2.222; 3.374; ASS 10.7; MBh 2.19.9; vanishes in Purit)as.
1 $B 13.5.4. 1-3; 11.5.5.13; AB 7.27; 7.34; 8.11; 8.21.
'
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SNAKES, SATTRAS AND THE MAHABHARATA 391
of this vendetta would explain why exerts all his powers to kill
Tak~aka
Parik$it; he is not simply the neutral medium for the working out of a
sage's curse.
In the Vedic literature the Kha1;u;lava forest is not infrequently named
as the site for sallras. 24 That Krishna and Arjuna raze this forest reveals
the same process of transformation from ritual to epic, aetiological myth
becoming apocalyptic narrative, that is seen in the epic generally. Thus a
Vedic yajlla that has only beneficial effects, (even if its original perfor
mance made snakes venomous,} turns into a destructive holocaust in the
epic.
There appear to be two causes for this transformation. The first is that
the Mahabharata version is also drawing on non-irtWta, abhicara tradi
tions. The black clothing, the non-Vedic provenance of the rite asserted
by the epic (MBh 1.47.6), the rite's efficacy being unique for J ana
mejaya, and the malicious effects all suggest the influence of sorcery.2s
The second cause for the transformation of the sarpasa/tra is motivated
by the differences in genre and expectation that separate ritual texts from
epic ones. Moreover, the sarpasattra in the Mahabharata forms the
opening chapters of an epic that has as its dominating theme vengeful,
apocalyptic practises, as shall be discussed below.
In the Mahabharata the site for the sarpasattra is specified as
Tak~a.Sila
(18.5.29). Why should Janamejaya hold his yajila at Tak$a.Sila? Jan
amejaya's choice is apparently based on the similarity in names: Tak
$asila as Ji/a, the rock In the Mahabharata there is
tak~akasya ofTa~aka.
only the suggestive statement that j anamejaya conquered Tak$a5ila, and
while he was away Utanka was duped by Tak$aka.26 Purar;iic traditions,
however, identify Tak$asila with Tak$a, the son of Bharata.27 The
historical sources notice large numbers of snakes and snake wor
shippers in the area.18
'' PB 25.3.26; JB 3.168; TA 4.1.1.
" On abhicara and its relation to Jrau/4 practise see Hans-Georg Tuntig, "The Indian
Sorcery called abhicara", WZKS 29 ( 1985) 69-117.
" 1.3.19; 1.3.179. Utanka then incitts Janamcjaya to pcrfonn the sarpasatlTa. MBh
3. •387 found only in Northern recension mss. lists as an abode of Talt$aka the Vitasta
river. But the Vitasta docs not flow through Taxila. For mor< on this question see 0.P.
Bharadvaj, "Janamejaya Parik$ita and Two Ancient Traditions ofKuruksctra", StuditJ in
of
thr Historical Geography Antimt India, Delhi: Sand~p. 1986, pp. 121-8.
"R 7.101.1; BrP3.63.191; VamP88.190.
,, Ontsikratos, the least reliable of those who traveled with Alexander, menlions two
snakes, one 80 cubits, the other 140 cubits (Strabo 15.1.28). For other accounts, sec J .
Fergusson. Trtt and Strptnl Worship (London: India Museum, 1868) 44- 7.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
392
CHRISTOPHER MINKOWSKI
Vedic Snake Lare
In creating the epic sarpasallra the "author" of the Mahabharata was
drawing on a vast repertory of snake lore, both Vedic and extra-Vedic.
It would be impossible to give a complete description of snake lore in
lndic literature herc.29 I will limit myself to some of the more prominent
features of snake lore in the Vedic literature.
In general terms snakes were regarded in the Vedic period just as they
were in later periods, as fearsome, potentially dangerous creatures. At
the same time snakes were treated as semi-divine beings who required
and received ritual propitiation.30 Individual snakes, however, were
regarded as contributors to the Vedic tradition, most notably Arbuda
Kadraveya, who served as the original Gravastut priest, and is tradition
ally listed as the ui of RV 10.94, the opening hymn of the Gravastut's
recitation. 31 According to Paficavirpsa Brahmar.ia, just as Arbuda
sloughed his old skin by these verses, so can a man slough off mortality
using them.3 2
Aside from Indra, who because of killing Vrtra is described in the
as a snake-killer (ahihan, RV 2. I 3.5; 2.19.3), the most
~gveda
celebrated bane of the snakes is the white horse of Pedu, Paidva, (RV
I.I 17.9; 1.118.9; 9.88.4). In Atharvaveda 10.4 the horse ofPedu is called
on to beat down the snakes with his hooves.33
In the frauta sacrifices the propitiation of snakes is performed with the
sarpaniima verses: namo astu sarpibhya~, ye lr.i ca prthivrm anu . ... 54 These
verses are used in the Agnicayana, in placing the golden man in the
footprint of the horse, to mark the place where the cayana will be built.)$
Among the oblations made on the fifth layer of the cayana are the
sarpiihutis, offerings to the directions and the snakes associated with each
,. For more detail see "'Srrp<nt-\Vorship", Encyloprdia of Rtligion and Ethirs 11.399-
423; Fergusson, Trtt and StTpmt Worship; J .Ph. Vogel, Indian Srrpml Lare (London:
Probsthain, 1928). For a comparative study sec r.1. Lurker, Adler UNI Schlallf.t (Tubingen,
1983), for a psycho-biological .iudy, Balaji Mundkar, Cult of tltt Srrpmt (Albany, 1983).
"' A.A. Macdonell, V!dir Mytholog,y (Strassburg: Triibner, 1897) 152-3.
" AB 6.1; KB 29.1; ASS 5.12; SSS 7.15.
" PB 4.9.4; 9.8.8; also JB 1.3.45; 2.222.
" AV 10.4.3, dva ivtta padojani . .• , is used cxtcnsiv•ly in ritual, both in Kausika Siitra
as described below and in the Sravana rite, (also described below), in a variant fonn dpa
lveta pada Jahi . ...
_ " TS 4.2.8.3; MS 2.7.15; VS 13.6-8; KS 16.15; $8 7.4.l.25ff; RV Khila 2.14.10;
ApSS 16.22.4; MSS 6.1.7.
The verses are also employrd in a grkra ritC' in >A'hat appears to be a more intrinsic
l)
use. Sec below.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SNAKES, SATTRAS AND THE MAHJBHJRATA 393
of those directions (TS 5.5.10.1-5 ).36 In TB 3.1.1.6-7, in a description of
the Nak$atrC$fi, the rite in which the 28 constellations are reverenced, a
lwma to the sarpas is prescribed for bringing the iiirefa constellation under
control, for the iiSrtfas are the constellation of the serpents.37 The
sarpasiimans have already been mentioned in their srauta use. They are
also used in making an amulet to ward off snakes.38
The sarpariijm (or siirpariijm) verses are linked to snake lore less
apparently. Consisting of RV 10.189.1-3,39 the verses arc used for
establishing the sacred fires at the Agnyadhana. 40 The rfi is traditionally
listed as sarparajm, the queen of serpents, identified with the earth, but
the verses make no mention of snakes. An alternative Jraula application of
these verses is in the Da5aratra, the Soma rite that lasts ten nights. On
the tenth day, after the priests creep back sarpanti, AB 5.23) from
(tala~
the performance of the patnisa111yiijas into the sadas, the Hotr recites the
sarpariijm verses. '1 There is, therefore, the suggestion of two old jokes,
both paronomastic, the tenth (daiama) day of the ten day rite (daiariiJra)
evocative of dai (daiati), and the acknowledged wordplay of the creep
root srp (sarpati) with sarpariijm.'2
In grhya rites the snakes are propitiated in the Sravai:ia, the Sarpabali,
and the Agrahayai:ii rites.43 There is great diversity in the practises
followed and the mantras recited, many of which arc unique to the
grhyasiitras. In general, the Sravai:ia rite is a homa performed in a fire
established on the full moon day of Sravai:ia ... A bali or offering on the
earth is made to the snakes every day until the full moon of
MargasI~a.
when the homa of Agrahayai:ia is performed. •s
"' ApSS 17.20.14; l\ISS 6.2.6; BSS 10.49.
" TB 3.1.4.7.
" SaB 2.3.3.
"\Vith variation al30 found at AV 6.31.1- 3; VS 3.6; TS 1.5.3.1; MS 1.6.1; KS 7.13;
AB 5.23; KB 27.4; SB 2.1.4.29.
"' In different schools either the Ahavaniya, Oak~iniigni, or Giirhapatya is ostabli·
•hed with this mantra. SB 2.1.4.29; KSS 4.9.4.14-5; ApSS 5.11.6; 5.13.6; 5.16.2; etc.
" A.SS 8.13.6; AB 5.23; KB 27.4; SSS 10.13.26; i\pSS 21.10.5.
" Creeping was once perhaps the characteristic manner of approaching all sattras. On
their originally secret performance and upa + rrP. soc Harry Falk, "Zurn Ursprung der
Sattra-Opfer'", 277.
"SGS 4.15, 17-8; AGS 2.1,3; PGS 2.14, 3.2; KhGS 3.2ff; HGS 2.16- 7; ApGS
18.5- 20.19. Stt M. \Vintemitz, "Der Sarpabali'', Mitttilungm dtS Anthrop. Gu. in ffitn 18
(1888) 25- 52, 250- 64.
" July-August, when the snakes become more troublesome, and people begin to sleep on
cots.
') PrcparatOI)' to rrdesrrndlng to sleeping on rhc earth.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
394
CHRISTOPHER MINKO\VSKI
In the Paraskara, Asvalayana, Apastamba, and Hirar;iyakeSi ver
sions of this rite the sarpanama verses are recited. In the Baudhayana
version (BGS 3.10), one recites the list of priests at the original sarpasallra
(BSS I 7.18) as a mantra. Thus the "myth" of the Vedic sarpasattra itself
takes on a ritual efficacy in warding off snakes.
In the Atharvaveda a typology of snakes is suggested in several sUktas,
where the black, striped, and white are distinguished, as are the prdiiku
(adder), the svaja (viper, cobra), the ratharvi (?), and the kasarrµ1a (?).48
The Kausika Siitra prescribes the use of these and other siiktas in charms
for driving away snakes or else for curing the venom of snakebite!'
Kausika 28.1-4 prescribes the use of AV 4.6 in case of snakebite, and in
this connection the verses arc to be recited after making obeisance to
Ta~aka.
In short there is a vast body of snake lore in Vedic literature, much of
it intended for the practical application of reducing the danger of
poisonous snakebite, a danger as real as ever in India today. That this
lore existed as a discrete element of the Vedic canon is suggested by the
descriptions of the pariplava of the Asvamedha. The fifth day of the ten
day cycle of stories and verse was devoted to a recounting of the
sarpavidya.48 The text of the sarpavidya is not provided in the Jrauta texts.
The commentators, who appear not to have had access to a continuous
commentatorial tradition, suggest that sarpavidya is the same as vi$avidya,
and that the sarpavidya must therefore refer to charms against snakebite. 49
In making this identification, the commentators are linking the ritual
sarpavidya with the vast network of Indian snake lore, the science of how
to avoid harm from snakes, which escapes the limits even of Sanskrit
literature.
But I would like to suggest that the sarpavidya also included a narrative
component. That is, in addition to charms against snakes, the sarpavidya
" AV 6.56; 10.4; 12.3.55- 60
" Kausika 28.1-4 (on AV 4.6); 29.1- 14 (on 5.13); 24.24ff (on 12.1); 29.28-9 (on
6.12)' 32.20ff (on 10.4); 50.17- 22 (on 6.56) .
.. SB 13.4.3.9. A$S 10.7.5; $$$ 16.2.13-5; P. Dumont, L 'Aivamtdha (Paris: 1927)
nos. 195- 7.
'' Gargya on ASS 10. 7.5 states that a sarpauid is one who knows the kiiJyapiya chann.s
against venom. Varadattasuta on SSS 16.2.15 <quatrs sarpauidfa with the giinuli or
kari.tan[rii lore. The sage K..Syapa is the fathrr of the snakes and is endowed with the
knowledge of the cures of their bites, ( l\.!Bh 1.18.13; also 1.39.1-20). NCC 4.148-9 lists a
Kiilyapiyasal'Jlhita, a medical treatise on the cure of poisons through """'''"'· It is also
called the and appcan, therefore, to overlap with the well-known
Garu<;lapaiicak~ari,
garuefi vidJii, the science of warding off or curing snake bite, found in GP 19. I can find no
references to a kalikan[yci iiir.!fO.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SNAK!o:S, SATTRAS AND THE .lttAHABH.:fRATA 395
also included stories about snakes. This can be argued purely from the
narrative content of the recitations on the other days of the pi.riplava."" I
further suggest that the Mahabharata became the repository for that
narrative snake lore. Certainly it cannot be disputed that the Mahab
harata provides us with the most extensive collection of stories about
snakes that we have in Sanskrit literature.
Snake Lore in the Mahabharata
A majority of the sustained snake tales are collected 1n the Pau~ya,
Puloman, and Astika chapters of the Adi parvan. In the Pau~ya
parvan, Utaitka is robbed of his earrings by He travels to
Tak~aka.
Nagaloka, praises the snakes, retrieves his earrings, but subsequently
J
urges anamejaya to destroy all of the snakes in a snake sacrifice ( 1.3.80-
195). In the Puloman parvan a poisonous snake kills the wife of the
Bhargava Ruru. He revives her, but makes a practise thereafter of killing
all snakes he happens on (1.8-9). Ruru nearly kills a sage trapped by
curse in the body of a lizard (t/uTJefubha) , (which curse was provoked by
frightening a fellow sage with a snake). The lizard discourages Ruru's
genocidal program, and reminds him of Janamejaya's sarpasatlra and
Astika's intervention ( 1.10-1 1) . Ruru has never heard the story of
Astika and goes off in search of a narrator. In the Astika parvan the
Kadrii and Vinata story is told, including the wager on the color of
Uccail)sravas' tail, the curse ofKadrii's sons, the birth ofGaruc;la and his
quest for the Soma (1.14-4-0),51 the story ofSe~a (1.32), the churning of
the ocean (1.15-7), and the machinations of the snakes to obtain the
birth of their savior, Astika ( 1.33- 44). Thus all three parvans lead by
different paths to the story of the sarpasattra.
Other snake lore is spread throughout the epic. It would not be
possible to list all of it here.52 There are descriptions of the Nagaloka,
Bhogavati (5.101 ).53 Lists of serpents are given in various places: the
serpents born of Kadrii ( 1.31 ), the serpents killed in Janamejaya's sattra
"' SB 13.4.3. Sec R.D. Karmarkar, "The Piiriplava at the Asvamedha", ABORI 33
( 1952) 27- 40. On the eighth and ninth days the itiloiiiavtda and the pvrW)avrd4.,
res~tivcly, are recited.
' Another version of the story is told in the late-Vedic Supan:iidhyiya. For biblio
graphy see Gonda, Vtdic litttal•rt (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1975) 47- 8. It is evident
that the Astika parvan of the Mahabharata becomes the repository for this earlier
narrative tradition.
" Sec E.\V, Hopkins, Epic Mythology (Strassburg: Trubn<r, 1915) 23-9; Vogel, Indian
Strf:"I Lort, 47-92; SOrcnson, Index, 492- 4.
' Also I. App. 72.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
396
CHRISTOPHER MINKOWSKI
(1.52), the snakes who attend on Varui;ia (2.9), the snakes in Bhogavati
(5 . I 0 I), the snakes who welcome Sesa back from incarnation as
Balarima (14.4.14-5).
The Mahabharata also records technique for curing snakebite.
Ka5yapa learns the u4akat}I vidyii from Brahma ( 1.18.11). In the
~
tlrthayiitrii sections pilgrimage spots associated with snakes are listed, e.g.
Sarpadevi (3.82.14). A visit to the t lrtha Mai;iinaga renders a pilgrim
impervious to snakebite (3.82.92). Similar claims are made for Naga
dhanvan, the home ofVasuki (9.36.29-32). Furthermore, mantras to cure
snakebite are used in the Mahabharata.ss Most pertinent for this study
are the mantras cited in the Astika parvan ( 1.53.21- 2), where Astika is
called on to protect the reciter from snakes. Similarly RV Khila 2. l.5-
6l6 uses the memory of Astika and Janamejaya's sattra itself as a charm
against snakebite. Thus the story about the sarpasattra takes on a ritual
application in the same way that the "story" of the Vedic sarpasattra in
PB 25.15 and BSS 17 .18 is reused as a mantra in the Baudhayana
grhyasiitra version of the Sarpabali.
Snakes and Kurus
Why should so much snake lore be collected in the Mahabharata? Since
it is a book about everything, it is perhaps not surprising to see some
description of serpents as of many other creatures. But there are more
particular reasons for the inclusion of the snake lore, especially at the
beginning of the epic.
To begin with, it is clear that the Kuru dynasty has a long and close
association with serpents. There is, first of all, a systematic overlapping of
snake names with Kuru and Bharata names. Thus we encounter serpents
named Janamejaya, Dhanal}ljaya, Kauravya, Dilipa, and
Dhrtar~1ra,
Moreover, there are accounts of dynastic links between Kurus
Nahu~a.s'
and snakes. Arjuna is carried off to the world of the Nagas by Uliipi, a
Naga princess ( 1.206), on whom he fathers a son Iravant (6.86.5ff).
Uliipi later saves Arjuna's life, and revives his son Babhriivahana
( 14. 79-81 ). The serpent Aryaka recognizes in Bhima his grandson's
,. He is subsequently brib<d by Takµlta so that he will not use it on Pariqit
1.39.1- 20.
» sorpjiV<J11a rruJJJi 14.82.2; and 8.27.83 which cites from AV 10.4.9.
" = MBh 1°463.1-5, found in most Northern m.ss.
" Dhrtar~1ra 1.41.131; Janamcjaya 2.9.10; Dhana!Jljaya 1.3 l.5; Kauravya l.31.13;
Dilipa 5.101.15; Nab~ 1.31.9.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SNAKES, S.4TTRAS AND THE MAHJBHJRAT.4 397
grandson (dauhitradauhitra) (I.App. 72.10-11).58 Furthermore, there are
episodes describing the interaction of Kurus with snakes. Nahu$a
becomes one (5.11- 17; 13.103); Arjuna marries one (1.206); Yudhi$ihira
argues dharma with one (3. 175--8);~ Janamejaya employs one as purohita
(1.3.10- 16).
There is also a dynastic vendetta, begun by Arjuna who kills
Tak$aka's wife (1.218.1- 11); Tak$llka's son ASvasena, barely escaping
the Khandava fire, tries to kill Arjuna by becoming one of Karr;ia's
arrows. Arjuna is saved only by Krishna and kills ASvasena (8.66.1- 24).
Tak$llka kills Parik$it, Arjuna's grandson ( 1.45-6). Janamejaya, Parik
$it's son tries to kill Tak$aka (1.47-53). Astika ends the vendetta
(1.53).
It is natural enough that the great story of the Bharata war would
attract other story traditions about those heroes, especially considering
the genealogical preoccupations of the Sanskrit epic. Then again, the
ritual setting is customary for recounting genealogy and the feats of
ancestors. The Asvamedha allows time in the piiriplava for the king to
hear bards tell stories of ancient kings and of the Yajamana as well.60
ASvalayana grhyasiitra 4.6.6 prescribes the recitation of ltihasa and
Purar;ia at a ceremony to expiate the loss of an elder, a rite which the
10
sarpasattra of Janamejaya can be likened, in that it is for the sake of a
father's death.
But it can further be argued that the Mahabharata version of the
sarpasattra belongs in the epic. I makes sense, artistically and
1
thematically, to begin with it. Embedding the epic in an apocalyptic rite
that only some survive prefigures the theme of the epic as a whole: the
passing of an age, the eradication of a race, the survival of a few. Parik$it
is the sole survivor of the bygone era in the following age. He was saved
by the intervention of Krishna. That he should be killed by Tak$llka,
who is then saved from another holocaust by another intervention, this
time by Astika, makes the two story traditions interlock. Moreover, it is
Tak$aka's son, Asvasena, who is saved by intervention from another
genocidal fire, that of the Khar;ic;lavadaha, only to be killed on the
battlefield at Kuruk$etra.
The sarpasatlra is not the only apocalyptic rite in the Mahabharata:
"' There is also some paralld bctwe<:n Kadru producing 1000 snake cg~s. 1,vs. \'inata's
two) (l.14.5- 15) and Gandhiin-s abortion that becomes JOO sons ("' · Kunti's three)
(1.107).
w ('(one other than Nahu$a.
"'' Dumont l.',4framrdha, nos. J60ff.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
398
CHRISTOPHER MINKOWSKI
Parasara. undertakes a Ra~asa sallra in order to avenge the death of his
father at the hands of a Ra~asa, but is halted by Atri before all
are destroyed ( 1.172). Baka Dalbhi undertakes a rite to tum
Ra~akas
the kingdom ofDhrtar~Jra to dust, but this rite is also halted (9.40.1-
25).
In fact the Bharata war is itself depicted as a sacrifice of weapons •··
(Jastrayajifa), with Krishna serving as Brahman and Adhvaryu.•1 The
apocalyptic rite is thus an organic component of the Mahabharata's
thematics.
Few would dispute that the Mahabharata has the passing of the heroic
age as its main theme. M. Biardeau sees in the Mahabharata an
enactment of the Purai:iic eschatological myth of the pralaya.62 If one
follows this thinking one discovers that there are two survivors of the full
scale mythological pralaya mentioned in the Mahabharata, Markai:it;leya,
who figures prominently in the Vana parvan (3.17- 207), and S~a. the
snake who holds up the world, whose name, "remainder", underscores
his position as survivor.63
On the Formation of the Epic
It is possible, therefore, to see how the sarpasallra became the frame story
for the Mahabharata, that is, by thematic attraction. By this means the
snake lore found in the Pau~ya, Puloman, and Astika parvans was
brought into the epic as well, for it forms part of the sarpasallra myth
cycle. These three parvans converge on the sarpasal/ra, as does the story of
the narration of the epic.
In keeping with these claims about the formation of the opening
chapters of the Mahabharata it is necessary to re-examine a widely held
view of the growth of the Mahabharata, namely the theory of"Bhrguiza
tion" advanced by V.S. Sukthankar. The major portion ofSukthankar's
study, "The Bhrgus and the Bharata",64 is devoted to collecting all the
story material from the Mahabharata about the members of the Bhrgu
race, Bhrgu, Cyavana, Aurva, Ruru, J amadagni, and others, but
especially Rama Jamadagni or Para5urama. Sukthankar then makes
" 5.139.29- 53. Similarly 7.80.22-3; 9.59.25; 12.99.12-13. The notion is central to
Hihebeitel's study of the epic; The Ritual of Battle (Ithaca: Comdl, 1976).
" M. Biardcau, "Etudes de Mythologie Hindou< IV, BEFEO 63 (1976) 203- 217.
" Biardeau, "EMH I", Publications de l'EFEO 128, Paris, 1981, 170. Also S.S.
Dang<, "Sesa- the Cosmic Serpent", Purii~a 7.1 (1965) 144-9.
" "The Bhrgus and the Bhiirata: a Text-Historical Study", ABORI 18 (1936-7)
1- 76.
Google rron1
Origi~al
Digll1Ze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
399
SNAKES. SATTRAS AND THE MAHifBHifRATA
some conclusions about the history of the Mahabharata, among them
that "there is a consciQus- nay--deliberate weaving together or rather
stitching together of the Bharata legends with the Bhargava myths" ,6~
that a Bhargava influence shaped the epic in its formative pcriod,66 and
· that this influence is tendentious, conscious, and self-serving.
The theory of "Bhrguization" has apparently been embraced
"Dy epicists gcncrally,6' in recent years most notably by Goldman.68
There are two presuppositions of Sukthankar's theory, however, that arc
troubling. The first is that there existed at the time of the formation of
the Mahabharata a group of Bhargavas who had a distinct, clan-based
ideology and mythology, and who succeeded in taking over the redaction
and transmission of the Mahabharata. The second is that the Bhrgu
story material has no connection with the Bharata story, that it is
"entirely foreign to the plan of the original saga of the Bharatas",69 and
that its inclusion in the epic can only be attributed to "ulterior
motives'' .70
As to the first presupposition, neither Sukthankar nor any subsequent
proponent of this theory, so far as I have been able to discover, has
presented any epigraphical, textual or other historical evidence indepen
dent of the epic that demonstrates the existence of a distinct Bhargava
movement.
As to the second, there is a demonstrable connection between the
Bhrgu myth cycle and the Bharata story, and that is the thematic
parallel: th.e passing of an age, the extermination of a race, intervention
and survival. This is evident in the Para5urama story itself, which takes
place at the end of the Tretayuga, and where the K$atriya race is
eradicated twenty-one times before Para5urama is persuaded to stop
(3.115-7). In the Aurva story, which takes place at the close of the
" Suk1hankar 70 .
.. ibid. 71.
" F. Wclkr, "Who were 1he Bhrguids"? ABORI 18 (1936-7) 286- 320, A.P.
Karmarkar, "Or. V.S. Sukthankar's Theory of lhe Bhrguisation of the Original Bharata
and 1he lighl it throws on the Dravidian Problem", ABORI 20 (1939) 21-4, NJ. Shende,
"The Authorship of the Mahabharata", ABORI 24 (1943) 67- 82, R.N. Oandekar, "The
tvlahabhara1a", ABORI 24 (1943) 67-82, R.N. Dandekar, "The Mahabharata: Origin
and Grow1h", Univttsity of Ceylon Rtvitw 12.2 ( 1954) 65- 85.
" "AkpavraQa vs. Sn1<nQa as Narrators of lhe Legend of Bhargava Rama .. . ",
ABORI 53 ( 1970) 161- 73, "Viilmiki and the Bhrgu Connection",JAOS 96.1 ( 1976) 97-
101, Gods, Pritsts, and fVorriors (New York: Columbia Univ., 1977). And yel lhe valuc of
Goldman's own work on the Bhrgus, especially Cods, Pritsls, on4 Warriors, d0C1 not resl on
1hc validity of Sukthankar's claims about Bhrguization.
" Sukthankar 70.
" ibid. 67.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
400 CHRISTOPHER MINKOWSKI
Krtayuga, the of the world are blinded by Aurva, who then
K~atriyas
undertakes to destroy the whole world by tapas before he is stopped by
the intervention of his ancestors ( 1.169-71).
Other apocalyptic practises fill the epic-the burning of the Khar.i
c;lava forest (1.214-25), the Rlilqasa rite ofParasara (1.172), Ruru's vow
to kill all the snakes in the world ( 1.8-12), Ayodhyan Pariqit's plan to
.kill all the frogs in the world (3.191 }, ASvatthaman's unleashing of the
.J( all-consuming brahmastra (10.13), and so on.
In all these stories the same thematic elements are discernible, the
intention of causing total annihilation, then intervention and survival.
They bear on the main story of the Bharatas, which must always have
had epochal themes. It lacks sensibility to maintain that they bear no
relation.
Furthermore, more precedent needs to be adduced for the notion that
a popular epic is subject to the kinds of manipulation suggested by the
theory of Bhrguization. What collective audience would readily accept
the reworking of their favorite stories so that they were freighted with an
unfamiliar ideology? Neoplatonic allegorical interpretations of Homer
had no impact on the "effective history" of the Iliad and Odyssey. Why
should we assume that in India a distinct group could take hostage the
'/ product of an entire culture, an epic, moreover, that itself suggests a
history of conforming to the interests of its listeners?
I have no doubt that the Bhargava story cycle fits together as a
mythological system, as Goldman has shown. No doubt its origins were
separate from the Bharata story. I suggest only that, based on what we
know now of the dynamics of traditional oral narrative, we reconsider
the process that brought the Bhrgu material into the Mahabharata, and
that we lay aside what amounts to a conspiracy theory of epic composi
tion.
The motif of eradication of snakes by fire is not unique to the
Mahabharata or even Indic literature. Winternitz has already remarked
on the comparable folklore and folk practise in Central Europe, where
legends of the incineration of snakes in ritual fires were once current. 71
The larger themes of the Mahabharata, the passing of an age and the
extinction of a race, are shared by other epic traditions.7 2 But in the
artful rendition of the Mahabharata story, the story of snakes and the
story of heroes are made to interlock and to complement each other.
" "The Serpent Sacrifice Mentioned in the !'vlahabharata'', JBBRAS 2.1 ( 1926) 74-
91.
" Ser for example, Hiltebeitel, Ritual of Batl/r 299- 335.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1tlze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
IN DEFENCE OF A DEVIOUS DIVINITY
K~$l':JA:
BIMAL KRISHNA MATILAL
I. The Enigma
K11r;aa is an enigma in the Mahiibhiirala. He represents the most confusing
kind of moral enigma not only in the epic, but also in the whole of Hindu
ideal of dharma. In the icons, he is represented as the Dark Lord, an
attractive appearance with a face bearing an enigmatic, mysterious and
mischievous smile, the smile, very much unike the famous smile found in
the icons of the Buddha. The Buddha's smile, in striking contrast with
that of Knr;aa, is straightforward, it radiates with compassion, calmness
and peace, it strikes confidence in the minds of the viewers. The ethica.I
doctrine of the Buddha is also straightforward. It is novel, but non
complex. The ethical doctrine of Knr;aa by contrast is different,
sometimes it appears to be just the opposite.
K11r;aa is a riddle, a paradox. If anything, he appears to be a devious
diplomat. Why should he, as he does, claim to be the Supreme Being, the
Ultimate Reality, the Inner Controller of every being? If he is God, then
God must be a great diplomat, greatly devious, in whom diplomacy was
the other name of duplicity and fraud. Western Indologists, by and
large, have been very critical of Knr;aa 's ethics and politics. The following
may sum up the opinion of the majority of Western Indologists as well as
some West-inspired Indian Indologists.
"A bizarre figure"! A Yadava chieftain who looks and acts not uncom
monly like a mortal- and a very ordinary mortal at that- and who has the
incredible effrontery to say that he is a god! A cynic who preaches the
highest morality and stoops to practice the lowest tricks, in order to achieve
his mean ends! An opportunist who teaches an honest and godfearing man
to tell a lie, the only lie he had told in his life! A charlatan who declares
himself to be the god of gods, descended from the highest heaven for
establishing righteousness on earth, and advises a hesitating archer to strike
down a foe who is defenceless and crying for mercy"!'
' The extract is from p. 95 of V.S. Sukthankar's posthumous publiration, On tht
l•1taning of tht MaM.hhiirata, Bombay 1975, where the source was not m<ntioned.
Google rron1
Origi~al
oig1llze1lby UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
402
BIMAL KRISHNA MATILAL
Such op1n1on about Kni:ia is not simply restricted to Western
Indology, the Jains and the Buddhists were also highly critical of the
ethics of Kni:ia.
In fact, the author of the Mahabharata himself supplied a strikingly
candid list of the misdeeds perpetrated by Knr:ia through the mouth of
dying Duryodhana. When Duryodhana was struck down by Bhima in an
unlawful manner (it was de facto hitting below the belt breaking the
ethical code of the mace-fight), and was dying, he took Knr:ia to task for
his questionable part in the battle of Kuru14ctra. In a way Duryodhana
was right. According to him, Kni:ia broke the moral code of Dharma in
more ways than one, whenever he found it suitable for ensuring victory
for the Pa1;u;lavas. Duryodhana called Knr:ia, son of a slave for his father
Vasudeva was sort of a slave of King Ka!Jlsa.
Duryodhana continued to point out, that it was Knr:ia who advised
Arjuna to place Sikhar:ic;lin in front while attacking Bhi$ma, knowing that
the grandsire would not fight Sikhar:ic;lin and would let himself be
mortally wounded without resistance. It was K11r:ia again who prevailed
upon YudhiHhira to utter that deadly lie which finally led to the killing
of the great warrior and revered teacher Dror:iacarya. Even the death of
Kari:ia was brought about by Arjuna who attacked him in a cowardly
manner when the former was engaged in lifting his chariot-wheel from
the mud in which it got stuck. And it was Knr.ia who persuaded Arjuna
to kill the invincible Karr;ia in this manner. It was Knr.ia again who
instigated Satyaki to butcher Bhiirisravas when his right arm had been
cut off. Thus the misdeeds of Knr.ia were well-known and that they
cannot be justified on moral grounds was, on the surface, very obvious to
any religious believer in traditional India. Can any of these be defended?
The contradictions in K11i:ia's activities as well as in his professed
ethical doctrines are self-evident. The Hindu believers were not unaware
of them, but still they had been undaunted by such contradictions. The
list of contradictions supplied in the above extract stands out, no matter
what. But still a tradition that is just about 2000 years old has
unconsciously believed that these contradictions must have either some
deeper significance, or some plausible explanation. In fact, Knr:ia is not a
god, but the God for the Hindus, and yet he is very different from the
Go<l of Judea-Christian tradition, or the Allah of Islam. I am not
suggesting that there are many gods in the worlds today, but obviously
there are many conceptions of God which have been around and well
entrenched in world religions.2 So we may ask, what was the Hindu
2 For an rarlier comment on the different conc,C'ptions of God in the Indian tradition,
sec my Logical and Ethical /nuts of Rtligious Btlitf, Calcutta, 1982, pp. 23- 41.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
IN DEFENCE OF A DEVIOIJS DIVINITY 403
K~~~A:
conception of God that was enshrined in the Knt;1a of the Ma/W.hlrii.rata?
Let us select a typical case of almost unpardonable violation of the
moral principal by Knt;1a from the story of the Malrii.blrii.rata. In many
cases, Knt;1a unquestionably appears to be the person who "preaches the
highest morality and stoops to practice the lowest tricks to achieve his
mean ends". It is indeed a mystery how a moral hero or a god who
should be impartial and whose behaviour should be morally irreprehen
si ble, can perpetrate such acts. However, let us take Knr:ia to be a
human being with superior intellect and with a superior sense of justice,
fairness and moral responsibility. Then we may begin to understand the
puzzle a little.
The battle of Kuruk$etra is the focal point of the Malrii.bhifrata, and
certainly Knt;1a played a very important role in this battle. He did not
fight, but certainly the battle was won by the Pat;1<;!avas because of
Kr$t;1a's presence on the Pat;1<;!ava side, because of his support and advice.
He was the supreme manipulator, who did not shoot a single arrow or
use a single weapon to kill anyone, but all the main characters were
killed by his superior strategy through behind-the-door manipulation.
Knt;1a as we have seen above had something to do with the killing of
each of the following heroes: Bhisma, Drot;1a Kan:ia and Duryodhana.
And each time it was through a means that violated the well-known
moral codes of any battle between K$atriyas. Duryodhana was
absolutely right in his accusation of Knr;ia. Even the author of the
Mahii.bhii.rata agreed, and we are told that Duryodhana after his death
ascended to heaven before the Pat;1<;!avas.
II. The Just War?
'[he battle of Kuruk$etra was described as a dharmayuddlra. But in what
sense was it a dharmayuddha? How should we translate the expression
"Dharmayuddha"? The word "dharma" is an enigmatic term. According
to standard interpretation "dharmayuddha" can be translated as "the war
of righteousness". It has the resonance of the concept of the "just war" in
Christian tradition. The first verse of the Bhagavad-Gita describes the
battle-field as "Dharmak$etra"s-the field where the seeds of moral
merit/demerit are sown in order to bring forth the harvest of Karma or
just desert. But what exactly is the point of the imagery? Sometimes, a
war is described as a case of "just war", when it is undertaken with a
view to protect certain moral and religious values. Was the battle of
' The firs1 line runs as follows: d/uJrmaqtlrt kuruA:/tlrt samaV<ta )'•.JUlsava~". &c BiuJgat'(Jd
Gita. any «li1ion.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
404
BIMAL KRISHNA MATILAL
Kuruqctra an example of this kind of "just war"? This has no easy
answer. It is a very simplistic assumption that the world can be divided
into black and.white, that whenever a war, or even a just war breaks out,
the two opposite sides would represent unalloyed good and unalloyed
evil. In actual cases, it is almost impossible to decide that one side fights
for the just cause while the other side represents the absolute evil. Good
and evil, right and wrong, are never given in their unalloyed states-a
fact, which along with the other well-known questions about whether
such values are relative or absolute, situational or universal makes it
almost impossible for us to give any uncontroversial verdict of moral
judgement. Thus it is that I find it impossible to agree with those who
wish to interpret the battle in the Epic as an allegory of the battle
between good and evil. All we can say that the Pir;tQava side was the
"preferred" side, preferred by the author or authors and readers alike,
while the Kaurav a side was not so. There was greatness on both sides,
both tried to maintain a set of moral principles and projects, a set of
values and virtues. And there were many evil acts perpetrated by both
sides, both stooped to meanness, to devious and devilish strategics, to
conquer. But perhaps one side was more abrasive and more arrogant
than the other. And if we put the immoral acts and wickedness of both
sides, the Par;i9avas and the Kauravas, on the weighing scales, it may be
that the latter will not be heavier than the former, except perhaps for a
couple of greatly grotesque, grossly unjust acts by Duryodhana. The
world in fact cannot be divided into black and white, but it contains only
innumerable shades of grey areas. The epic represents the world exactly
as such-paradoxically there was more realism in the epic than some of
our present-day realistic novels. The situation actually presents us with
what Isaac Levi4 has called "Hard Choices" under unresolvable moral
dilemmas.
If the Mahabharata imparts a moral lesson, it emphasizes again and
again, the ever-elusive character, the unresolved ambiguity of the
concept of dlzarma. role was not to resolve the ambiguity but to
K~r;ia's
heighten the mystery, which offered only temporary glimpses of the
human and moral realities lying behind the stories, myths, allegories and
illustrations.
I believe the battle was called dharmayuddha in a technical sense. One
technical sense of this many-faceted word dharma is this. It means the
code of conduct agreed upon and observed by a particular group or
• Isaac Levi, Hartl Choias, Cambridge, 1986.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
or
405
K~S~A: JN DEFENCE A DEVIOUS DIVINITY
community. Dharma (in this sense) is what one should or should not do in
a particular domain of human behaviour. In the beginning of the battle
of Kuruk$etra, in the we get a long list of Dhannas
Bhl~-Parvan,
comprising the code of conduct of each when they are engaged
K~atriya
in a battle with the adversary. Both sides agreed to fight a war on the
basis of fairness by observing a number of familiar rules and practices on
humanitarian grounds. Nobody, for example, should fight and kill a
person who is running away from the battlefield, nobody should attack
an unarmed and defenceless person, and so on and so forth-rules that
are very similar to that of the war conventions prevalent in any civilized
society today. Fighting must be between equals, a charioteer should fight
another charioteer, horsemen should fight horsemen. It may be that this
battle was called dharmaywidha because both sides agreed to observe this
dharma.)
It is of course clear that most of these rules were violated at different
crucial moments of the war, and on the Par.icjava side KnQa undoub
tedly was instrumental in the decision to violate the norms. Hence, he
seemed be the devious manipulator, without whose help, the battle
10
would not have been won by the Pai:icjavas.
Suppose Kf$i:ta was playing the role of the omnipotent lord. What
could have happened? Was it possible for him to end the battle of
Kuruk$etra in one day? An omnipotent lord could have done it. After
all, he wanted the Par.icjavas to win. At every stage, we see him very
unsure and concerned about the outcome of the battle. He knew about
the superior strength of the rival side, and hence was afraid that the fight
might be lost. Therefore he was planning and plotting all the time to
avoid disasters for the Pai:icjavas. This certainly dOf!s not testify to the fact
of his being the omnipotent lord. Nor does the trickery which he
frequently resorted to on behalf of the Par.icjavas, prove his God-like
moral superiority.
Take the case of KnQa's advice to to tell a lie- the only
Yudhi$~hira
lie he had told in his life- the lie that was calculated to kill the great
teacher and fighter Droi:ia.6 l.his was perhaps one of the darkest deeds of
) ~<' thr 1'8hi~ma .. Par,·a··, of the .~-lahiibhQrata. <'rlriral edition. Poor1a. I ha\'<' dis<,1ss«d
this iS<uc in my Yukti, ,Viti 0 Dharma (in Bengali). Calcutta. 1988, pp. 13- 16.
• Yadairau~alJl Drovam iiciiryam ckalJl
Ohn1adyumncnabhyatikramya dharmam
Rathopasthc priyagatarp \·iSastam
tadii naialjlS< vijayaya San.iava, verse 143 1.1.143.
"I did r1ot hope hope for ,·ictory, 0 Sailjaya. \.\'}1cr1 I heard tl1at tlte teacher. Dr,>r,la. v.·as
slat1g}1tt'rt-d by Oh~1adyun'111a. Dharma \vas thus ,·iolatc.~d for Dro1.1a at ll)al 1i1ne \\•as
si11i11g in his rhariot tinarmed."
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
406
BIMAL KRISHNA MATILAL
our "dark Lord" Knt;ia. One question that is not often asked is this:
Knt;ia was almost as venerable to the author or the story-tellers as he is
to us today, but then why did he (or they) not, using the unbounded
freedom of any story-teller or narrator, formulate the story in such a way
that would have made Knt;ia a patently obvious moral hero without
such glaring blemishes in his character? Why thls deliberate attempt at
mystifying the issues, if this is what it is? I believe the answer is not very
obvious, but there arc implicit hints scattered all over the text, hints that
might be collected and put together in such a way as would dissolve a
greater part of the mystery. In fact there may be alternative ways of
interpreting the text that we have received in the tradition and hence I
would suggest only one such possible alternative which may not seem to
be improbable at all.
Ill. Truth and the Q)lestion of Survival
Drot;ia was a great hero, venerable teacher of both the Kauravas and the
Pat;ic;lavas but his behaviour had not always been ideal.' He was, to be
sure, instrumental in bringing about the inglorious death of the boy
warrior Abhimanyu, who was killed being attacked jointly by seven
great warriors including Drot;ia. And Drot;ia was the ring-leader of the
inglorious Seven! So he had already violated the dharma i.e. the moral
code of warfare. It was highly immoral to kill a boy who was fighting
most heroically all alone against the seven formidable adversaries.
It is interesting to note here another earlier episode in the Adiparvan
for it has implications for moral lessons or moral teachings of the
Kauravas and the Pai:ic;lavas. Dror:ia was a Brahmin teacher, but he was
an expert in archery and the art of warfare. He was appointed by
Dhrtara$fra as the teacher of all the princes, the Kauravas and the
Par:ic;lavas. He was apparently appointed to teach the art of warfare, how
to fight and kill, but not any moral lessons or war ethics. Once Bhi$ma,
the grand-father, wondered: who was taking care of the moral lessons to
be imparted to the princes, the Kauravas and the Pat;ic;lavas when they
were growing up? He first thought it was the duty of Dror:ia. So he
approached Droi:ia and enquired whether the latter was teaching
moral lessons to the princes, along with the lessons in archery. Droi:ia
answered in the negative. When Bhisma insisted further, Dror:ia went to
the paymaster Dhrtara$Jra and asked. Dhrtaranra said that Dror:ia's
' Sec Dro~a-Parva of the .>Ja/Uibhiirata, critical edition, Poona.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
407
KJ1.$NA: IN DEFENCE OF A DEVIOt.:S DIVINITY
appointment was solely for the purpose of teaching archery, and the art
of fighting and killing, and he should not bother about teaching any
moral lesson. This apparently satisfied DroQa. This also throws some
light upon the character fact we should recall when we
ofDhrtar~Jra-a
analyse the character of the blind king as well as his characteristic
repentance in the Adiparva.
The episode unveils at least two facts. (a) The princes did not have
any formal teaching in morality and ethics. The PaQQavas probably
received it from to whom Kauravas did not pay any heed. (b)
BhI~ma,
DrolJa himself did not have much regard for moral lessons. His
behaviour was generally within the bounds of morality, but sometimes
he transgressed them. One may be reminded here of the story of
Ekalavya, in which DroQa's behaviour was abominable.
Briefly, the story is this. Ekalavya belonged to the lower caste, but he
wanted to be one of the best archers of his time. He approached Drol)a,
the most well-known teacher of archery at that time, but the lauer
refused because Eakalvya was born in a lower caste and Drol)a's
brahminical background found it undignified. In other words, DroQa
lacked the generosity, open-mindedness and other moral virtues which a
proper Brahmin (a sage like Gautama in Chandogya for
Upani~ad,
example) should have possessed. It is well-known that sage Gautama did
not reject Satyakama (who came to study under him) when the latter
said that he was the son of his unwed mother and hence he was unable to
tell his father's name or his family name. Gautama embraced the child
with affection, accepted him as a student and decided that he must
qualify as a Brahmin for his exemplary virtues, such as truthfulness. But
DrOIJa was no Gautama. Being rejected, Ekalavya went to a secluded
place in the forest, created an image of DrolJa and, accepting that image
as his guru for ritualistic initiation as well as inspiration, started learning
archery all by himself! He was later discovered by Drol)a and his pupils
(the princes) who went to forest one day on a hunting expedition. DrolJa
saw to his uuer surprise that Ekalavya's self-taught archery had been so
good that he could excel Arjuna, his most favourite pupil. He played one
of the dirtiest tricks upon young Ekalvya, who still claimed Dro1Ja to be
his guru (in archery) in absentia. DrolJa claimed his guru-dakii!Jii (present
for the teacher after the completion of the training) from Ekalavya. He
asked the latter to cut off his right thumb and make a present of it to his
adopted guru, DrOIJa, which Ekalavya did immediately by showing his
exemplary courage, integrity and truthfulness. Of course, this meant the
end of Ekalavya as an archer. In the background of such adorable self
sacrifice, DroQa's heartlessness and total absence of any moral sensitivity
in his character had been shown in sharp relief. Tradition justly
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
408 KRISHNA MATILAL
Bl~tAL
condemned Droi:ia and glorified Ekalavya who excelled not only in
physical strength or archery but also in moral virtues. Let us now return
to the battle of
Kuruk~etra.
On the fifteenth day of the battle Droi:ia became almost irresistible in
his attempt to kill the entire army of the Pai:ic;lavas and obtain victory
for the Kauravas. Koi:ia saw it in the beginning: If Dror;ia could not be
stopped that day, battle would end in another way. What could not have
been done by strength apparently, was accomplished through a trick.
And it was Kni:ia's trick. Bhima killed an elephant called ASvatthama
and proclaimed that he had killed Asvatthama (which was also the name
of Dror;ia's only son}. Kor;ia saw a chance. He knew about Droi:ia's love
for his son and realized that the news of his son's death would have at
least temporarily made him vulnerable. But the son was not dead. Dror;ia
ignoring the rumour continued to fight. He also started killing a number
of Par;ic;lava soldiers while they were running away from the battlefield.
So the moral code of dharma was again broken and the Dharmayuddha
turned into an Adhannayuddha. Some celestial sages, who were watching
the battle, approached Dror;ia in their subtle bodies and took him to task
for stooping to meanness and violating the ethical code of warfare.
Instead of setting an example of greatness, the conduct of the great aciirya
became again abominable. Being scolded by the celestial sages Dror;ia
paused for a moment. Kor;ia was looking for this opportunity. Dror;ia
wanted to know whether the rumour about the death of his son was true.
If told him he would have believed it. Knr;ia already had
Yudhi~Jhira
convinced that since the life of everybody on the Par:u;lava
Yudhi~Jhira
side was at stake and the dream of final victory would certainly be
shattered, YudhiHhira would have to make a compromise and tell a
tactical lie. The trick worked and Droi:ia was killed.
Why do we feel quite embarrassed and upset about this rather sordid
affair? There was plenty of such affairs described in the epic from the
beginning to the end, and both sides had their share to contribute. But
why is this particularly painful for us? I believe the answer lies in the fact
that the two most important and presumably venerable characters are
involved-one is who is supposed to be an incarnation of the
Kr~i:ia,
Lord and presumably the upholder ofj ustice, morality and dharma, and
the other is who is also Dharma incarnate, who is not
Yudhi~1hira,
supposed to deviate from his high and lofty ideal of truthfulness. And yet
it is a classic case of backsliding. lie was not even a "white
Yudhi~1hira's
lie", it was the "darkest of the lying to deceive his
dark",~eliberately
teacher and thereby ensuring the opponent's death and victory for his
own side. It was a deliberate lie calculated to regain his throne. What
can be a more selfish goal than this? And was persuaded to
Yudhi~Jhira
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
409
Kl:($Jl;A: IN Dl::t'F.NCE OF A OEVIOL'S DIVINITY
take this course! I believe this exposes one of the fatal weaknesses in
Yudhi$lhira's own character. The author's characterization became
more lively by the portrayal ofs uch paradoxicality and conflict of values.
Yudhi$1hira was not a simple, lifeless, abstract painting of Dharma. He
represented a human prince who had all the adorable virtues but had
some serious flaws in his character- he had a vice, he was addicted to
gambling. He did his utmost to protect the Dharma-morality and the
ideal of truthfulness, but also failed, like all humans, on one or two
crucial occasions. Lying on this occasion was such a case and he lost his
moral reward. It was Arjuna who said at that time that this act of lying
would be an indelible blemish in Yudhi$1hira's noble character.
It would be wrong to construe from this that the ideal of truthfulness
should therefore be compromised sometimes in this way. For the ideal
had not been compromised at all. The story-teller leaves no doubt in our
mind that there had been an almost unpardonable violation of a very
noble principle (truth-telling) here. Yudhi$1hira had to suffer accord
ingly. The weakness of the will once more got better of even Dharmariija
Yudhi$1hira.
In fact YudhiHhira lacked firmness, which must be an essential
characteristic of a moral hero. Yudhi$1hira suffered from such weakness.
This is also illustrated by his weakness for gambling. On the other hand,
he had the stubbornness of a tragic hero. This is shown by his
stubbornness in gambling, even when he was losing one stake after
another.
IV. The Divine Allributes
How about He was the manipulator. To use the terminology of
K~oa?
Paoini's grammar, he was the prayojaka kartii. He had the moral respon
sibility for almost all the important decisions of the Pa1:1<;lavas. One may
argue that although it was emphasized that "yalo dharmas Jato jaya}J."
("victory belongs to the party where dharma belongs), it was actually the
case that "yata}J. KuTJafJ. tato jaya}J.", i.e. victory belonged to the party
where belonged.
Kr~r:ia
upaplavye Mahar~ir yo K~r,iadvaipiiyano'-bravit
yato dharmastaro Kr~J.lO yarai,l Knl,lai,l rato jayai,l
i.\1ahiibhiirala 9.61. 30)
(Kr~r,ia Dvaipiiyana, during the disaster said " \\'here there is dharma there
is Knl,la, and where there is Knl.la there is victory")
Here K11oa bears the entire responsibility. But the story-teller does not
make K11oa, the alleged Lord of the universe, an omnipotent being, and
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
410
BIMAL KRISHNA MATILAL
bring about this victory through his magical or supernatural power.
Apparently this is the biggest mystery. If we can have a reasonable
explanation of this mystery, we can find answers to most of our
puzzlement about Kor.ia's doings.
According to the received doctrine, God is supposed to be omnipotent
and He should also see that justice is done in the end. But Kot;ia in the
ManabharaJa did not always claim to be omnipotent. Apart from certain
inspired speeches (e.g. in the Gllii) he acknowledged his human limita
tions. He admitted before the hermit Utanka how powerless he was to
stop the devastating war, and restore friendship between the two warring
families. For as he said, the war was inevitable, and he had no power to
stop the inevitable.
K{lr;ia's own admission that he did not have any power to stop the
battle or devastation either of the Kauravas or of the Yadavas (his own
race) is an important evidence to show that the Hindu conception of
God docs not always include the attribute of Omnipotence. I believe this
constitutes an important difference between Judaco-Christian theology
and Hindu theology. Words such as Isvara or Bhagavan arc often used to
denote what is called "God" in the Western tradition, but these words do
have a number of meanings in the Indian tradition. God in Hindu
theology is not always a creator God- that is, he is not a Creator ex
nihilo. Nor is the Hindu God always a personal being. In the case of
K11r;ia or Rama, he is of course conceived as a personal being, in fact a
human being with all possible human virtues and vices. Of course, it has
been claimed that Krsr:ia (or Rama) was mightier than anybody else,
had intelligence superior 10 1ha1 of anybody else, but 1his is hardly
equivalent to the claim of omnipotence or even omniscience.
Omnipo1ence is no1 an important concept in Indian philosophy of
religion. It has been generally pointed out that the problem of evil was
not regarded by the philosophers of India as a serious flaw in the Hindu
conception of God. Some lndologists have argued that the problem of
evil was not important for Indians because evil was not real but an
illusion. In other words 1his attitude was connected with the trans
fictional approach to the reali1y of the Indian philosophers in general.
This may be so. However, there is another line of explanation. I believe,
the problem of evil never posed a serious threat to 1he concept of Theos
in India because the attribu1e of Omnipotence was never seriously
emphasised. For the problem of evil becomes a serious problem if the
problems of the two attributes of God are jointly emphasised in the
contex1: Omnipotence and perfect goodness of God. We might also add
Omniscience 10 1he list. As we have seen, the concept of K{lr;ta as God
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
K~S!l/A: IN DEFENCE Ot· A DEVIOUS OIVINr!Y 411
does not include omnipotence. He was mightier than anybody else but
he was not omnipotent.
The concept of God however must include a reference to morality and
justice. This is even true of the dominant Hindu conception of God. In
this respect, as we all know, the character of Ko1,1a comes under serious
criticism. Examples ofKoQa's violation of ordinary moral principles are
too numerous. Let us see briefly how he defended this move once. At the
final stage of the battle, when Bhima and Duryodhana were locked in a
mace-fight, Arjuna asked K"Qa about the relative strength of the two
combattants, and the possible outcome. KnQa replied in no uncertain
terms that while Bhima was physically stronger than Duryodhana, the
latter was a better mace-fighter than the former and then added:
If Bhima fights according to Dharma (approved ethical code of conduct),
he will not win. Hence he should kill Duryodhana by breaking the moral
rule (anyayma).
(Malrabharala, 9.57.4.)
KnQa continued to justify this breach of ethical conduct. He said that
we had heard that the demons were defeated by the gods in a deceitful
fight (miiyayii). Similarly Virocana was defeated by Indra by unlawful
means, and Vrtra was defeated in a similar manner. Besides, Bhima had
already promised to break the thigh of Duryodhana by the stroke of his
mace. Hence there was no other way but to resort to this deceitful means
for destroying Duryodhana. For Krs1,1a was confident that a fair battle at
that time would steal the victory away from the PaQ<,lavas. KnQa said
that Yudhisihira "had done it again". By agreeing to accept the outcome
of the duel between Bhima and Duryodhana as the final decisive factor of
the entire battle of Kuruksetra, Yudhis1hira had put the prospect of final
victory in grave danger; KNQa had no illusion about it. He said:
"Having won the banle, he is now throwing it away".
(Malrabharata 9.57.10)
h is significant to note that Krsi:ia gave two different sets of arguments
to justify Bhima's unlawful killing of Duryodhana. To pacify Balarama
He said that Bhima took a vow of breaking Duryodhana's thigh during
the fatal and deceitful gambling match where innocent Draupadi was
publicly humiliated for no fault of her own. To the Pai:i<,lavas, however,
he gave the other reason. In a lawful battle, Bhima would have been
defeated by the superior technique of Duryodhana and hence the whole
battle ofKuruksetra would have been decided in favour of the Kauravas.
I shall further expand the nature of Krsi:ia-logy or Krsua's divinity by
first referring to the story of Utanka.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
412
BIMAL KRISHNA MATILAL
The t)tanka episode is interesting in itself.1 The encounter between
K111,1a and U tanka took place, after the devastating battle was over.
K111,1a was apparently going back from Hastinlipura to Dvlirakli. On his
way, in the desert of Rajasthan, he met the great hermit Utanka and
accepted his hospitality for the day. Utanka regarded K111,1a as an avatara
of Lord He was also unaware that the great battle had already
Vi~1,1u.
ta.ken place, and everybody had died except a few fortunate warriors. He
therefore asked K111,1a in confidence whether the Lord had been able to
settle the quarrel between the two families, and had been successful in
avoiding the devastating war. When the good hermit learned what had
happened, he was visibly upset and accused K111,1a of all the evil doings.
He insisted that K{11,1a must have the full responsibility for all the evils of
the war, simply by letting it happen when he could have stopped it.
K111,1a then answered that it was unstoppable, even by K111,1a himself. It
was impossible to stop something in the middle. The process of devasta
tion started much earlier, started by both sides through their enmity,
greed, jealousy and hatred. It was true that the Kauravas wanted to take
over the whole kingdom by getting rid of the Pli1,1c;lavas by hook or by
crook. But it was again the Pli1,1c;lavas who were abrasive and arrogant
enough to insult Duryodhana and the Kauravas in the Sabhi.parva. The
root of hostility was too deep to be uprooted at a later time, but K111,1a
did whatever he could and tried his best to see that justice was done
towards the end. A god does not have to be omnipotent, but he could be
noble enough to see that justice is done in the end. It is significant to
know that after Duryodhana's fall, greeted King with
K~1,1a Yudh~Jhira
a long speech, which was interspersed with the expression "Dqtyii
Vardhase" ("luckily you have achieved the victory)". It was a plain
admission that the Pli1,1c;lavas won against all odds because of luck, not
through the omnipotence of K111,1a.
of
V. The Foret Evil and Human Freedom
\Vestern philosophers and theologians have pondered throughout the
ages over the intelligibility of the divine attributes, such as omnipotence,
omniscience and perfect goodness. St. Thomas and St. Augustine are
well-known for their formulation of these attributes in a faultless manner.
In recent times, Anthony Kenny, Peter Geach, A. Plantinga, Nelson Pike
and others of the analytical tradition have discussed these issues to
11 St·c A~\·amC'dhika-Par,·a of th<' .\lahflbhOrato. rritiral C'dition, Poor•a.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
413
K~S~A: II\ OEt'El'\CF. Ot· A OF.\'IOt:S 01\'INITY
connect them with the contemporary problems of philosophy. Many old
issues have been revived but several new dimensions have been added to
them. I find some of these issues are strikingly relevant to our discussion
of Kni:ia in the Mahabharata.
Recent discussion about the concept of God was triggered off by a
paper written in 1955 by J.L. Mackie called " Evil and Omnipotence".
The discussion rolled on, and Mackie in his posthumous writing, Tiu
ef
miracles Theism, modified his earlier formulation. Instead of calling his
formulation of the problem of evil a genuine paradox, he described it as
an undecidable question. There is no need to rehearse the well-known
arguments here. Geach (1973) and Kenny (1970) both have agreed that
the strictly philosophical notion ofo mnipotence is not essential for Western
Theism.9 The notion of Almighty, in the sense of having power over all
things would be enough, according to these philosophers, to be compatible
with Western theology. We may follow a similar move in defining Kni:ia's
power. In fact, in K!1i:ia-theology (or should we say Krsi:ialogy?) we need
to modify the notion of creator-God, following such Hindu philosophical
systems as the Sa1J1khya and the
Nyaya-Vaise~ika.
According to the Sa1J1khya school, the material world was never
created but it evolved out of some unmanifest material form, the abode
of all potentialities. Hence there is no Creator God. In fact in one section
of the early Sli1J1kya the category of God was declared as redundant. In
Sal]'lkya-Yoga system however, God was accepted as one, who was not
the creator but the goal of the Yoga practices. In other words one can
seek the help of such God and thereby achieve success or siddhi. The God
of the Yogins (and Kr?i:ia has sometimes been called Yogesvana) is
supposed to have the highest form of all adorable qualities of humans.
He is perfectly good but he does not have to be omnipotent. Hence the
conception is free from apparent incoherence. In fact the God of tht>
Yoga system does not do anything on his own, but it is said that we can
get something done or accomplished and proceed towards our ultimate
goal if we resort to him through meditation or other practices.
The Nyliya-Vaise?ika conception of God is different. He can be called
the Creator God but in a different sense. Since the material atoms are
eternal entities and so are the human souls we cannot say that God has
created them. However, it is at God's will that the atoms come together
to create the gross universt whtre human beings have embodied exis-
ef
" Geach. P.T. Prtwidmrt and FNI, C.:amhridgc, 1977: Kermy. A. Tht (;ad lht
Phi/o,opher.t. Oxford. 1'179.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
414
BIMAL KRISHNA MATILAL
tence and act freely. Although they act freely, i.e., they can choose
between what is morally good and bad, they have to act under the
constraint of the circumstances in which they are born. Birth and
environment are not under their control. This conception of God seems
compatible with the KoQalogy of the Mahabharata. BhI$ma at the
Rajasuya sacrifice of Yudhi$ihira selected KoQa as the best of men and
hence worthy of worship by all. He listed all the adorable virtues of
KoQa on that occasion.
There is another important divine attribute which the epic literature
ascribes to KnQa as the godhead. The Pural)a literature usually speaks
of three complementary aspects of the ultimate deity, the creator (perso
nified in Brahma), the preserver or protector (Vi$Qu), the destroyer
(Rudra-Siva). This trinity is not relevant for our purpose. What is
important to note is that God is also the destroyer and in this aspect he is
identified with Kala or Mahakala or Time. In the Gita, Kn9a says "I am
the Kala and as Kala I destroy the world".
Time or Eternity has often been regarded in Hindu religious literature
as the great destroyer of everything, sometimes identified with the
supreme deity. In the Vedas, there is an entire hymn devoted to Time
where it was emphasised that everything originates in time, persists in
time as well as perishes in time. In other words Time not only creates
everything but also destroys everything. In the epic literature, Knl)a has
often been identified with the destructive aspect of Time. As God, He
cannot make the world a better place overnight where every being will
forget their enmity and hatred towards each other and live in perfect
peace and harmony. For every creature is free to perform his own Kanna
and thereby create his own destiny in which God should not intervene.
But when the earth is full of hatred and enmity and sin, when Justice is
at the risk of being trampled over for ever, when disasters after disasters
imperil the very existence of being then the will of God may intervene in
whatever way it can. This is called the theory of Hindu God, or
KoQalogy, that has been expounded in the third and fourth chapters of
the Gita.
Knl)a as Kala is passionless, free from any human virtues. Here, if not
anywhere else, end justifies the means. He told Arjuna that as Kala He
had already destroyed (was going to destory) all the kings of the
Kauravas and the Pal)c;lavas. Next He would destroy His own Race the
Yadavas. All these were needed to release the burden of sin. People with
their freedom had acted following their instincts and thereby a "sad
mess" had been created. Hence it was time to let loose the destructive
power of the divinity. He, acting as the inner manipulator of every being,
would bring about the intended destruction. Therefore He described
himself as Kala. Kala is also identified sometimes with Varna, the God of
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
IN DEFENCE OF A DEVIOUS DIVINITY 415
Kll~~A:
Death. We should remember that in the Ramayai:ia also the
Kalapuru~a
appeared towards the end, to have a secret counsel with Rama, which
marked the beginning of the end of the Rama story.
VI. Justice
In fact, it was an uphill task for anyone who would try to see that justice
was done in the end. When the two sides were lined up for battle, it was
clear that the Kauravas represented the stronger side by all counts. The
Pai:ic;!ava side was weaker by comparison. On the other hand, it was the
Pai:ic;!avas who were deprived of their kingdom for thirteen years through
trickery and fraud. But above all, the unprovoked insult inflicted upon
the defenceless Draupac!T in public was the last straw. This particular
incident could be regarded as a turning point of the moral balance in the
story. This was uncalled for and unprovoked and it was an unparadon
able offence on the part of the Kauravas. From that point onwards, as I
have already noted, it seems, the balance ofj ustice tilted in favour of the
Pai:ic;!avas.
It has already been noted that the Pai:ic;!ava side was comparatively
weaker. The weaker side can defeat a stronger side only with the help of
a strategy, and strategies cannot always be restricted to fair and just
means. There is a touch of realism here. Idealism would have demanded
that the good be the victorious over the evil by following the ideally
constructed strategies, which should always be fair. But our story-teller
preferred realism. Our world is really an imperfect world, and this is all
we have. Our story-teller's conception of God was not that of an
Almighty Deity. Through the Utanka episode, our story-teller cons
ciously raised the question of Omnipotence but rejected it in favour of
realism, contingencies of situation (moral luck) and fatalism. Courses of
certain events cannot be stopped. All that Koi:ia was able to do was to
salvage justice at the end of the battle. So the paradox became more and
more underscored. In order to save justice towards the end, many unjust
and immoral acts were perpetrated. But what kind of justice was this? A
sense of justice that kills all other senses of justice? A policeman in hot
pursuit of a criminal overturns many vehicles and kills many innocent
people-a very common sight in modern T. V. But is this right? I believe
that this is the ultimate puzzle. A puzzle that is realistic enough; for we
even see it today all around us, but it is too frustrating to yield a solution.
Apart from the above puzzle there are several intricate problems that
can be connected with the incident in the Mahiibhiirata. Let us articulate
at least one of them. Yudhisihira's problem was one of moral integrity.
He maintained a very high profile as far as dharma or morality was
concerned. He never told a lie in his life. So one would expect him to be
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
416
Bl~IAL KRISH:'\A ~IATIL\L
telling the truth always. But at KllQa's advice, he lied to save his life.
Hence there was a visible crack in his otherwise impeccable honesty and
moral integrity. But how about Kr~r:ia? What was his justification for
giving this advice to YudhiHhira? He obviously compromised his moral
integrity by choosing to give this advice. Was he acting as a utilitarian
consequentialist? Perhaps not. For a consequentialist opts even for a little
bit of well-being or happiness (that is, utility) when he violates a well
established moral principle.
For the consequentialist, the consequence must produce more well
being or more happiness. One can obviously produce an argument by
which it will be shown that Knr:ia as a moral agent gave up the principle
of moral integrity (assuming that moral integrity is an excellence or
value) in order to ensure victory for the right side, that was the
PiiQ<;lavas, or negatively, to avoid disastrous consequences of the defeat of
the side which was more just than the other. The unpardonable humilia
tion of the defenceless Draupadi by Duryodhana has already been
mentioned. That was also the reason KllQa gave to Balariima, when the
latter became extremely angry seeing that Bhima resorted to unlawful
means to defeat and kill Duryodhana. So one may say that Kllr:ia as a
moral agent gave up moral integrity to avoid a total miscarriage of
justice in the end. But this consequence can hardly be measured in terms
of happiness or even well-being. Anybody who has read the Mahabharata
can testify to the fact that the conclusion of the war contributed to
nobody's happiness in particular. It did not contribute even to the well
being of the PiiQ<;lavas. For this, one can simply read the laments of
after the war. Therefore, the outcome of this apparently
Yudhi~Jhira
deviant behaviour of K11r:ia cannot be explained in the consequentialist's
terms. On the other hand, could we argue that if Knr:ia as well as
Yudhi~Jhira maintained his moral integrity, and did not stoop to this
devious means of lying to Dror:ia (and thereby leading
the great teacher to his own doom), would the world have been a
better place or would it have contributed to the general well-being of
humanity? We cannot answer affirmatively here, for our inherent sense
ofj ustiC'e would have suffered a set back and our very trust in the moral
order of the Universe would have been impaired. For at least the story
t(·ller made us increasingly aware how far the Kauravas went in their
wi.-k('dness and immoral aC"tions.
\'II. Good i:s. The Best H'orld
\\'hv. do wt> fed embarrassed and definitelv. shoC"ked at the C'onduct of
YudhiHhira and Kr~r:ia on this OC'C'asion? It is brcause our expeC'tations
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
417
K~S/'.IA: IN Df:FENC~: (lf A DEVIOUS Dl\"INITY
were high, as far as the Pli1;1';!avas and K"oa were concerned. Had
Duryodhana been involved we would not have thought it to be irregular.
But from K"oa we expected something better.
There may be another way of looking at this issue. Let us regard
K"oa as a moral agent here. It was his duty to uphold dharma which also
included justice, at any cost. The exact nature of dharma has remained
ever elusive, for it was never spelled out fully. Various stories in the
Mahabharata illustrate the point underlying the ever-elusive nature of
dharma. Of course, dharma is mostly represented as a set of rigid moral
principles or a rigid moral code of a given society. It was something like
the honour code of a given community. It is assumed that to breach the
code, is to lose one's honour and one's place in the social order,
circumscribed by that moral code. But this rigidity can sometimes be
challenged by a proper agent who has proven to be superior to others in
the community both in talents and intelligence as well as in leadership
qualities. This only acknowledges the possibility of what is called today
"a paradigm shift". Sometimes it is possible for a leader to transcend or
breach the rigid code of conduct valued in the society, with the sole idea
of creating a new paradigm that will also be acknowledged and esteemed
within that order. Our K"oa might be looked upon as a leader of that
sort. It may be that he created new paradigms for showing limitations of
such a generally accepted moral code of truth-telling and promise
keeping. Sometimes situational constraints and the risk of the loss of the
greater good might influence a rational agent to transgress certain
valued principles. In this case one might say that a threat posed by
Duryodhana's victory and the consequential loss of the chance for the
restoration of justice, might have influenced Knl)a's decision to follow
the devious course. All these are speculations, but I claim that they are
not entirely absent from the moral concerns of the Indian people who
have loved the epic for about two millenia. Certainly these speculations
are not at all foundationless. The available evidence found in the
tradition of the great epics of India lends support to such speculations. I
believe the moral consciousness of the people found its expressions
through such portrayal of dilemmas throughout the epic literature and
the different versions of the epic stories at different times. '0
I shall conclude this discussion by introducing a thought experiment.
Suppose there is a divine creator who is also omnipotent and omnisccnt
u• For other rthical issues connC'C'tcd with thr m<>ral dilemn1as. ~ n1y ··~toral
Dilemmas: Insights frc>m lndiar1 Epic:s·· in ~\fora/ /Jiltm1t1a:r in thr ,\fnhiihhiirata (<"d. Bin1al
Krishna Ma1ilal), 1.1.A.S., Shimla, and J\lotilal Banarsida<.<. L>rlhi. 1989.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
418 SIM.AL KRISHNA MATILAL
in some acceptable and coherent senses of these terms. Suppose also that
he is about to create a world where the pre-existent matter and human
souls would be the ingredients. How much choice is left to the creator
under the circumstances to create an entirely new world? Suppose there
are three possibilities-W W and W W, stands for a world as science
, •
1 2 3
sometimes is said to conceive it. There is no value, no justice. Things
happen mechanically following the scientific rules, properties of matter,
and those who suffer and enjoy are only rational beings. There is no
standard for good and evil. It is an amoral world.
W stands for a world, which is much like that ofo urs. There is good as
2
well as evil. There is human rationality; sometimes justice is done,
sometimes evil forces try to suppress justice. But there is this persistent
belief that good will win at the end.
W stands for another world, which we can call the perfect world or
3
the best of all the possible worlds. There is no evil. Or evil has no power
over the good. Everybody is happy. But in such a way the meaning of
happiness is perhaps lost. Or, nobody understands what unhappiness is.
Now, if a divine creator is faced with the choice of creating a world
like any one of this, which particular one would He select? For various
reasons into which I do not wish to go into here, I suggest that he would
select W i.e. world no. 2. Whether there is a creator God or not, whether
2
was a devious deity or not, this is the kind of world we have got
K~r;ia
and hence ifj ustice can be salvaged in the end the creator will fulfil His
promise.•
•I wish to thank The British Academy for funding the preliminary research
for preparing this article.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
REPETITION IN THE MAHABHARATA'
A.K. RAMANUJAN
(/)
No Hindu ever reads the Mahabharata for the first time. And when he docs
get to read it, he doesn't usually read it in Sanskrit. As one such native,
I know the Hindu epics, not as a Sanskritist (which I am not}, but through
Kannada and Tamil, mostly through the oral traditions. I've heard bits
and pieces of it in a tailor shop where a pundit used to regale us with
Mahabharata stories and large sections ofa sixteenth century Kannada text;
from Brahmin cooks in the house; from an older boy who loved to keep us
spellbound with it (and the Kannada Arabian Nights which he was reading
in the Oriental Library) after cricket, in the evenings, under a large neem
tree in a wealthy engineer's compound; from a somewhat bored algebra
teacher who switched from the binomial theorem to the problems of
Draupadi and her five husbands. Then there were professional bards who
"did the Harikatha redeeming the time with holy tales (and
Kalak~epam",
not always holy ones). They were invited into a neighborhood by a group
or a wealthy man, and they would recite, sing and tell the Mahabharata in
sections night after night, usually under a temporary canopy (panda{) lit by
petromax lanterns, with a floating audience sitting on rugs on the street
and on the verandas of houses that lined the street now turned into
a makeshift auditorium. They sang songs in several languages, told
folktales, sometimes danced, quoted Sanskrit tags as well as the daily
newspaper, and made the Mahabharata entertaining, didactic and relevant
the listener's present.
10
'fhe Mahabharata provides materials and allusions to every artistic
1 This essay on the Maliiibliiirala was originally written in 1968 and p~nted 10 Victor
Turner's Seminar on Comparative Epic at the University of Chicago. I had thought that
the paper was suggestive but needed extensive reworking, so I did not venture to publish
it. I venture to do so now, twenty years later, urged and encouraged by the rcsporucs of
Atalriibliiirala scholar. like Alf Hiltebeitel, David Shulman, Narayana Rao, and Arvind
Sharma- to all of whom I'm indebted. I have changed very little in the original paper,
except 1ha1 I've addrd new references. Ocher and bcner scholars have independently
an1icipa1rd and explored some of the notions exprnscd in this early essay. Such
corroborations arc both a pain and a pica.sure. I've added several of these rc.fcrcnces to
the essay.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
420
A.K. RAMANUJAN
genre-from plays to proverbs, from folk performances to movies and
TV. Indeed, the Maliabharata and the Ramayatµ1 have appeared as serials,
week after week in popular Tamil weeklies. C. Rajagopalachari, the
veteran statesman, who was dedicated to bringing traditional wisdom
into modern politics, retold them in Tamil, and later translated them
into English. When they were published by Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan,
they became, and probably still are, the most-read paperback renditions
in English of the epics. The Mahabharata also occurs in various sizes and
in many languages-from proverbs like "Whatever you say, Kunti's
children have no kingdom" (Kannada: anlu intu kunti makka{igt rajyavilla)
to one-or two-hour versions, to the South Indian Sanskrit redaction which
has 100,000 stanzas. Then there are "translations", transpositions truly,
into the many Indian mother tongues, extensions into active cults and
local communal performances where Draupadi or the Pai;ii;lavas possess
the actors and members of the audience. Two of these possession cults,
the Pai;ii;lavlila in Himachal Pradesh (Sax 1987) and especially the
Draupadi cult (Hiltebeitel 1987) in Tamilnadu, have been studied in
some detail.
Thus a text like the Mahabharata is not a text but a tradition. It used to be
every poet's ambition to write a Riimiiylll}Q or the Maliabharata. Subramanya
Bharati's best narrative poem is a Tamil reworking of Draupadi's vow
(Piincali Capatam), where Draupadi's public dishonour at the hands of the
villain Dul;lsasana represents the plight of all women in a male society and
it also represented the British oppression of" Mother India". The poem has
recently become popular with street-theatre troupes in Tamilnadu who
use it as their script. Several years ago, K. V. Puttappa won national
honors for his Riimayal'}a Darianam in Kannada, as V .S. Khandekar's
Marathi novel rayiiti did. Recently Bhairappa, a well-known Kannada
novelist, has written a long novel on the Mahabhiirala story, giving it
ethnographic interpretations. Two of the best modern plays, to mention
only two, are Girish Karnad's rayiiti in Kannada and Dharam Vir
Bharati's Andhayug in Hindi, both inspired by the epic. So was Shyam
Benegal's Hindi film Kaliyug.
The size of the Mahabharata appalls non-Indian readers. It is said to be
eight times the size of the Odyssey and the Iliad put together. "What is here
may be elswhere. But what is not here is nowhere else", says a verse in
praise of the text. Another such verse says, "The whole world is Vyasa's
leftovers"- he has tasted, chewed and digested whole worlds. Both the
Bhagavad Gita and the story of the Goose That Laid the Golden Eggs are in
its maw.
Yet the main, complex, many-storied plot of this enormous epic is
remembered and recalled in great detail by most traditional Hindus. Such
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
REP~:TITION I:>: THE MAHABHJR,1 T.~ 421
recall is possible because it is a slruclurtd work. In a largely oral traditon, one
learns one's major literary works as one learns a language-in bits and
pieces that fit together and make a whole in the learner's mind, because
they are parts that reflect an underlying structure. Later tradition calls the
i\1ahabhiirata an ilihiisa" that's the way it was" or a "history", not a karrya,
"poem", denying it structure and composition. Yet the great Sanskrit
aesthetician, Anandavardhana, treats the main epic story as a poem with
a coherent central mood, all its parts and plots and characters cohering
into a final sense of siinta rasa or "tranquillity" (Tubb 1985).\ 'Vhether we
agree with that description or not, it is clear that Anandavardhana saw it
not as an unstuctured monster but as a well-formed whole. Recent Indian
and Western scholars have talked of hundreds of interpolations in the text;
they see the work as a "loose-leaf file of palm leaves" with a knot (grantha)
that holds the leaves together, to which anything at all could be, and was,
added by anyone at all at different times. The name Vyasa, they point out,
indicated an "editor", a "compliler", not an author. Yet all these
descriptions belie and deny the native's sense of its unity, its well-plotted
network of relations. Only the "epic" is what's known everywhere in the
regional languages, what the native speaker and listener remembers
vividly and without fail. The so-called Brahminical "pseudo
epic", which is not "pseudo" but an integral part of the Sanskrit epic, and
the many discourses (including the Gita) are not recited as part of the story
in the oral traditions or in the endless reworkings and abridgements in the
mother-tongues, in oral and written traditions.
The present attempt is to explicate a "native intuition", the intricate
sense of structure and unity in this ten-mile monster of a work. I use
"intuition" not in any occult sense, but as linguists use it- the sense that
every native speaker has of the grammar ofh is mother tongue which makes
him speak grammatically and judge what is or is not grammatical.
(2)
I'd suggest that the central structuring principle of the epic is a certain kind
of rcpeti1ion. One might say that repetition or replication is the central
principle of any structuring. \\!hat occurs only once does not allow us to
talk of structure. Einmal isl keinmal- it's as if what happens once doesn't
happen at all. Students ofn arrative like Propp, Levi-Strauss, Dumezil, and
J.
Hillis l'vliller have made this idea a commonplace. Indian artworks, like
the Hindu tetnple, or the decads (pallu) ofTamil classical or bhakti poetry,
or the ragas of Karnatak music, are built on the principle of interacting
structures of repetition and elaboration and variation. Not only are there
repetitive phrases, similes, and formulaic descriptions that the students of
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
422
A.K. RAMANl;JAN
oral poetics (Parry, Lord, et. al.) have taught us to recognize, but incidents,
scenes, settings, and especially relationships are repeated. Let us look at one
large overarching example of replicated relationships.
Here is a genealogical chart of the main characters.
Santanu -----
1 by Satyavati
I I ~
by Ganga 1 ___ ~
I by Parasara, a sage by Santanu
I I two sons who die,
t
Bhi~ma
vows celibacy) Vyasa leaving childless
( '
"' ' ' ........ .... widows
'
/ /
....
'
,,,"' /
'
by servan/ t maid by Ambikl by Ambllikii
I
I I
I
I I
Vidura I
Dhrtar~1ra
I
(blind)
Pa1:11Ju
I
(pale)
by servant maid by Gandhari
I I
Yuyutsu Duryodhana
(non-entity) et. al. by Kunti by Miidri
(a.k.a Kauravas) ..... (and the
~?!',
,... ,... / I \ Twin Gods)
,... ..... ,,,"' I \ I \
,........ / I \ I \
,... ,... ,,. "' I \ Nakula Sahadeva
'
,........ "' I \
,........ ..... ; / I
,... "' I \
,...,... ..... " bygodoflaw ·' \
by sun god I by wind god 'by rain god
I I I I
I Dharma I I
Kan;ia (a.k.a. Yudhinhira) Bhima Arjuna
The chart is redrawn from the regular kinship diagram to show the
double espousal and the double parentage of the major characters.
Certain patterns of repetition may be noted:
1. $antanu, as well as Satyavati, has a human and a supernatural
lover. Santanu has goddess Ganga on whom he begets Bhi~ma; and by
human Satyavati he has two sons. Satyavati has had a liaison with
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
423
REPETITION IN THE MAHABHARATA
Parilara, a sage with supernatural powers (and a very human lust) and
she has a son Vylisa by him. Vyasa, too, is a sage with supernatural
powers. He is the author of the Mahabhiirata as well as the ancestor of the
Pat:iQavas and Kauravas.
$antanu and Satyavafi's two sons (Citrangada and Vicitravirya) die
childless, leaving two widows, Ambika and Ambalika. At Satyavati's
behest, sage Vyasa begets two sons on them, Dhrtariltra the Blind and
Pat:iQu the Pale. Thus each of these two widows too has a supernatural
and a human lover.
At this point, there is a clear division. progeny by
Dhrtar~tra's
Gandhari is entirely human. But Pat:ic;lu, cursed by a sage to die if he
makes love, permits his wives Kunti and Madri to invoke gods and get
sons by them. Thus Kunti and Madri too have supernatural and human
lovers- actually Kunti almost overdoes it, trying it once before marriage
and three times after. Like Satyavati, her virginity too is returned to her
by her supernatural, premarital lover.
Thus, for three generations, practically every major male character,
from to Sahadeva, has a human and a supernatural parent. The
Bhi~ma
only exceptions are the Kaurava brothers. When we reach the third
generation, we have two sets of cousins, the Kauravas whose parents are
entirely human and the Pat:ic;lavas, fathered by the gods. That's when the
battle is joined.
2. Vyasa, Vidura, Pat:iQu, and finally Karna are
Bhi~ma, Dhrtara~fra,
all born to their mothers before they were married or after they were
widowed. The two legitimate sons born to $antanu and Satyavati die
childless. takes an oath of celibacy and abdicates his right to the
Bhi~ma
throne; Vyasa and Vidura are celibate sage figures. is blind.
Dhrtara~ira
Pat:ic;lu is born pale and, after a brief reign, earns a curse which makes sex
a mortal act, and unmans him. Thus, beginning with 's self
Bhi~ma
chosen celibacy and abdication, the succession totters, oscillating from
brother to brother and Pat:ic;lu) and from cousin to cousin
(Dhrtar~tra
(Par;ic;lavas and Kauravas). The war books also show the fortunes of war
similarly vacillating between victory and defeat.
3. Not only are relationships (like Satyavau's past and Kunti's past)
repeated to make patterns, and patterns of patterns. The appearance of
certain characters and settings punctuates the continuity of narrative
with patterns of repetition. For instance, Ganga as a goddess and as a
river appears several times: she is the mother of and the river
Bhi~ma,
carries/fosters Karr;ia when he is abandoned by KuntI, his mother. S"o
both men are called Gangeya, "son of Ganga". The river is the setting of
the great war, and it is on its banks that gets a vision of all
Dhrtar~tra
the war dead.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
424
A.K. RAMANUJAN
4. Fires occur over and over again. Duryodhana conspires to burn the
Pa1:u;lavas in a house of lacquer, but in their stead a hunter woman
(Nijada) and her five sons die-as later in ASvatthiima's rampage, the
Piii;iQavas' own five sons die as surrogates for the Pii1;1Qavas. Kni:ia and
Arjuna destroy a forest (KhiirµJava) and all its denizens by fire, as an
offering to the fire god, Agni.
5. A minor character like Durvasas appears in the life of Kunu as well
as Draupadi. And Kalidasa, when he reworks the Sakuntala story from
the Mahiibharata, brings Durvasas into her life as well.
6. Whole situations like the heroes' exile and disguise are replicated.
Such replications can be simultaneous, suffered by several characters at
different times, like the Piii;iQavas living in exile and disguise in Vira1a's
court; or successive, at different stages of the same lives, like the
Piii;tQavas who disguise themselves as brahmins after the first attempt on
their lives, and later as different kinds of professionals in Virata's court.
Or the repetitive events may be concentric, or nested, as in the inset story
of Nala who too lives in exile and disguise. Lastly, life lived incognito is
personified in_Kari:ia whose destiny is governed by the fact that neither
he nor most others around him know who he is-a situation that gives
rise to many poignant ironies and reversals.
Such repetitive elements foreshadow later events and recapture earlier
ones. Two major examples will do to make the point. Draupadi is
outraged first in court with the elders' connivance and the
Dhrtar~tra's
husbands looking on, unmanned and helpless. When she is molested
again in Virata's court, abetted by the queen, her husbands are helpless
because they have to lie low in disguise. But the episode is given a
different ending. This time Bhima does not put his anger aside. He beats
her molester Kicaka to a pulp and kills him--exactly foreshadowing
what he would later do to Dul;isasana, the first molester. The death of
Kicaka too is part of a series. For, in the epic, only five men were known
to be equal to each other in strength, in the art of wielding a mace,
and in wrestling: J arasandha, Kicaka, Sal ya, Bhima and Duryodhana.
Jarlisandha was killed early in the epic: Kni:ia arranges that. Now
Kicaka is killed, later Salya- so that Bhima and Duryodhana alone are
left for the final combat. The serial elimination of equals, like the gradual
amassing of weapons by Arjuna and Kari;ia, the two sworn opponents, is
part of the epic progression.
One of the major instances of repetition concerns the Bhagavadglta.2
' See Dumezil (1968), p. 93, van Buitentn (1978), pp. 15- 16, and Shulman (1985), p.
262, for discwsions regarding the opening chapter of the Gltil as an inversion of the
Uttara episode, of the Viri{aj>arvtln as a ''carnival''.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
425
REPETITION IN THE MAH;/BHI R ..t TA
Scholars have debated whether the <rltii belongs in the epic at all; editors
have called it an interpolation. But to the native reader, it belongs
incontrovertibly; artistically and structurally, it is firmly in place. Its
central incident-a warrior suffers a failure of nerve, an attack of
cowardice, before battle, but he is then counselled and urged into
battle--occurs at least five times in the epic. But the most ironic parallel
incident occurs immediately before the big battle scenes, as a comic scene
in Virii(a Parvan.
When Duryodhana hears of Klcaka's death, he at once suspects the
Par;iQavas' presence in the ViraJa court. He lay$ siege to ViraJa's country
to smoke out the Par;iQavas. (If they are discovered in the year of living
incognito, they would have to go back to the forest for 12 years again).
Then, as Virata's army gets ready for battle, Uttara the crown prince,
darling of the palace women, boasts that if only he had a proper
charioteer he would take on the Kauravas and rout them. Draupadl,
who is disguised as a servantmaid, slyly suggests that BrhannaQa, who is
really Arjuna disguised as a eunuch dancing-master, knew Arjuna well
and was his charioteer. After some ironic play on this situation, and after
protesting that he, a mere dancing-master, couldn't really wear armour
or mount a horse, Arjuna/BrhannaQa agrees. U ttara then ostentatiously
prepares for battle, patronizes Arjuna, then gets into his chariot. As
Arjuna drives it between the contending armies, Uttara is overwhelmed
by the array of shining spears, the trumpeting war-elephants and the
dazzling host of warriors. He loses nerve and runs from the battlefield.
Arjuna follows, catches him by the scruff of his neck and asks him, "Who
do you think you are"? When Uttara falls at his feet and asks Arjuna to
save him from certain death in battle, Arjuna relents. He then retrieves,
with Uttara's help, his divine weapons (left on a tree before the five
brothers entered service with Vira1a). He asks Uttara to be his charioteer
while he fights the battle. As he strings his divine bow Gar;iQlva and
strums it, Uttara is dazzled by his erstwhile eunuch dancing-master, now
changed into a commanding hero. Uttara asks hims who he really is.
Arjuna reveals his true identity. He recites his ten sonorous names:
Phalguna, Savyasacl, Dhanaiijaya, etc. Then, as Uttara is still amazed,
he amazes him further by riding into the thick of battle and beating off
the enemies.
The very next book opens with Arjuna in the chariot with as
Kr~r:ia
the charioteer. When Arjuna's chariot moves between the two armies,
Arjuna is conscience-stricken at the sight of his cousins, elders, and
teachers whom he may have to kill. He loses his nerve and his appetite
for battle. Then Knr;ia asks him the same question that Arjuna asks of
U ttara, "Who do you think you are"' and reminds him of his true
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
426
A.K. RAMANt.:JAN
nature as a K$atriya whose duty is here and now, to take part in battle.
Ko1Ja further tells him that the real war is being fought by him, KoQa,
not Arjuna. Thus KnQa, who began as a non-combatant and a
charioteer, is seen to be the true war-maker, and Arjuna the warrior only
a nimitta, an excuse and an instrument. At the end, KoQa reveals his
blinding, terrifying, cosmic form as Time the devourer of all, and he also
describes himself in a hundred ways (just as Arjuna recites his ten names
earlier). As in the earlier U ttara episode, here too several reversals take
place between Actor/Agent, Charioteer/Warrior, Eunuch/Potent male.
As victory earlier is falsely attributed to Uttara's efforts, now it is
attributed to Arjuna's prowess. The former episode tells of the growing
up of U ttara, as the Gita episode depicts the growing-up of Arjuna. What
seems like a playful rehearsal in the Vira/a Parva becomes earnest in the
Udyoga Parva. U ttara's cowardice and Arjuna's self-revelation arc
physical, as Arjuna's cowardice and KoQa's self-revelation are meta·
physical.
As one rereads or rem em bcrs such episodes in the Mahabharata, one is
reminded of Henry James on Flaubert's careful mots Juste, designed and
planted in his novels with infinite care. Though the Mahabharata has
qualified in the eyes of many as "a loose baggy monster" (Henry James'
phrase about 19th century novels), a second look at the foreshadowings
and recapitulations make one think of Flaubert, except on an epic scale.
Henry James spoke of how the elements in Flaubert were
. . . always so related and associated, so properly a part of something else
that is in turn part of something other, part of a reference, a tone, a
passage, or page, that the simple may enjoy it for the least bearing and the
initiated for the greatest.
(3)
This may be the place to talk briefly of the many substories (upakhyana)
that participate in and intensify the repetition of events. To give only
two examples: just when Bhi$ma decides to give up his sexual and
political life so that his father may marry again, th story ofYayati is told
as a kind of model and precedent. Puru transfers his youth to his aged
father Yayati and thereby earns merit. Such appropriate reminiscence
speaks of a kind of mythic imprinting, motivating present action
(Ramanujan 1972; 1983). To cite another instance, one of many, when
YudhiHhira is despondent, having lost everything at dice, now exiled in
a forest, a sage tells him the story of Nala. Nala, too, has gambled away a
kingdom and lost it to a brother, has even lost his wife in the forest, is
bitten by a serpent which turns out to be literally a blessing in disguise-
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
REPETITION IN THE ,WAHABHJR.4 T.4 427
for it turns his body ugly and unrecognizable until his exile ends. But, in
the end, the story restores him to his wife, gives him skills in dice so that
he wins back his kingdom. As he listens to this story, Yudhi~1hira sees
that his plight is not singular and that he is only a half-finished story,
with him still in exile (Ramanujan 1980).
Thus, these scores of tales that seem to interrupt the main action have
a narrative function. They are performative, i.e. they too are acts, not
merely explanations. They add the vector of past and precedent to
present and future. They are "bovariste" as the French would say.
(Madame Bovary's fantasies and later actions are molded by the cheap
romances of her youth-a process aptly called "bovarisme" by Gaultier).
They also help in amassing repetitive networks and density, to make the
heroes' lives not singular but representative, tokens of a type.
(4)
Many of these features are also replicated in the local texture of
significant passages. Many waves of many amplitudes meet here-as in a
harmonic series. A passage like the description of the first contest
between Arjuna and Kari;ia is only one among many. It is one node of
the larger rhythms of the epic. Before reading the rest of this page, the
reader might want to refresh his memory of the following passage I'm
going to discuss: pp. 276- 282, in van Buitenen's translation of the
Adiparva (1973).
When the day came, the king and his councilors arrived, preceded by
and Krpa, the first of the teachers and they entered the royal stand
Bhi~ma
that, decked with gold leaf, was screened off by pearl-studded lattice and
paved with beryl. Then the great lady Gandhliri came out, and KuntT, 0
victorious king, and all the king's women with their maids and retainers;
and excitedly they stepped up on their platforms as the wives of the Gods
ascend Mount Meru. And the whole fourfold society of brahmins, barons,
and the others came hurriedly from the town and assembled to watch the
weapons trails of the princess. There was a crowd there like an ocean,
rippling in waves with the music that was played, and the people's
curiosity.
Then the teacher himself arrived with his son ASvatthliman, dressed in
white clothes and wearing a white brahmins' thread, anointed with white
ointments, white-haired, white-bearded; and he entered the middle of the
arena, as the Moon enters with Mars the sky that is cleared of rain clouds.
Mighty Dror;ia made an offering such as suited the day, and had brahmins
who knew the spells recite Vedic lines as a blessing. Then, as the sacred
sounds that blessed the day subsided, men entered the arena carrying all
kinds of weapons and gear.
Thereupon, the powerful bulls of the Bharatas descended with their
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
428
A.K. RAMANvJAN
bows, armour, and belts tightened, the quivers fast. Headed by Yudhinh
ira, the mighty princes from the eldest onward each gave a superb and
marvelous exhibition of weaponry. Some of the spectators ducked their
heads, afraid that the arrows might land on them, while others boldly kept
looking, wonder-struck. They hit the targets with their arrows, and nimbly
let go while they drove past with horses. And watching that army ofp rinces
wield their bows and arrows, the crow<h were astounded, as though they
were watching a castle in the air. Their eyes wide with wonder, the men
there wildly cheered them by the hundreds and thousands: "Bravo! Bravo"!
The powerful princes did their courses with the bow, over and again, on
chariot, elephant, or horseback, and in hand-to-hand combat. Then they
seized hold of their swords and shields and, brandishing their arms, ran
through the courses of swordsmanship all over the terrain. The spectators
watched the deftness, sir.ill, flamboyance, balance, and firmness of grip of
them all as they used their shields and swords.
Now Suyodhana and the Wolf-Belly descended, as always in high spirits,
clubs in hand, like two singlc-pcalr.ed mountains. The strong-armed princes
buckled their armour, hell-bent on showing off their masculine prowess,
like two huge rutting bull elephants joining battle over a cow. They circled
each other, sunwisc and widdershins, with thc.ir sparkling clubs, like two
bulls in rut. Vidura described to Dhrtaranra, and Kunti to Gandhari, all
the exploits of the princes.
VaiJa'!lpOyana said:
When the Kuru prince and Bhima, strong among the strong, had taken up
their position in the arena, the crowd split into two factions, each partial to
its own favorite. "Hurray for the champion, the prince of the Kurus"!
th~y
shouted, or "Hurray for Bhima"! and the wildly rising cheers of the
onlookers echoed widely.
The wise Dror;ia Bharadvaja looked at the arena that was like a stormy
sea, and he said to A.Svatthaman, his beloved son, "Stop those two
champions, highly trained as they arc, or else there will be a riot in the
arena over Bhima and Duryodhana"! The son of the guru halted the two as
they raised their bludgeons like two violent seas that arc whipped by the
tempest of Doomsday.
Dro1,1a entered the court of the arena, stopped the music band that raised
the din of a thundercloud, and began to speak: "Now watch the Partha, the
greatest of armsmen, son of Indra and the match of Indra's younger
brother, whom I love more than my own son"! Thereupon the young man,
whose happy entrance had been blessed by his teacher, entered with bow
and full quiver, with wrist guarded and finger guards tied on; and so,
wearing a golden cuirass, Phalguna made his appearance like a rain cloud
with a golden sun, iridescent as the rainbow aglow with lightning, red like
twilight. There was a huge commotion all over the arena, and the musical
instruments and the conches exploded into sound. "There is the mag
nificent son of Kunli''! "There goes the middlemost of the Par;i<;lavas"!
"There is the son of great Indra, the safeguard of the Kurus"! He is the
greatest of armsmen, he is the greatest of the upholders of the Law, of
morality, the supreme treasury of the wisdom of morals"! And when Kun ti
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
429
REPETITION IN THE MAHABHARATA
heard these words beyond compare that the spectators voiced, her breasts
became damp with tears that commingled with milk. His ears filled with
the uproar, Dhrtarli.$ira, the best of men, happily turned to Vidura and
asked, "Steward, what is that uproarious outcry like the roaring of a stormy
sea that has suddenly risen from the arena as though to rend the skies"?
Vidura said:
Phalguna Partha has descended, great king, the son of Par,u;lu, wearing his
armour; and hence this commotion!
Dhrtariif(ra said:
How lucky am I, and favored am I, and protected am I, sage, by these fires
of the Par,u;lavas that were kindled from the block of Prtha!
Vaifarrrpiiyana said:
When the rising theatre had somehow calmed down, the Terrifier began to
exhibit the skill with weapons he had learned from his teacher. With the
iigntya he created fire, with the viirvl}a water, with the viiyal!)la wind, with the
piirjanya rain; with the bhauma he entered earth, with the piirvata he brought
forth mountains. With the disappearing weapon he made it all vanish
again. One instant he stood tall, the next squat, then was up in front on the
chariot yoke, then again in the middle of the chariot, and the next instant
had jumped to the ground. Trained to high excellence, the favorite of his
guru hit and shot through fragile targets, and tiny ones, and hard ones,
with different makes of arrows. While an iron boar was moved about, he
loosed into its snout five continuous arrows as though they were one single
one. The mighty archer buried twenty-one arrows in a cow's hollow horn
that was swaying on a rope. And in this and other fashions he gave an
exhibition of his dexterity with the long sword as well as the bow and the
club.
When the tournament was almost over and the crowd had thinned and
the music stopped, there came from the area of the gate the sound of arms
being slapped, like the crash of a thunderbolt, which betokened greatness
and prowess. "Are the mountains rending? Is the earth caving in? Is the sky
filling up with clouds that are heavy with rain"? Such, overlord of the
earth, were the thoughts of the arena that instant. All the spectators looked
toward the gate.
Dro1,1a, surrounded by the five Pal,l4ava brothers, shone like the moon in
conjunction with the constellation of the Hand. The proud one hundred
brothers, joined by Asva11haman, surrounded Duryodhana,killer of his
enemies, who had risen to his feet. And he, brandishing his club, encircled
by the brothers who kept their weapons ready, stood there like the Sacker
of Cities of olden times surrounded by the hosts of the Gods at the
Slaughter of the Danavas.
Vaifa'!'piiyana said:
The people, eyes popping with wonder, made way, and Kan]a, victor of
enemy cities. entered the spacious arena like a walking mountain, wearing
his inborn armour and his fa<·e lit by his earrings, with his bow and tied-on
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
430
A.K. RAMANUJAN
sword-Kan;ia, scourge of the hosts of his foes, of the wide fame and wide
eyes, who had been born by Prthli as a maiden to the sting-rayed Sun, of
whom he was a portion. His power and might were like the regal lion's or
bull's or elephant's, and he was like sun, moon, and fire in brightness,
beauty, and luster. Tall he stood, like a golden palm tree, this youth with
the hard body of a lion. Innumerable were the virtues of this magnificent
son of the Sun.
The strong-armed champion glanced about the circle of the stands; then,
with none too great courtesy, bowed to DroQa and Krpa. The entire crowd
was hushed and stared at him, and a shudder went through the people as
they wondered who he was. With a voice rumbling like a thunderhead, the
eloquent brother, son of the Sun, spoke to his unrecognized brother, son of
Pila's Chastiser: "Partha! Whatever feat you have done, I shall better it
before the eyes of all these people. Don't be too amazed at yourself"!
He had not finished speaking, eloquent king, when the people all about
rose like one man, like a pitcher heaved from the well. Pleasure flooded
Duryodhana, 0 tiger among men, and abasement and anger pervaded the
Terrifier instantly. Dror;ia gave his permission, and the powerful,
pugnacious Karr;ia accomplished every feat that the Partha had achieved.
Wercupon Duryodhana and his brothers embraced KarQa; and he joyously
said to him, "\Velcomc, strong-armed hero! Good fortune has brought you
here, you who know how to humble pride. Take your pleasure of me and
the kingdom of the Kurus"!
Kal7}4 said:
Then enough of everything else! I choose to be friends with you. And I
want a duel with the Partha, Bharata!
Duryodhana said:
Enjoy all pleasure with me, show your friends your favour, and set your
foot on the heads of your ill-wishers, scourge of your foes!
VaiJarppayana said:
But the Partha thought himself insulted, and he said to Kari:ia, who stood
like a mountain in the midst of the crowd of his brethren, "The worlds that
are set aside for uninvited intruders, and for uninvited prattlers, those
worlds you shall attain, KarQa, when I have done killing you"!
Kal7}4 said:
The stage is open to all, so what of you, Phalguna? Barons arc those who
arc the strongest. Law obeys might. Why abuse, which is the whimpering of
the Weak? Talk with arrows, Bharata, until before your teacher's own eyes
I carry off your head with mine!
Vai1a'1'piiyana said:
Dror;ia gave his permission, and the Partha, sacker of enemy cities, was
embraced by his brothers and rushed to the other to fight. Duryodhana and
his brothers clasped Karr;ia, and he stood there ready for battle, holding his
bow and arrows.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
REPETITION IN THE MAHABHARATA 431
Then the sky became overcast with li.ghtning-streaked, thunderous,
rainbow-attended clouds that laughed with lines ofc ranes. And seeing how
Indra of the golden horses fondly down upon the stage, the Sun carried off
the clouds that came too close. Now the Pa1;1<java could be half seen, hidden
by the shadow of the clouds, and Kan;ia appeared in a nimbus of bright
sunlight. The sons of stood by Kan;ia; and Droi;ia Bharadvaja,
Dhrtar~1ra
Krpa, and stood by the Partha.
Bh~ma
The arena was divided, the women took their sides; but Kuntibhoja's
daughter, who knew the issue, fell in a faint. Vidura, who knew all the
Laws, brought the fainting woman back to consciousness by splashing her
with water in which sandalwood had been sprinkled. When her breath had
returned, she stared at her two sons; clad in their armour; but however
much grieved, she did not interfere.
As the two champions raised their large bows, Saradvata said to them,
for he was experienced in the conduct of duels and knew all the LaW1,
"This is the youngest son of Pa1;1<ju born from a scion of Kuru, who
P~ha,
will engage in a duel with you, sir. You too must now tell the names of your
mother, your father, and your lineage, and of the barons whose scion you
are. When he has learned them, the Partha shall fight you, or mayhap
not''.
At his words Kari;ia hung his head in shame, and his face faded like a
lotus that has been showered by the rains.
Duryodhana said:
Master, in the scriptures it is ruled that there are three ways for one to be a
king: to be born one, to become a champion, or to lead an army. If
Phalguna refuses to fight with anyone who is not a king then I shall anoint
him to the kingdom in the country of the Angas!
Vaiia111p;iyana said:
That very instant the warlike Kar1;1a was consecrated by Vedic brahmins
with roasted rice grains, flowers in golden pitchers, and enthroned on a
golden stool, to rule the kingdom of Anga; and the mighty hero was
endowed with fortune. He received a royal umbrella and a yak-tail fan; and
when the wishes for victory had died down, the bulllike king said to King
Kaurava, "What can I give that matches this gift of a kingdom? Tell me,
tiger among kings, and I shall do it so, my liege"! "I want your eternal
friendship"! replied Suyodhana. And upon his word Karl)a answered, "So
shall it be"! Joyously the two embraced and became greatly happy.
Vaiia.111payana said:
Then, his upper cloth awry, sweating and trembling, Adhiratha entered the
stage, swaying on his feet, held up by a stick. When Kari;ia saw him, he let
go of his bow and moved by his reverence for his father he greeted him with
his head, which was still wet with the water of the consecration. Nervously,
the chariot driver covered his feet with the end of his dhoti and said to
Karl)a, who was crowned with success, "Ah, my son"! Trembling with
love, he embraced him and kissed his head, and with his tears he once more
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
432
A.K. RAMANUJAN
sprinkled the head that was still damp from the consecration to the Anga
kingdom.
When Bhimasena Pa1.1c;lava saw Adhiratha, he decided that Kan;ia was
the suta's son and bunt out laughing. "Son of a siita", he said, "you do not
have the right to die in a fight with a Partha! You better stick to the whip
that suits your family. You have no right to enjoy the Anga kingdom,
churl, no more than a dog has a right to cat the cake by the fire at a
sacrifice"! At these words a slight tremor started in Kan;ia's lower lip, and
he sighed and looked up to the sun in the sky. But Duryodhana leaped up
from amidst his brothen, like a rutting elephant from a lotus pond, and he
said to Bhimasena fo terrible deeds, who stood his ground, "Wolf-Belly, you
have no right to speak such words! Might is the father of barons, and even
the least of barons deserves a fight. The origin of both barons and rivers are
surely obscure. Fire that pervades all creatures springs from water. The
thunderbolt that slew the Danavas was made from a bone of Dadhica. The
blessed lord God Guha is a complete mystery: he is said to be the son of
Fire, or the Pleiads, or Rudra, or the Ganges. Men born from baronesses
are known to have become brahmins. Our teacher was born from a trough,
Master Krpa from a reed stalk. And the princes all know how you
yourselves were born. How could a doe give birth to his tiger who resembles
the sun, with his earrings and armour and celestial birthmarks? This lordly
man deserves to rule the world, not just Anga! He deserves it by the power
of his arms and by me who shall obey his orders. Or else, if there be a man
who will not condone my action, let him, on chariot or on foot, bend the
bow'1!
There was a great uproar in the entire arena, mixed with cheers; then the
sun went down. Duryodhana, holding Kart.ta by the hand, his way lighted
by the flames of torches, left the arena. The Pai;ic;!avas, Droi;ia, Krpa, and
0 lord of the people, all went to their own dwellings. The people
Bhi~ma,
departed, some hailing "Arjuna"! others "Kari;ia"! others again "Duryod
hana"! And when she had recognized the king of Anga by his birthmarks as
her own son, Kunti's hidden pleasure grew with love. Duryodhana's fear of
Arjuna also diminished rapidly when he had found Kari;ia, 0 king of the
earth. That hero himself, who had mastered the labour of weaponry,
flattered Duryodhana with the most coaxing words. And at that time even
thought that no archer on earth was Kari;ia's equal.
Yudhi~1hira
The entire scene, where Dror;ia is displaying the martial skills of his
young disciples to the Kaurava assembly, foreshadows the later war. As
the young men arrive, buckled in armour, showing off their prowess,
Vidura describes it all to blind DhrtaraHra, and Kunti to blindfolded
Gandhari: as, later, Safijaya describes the war to Dhrta~1ra. The old
father's blindness is always kept in view.
All the parents and parent-figures are present here: the blind
Dhrtaras1ra, the heroic but ineffective Dror;ia and KuntI, the
BhI~ma,
mother of both Arjuna and Karr;ia (who become sworn enemies before
her very eyes, in this scene), and then, as a late arrival, the charioteer
and foster-father of Karr;ia, and also the true fathers of the two young
antagonists, the Sun-God and the Rain-God. These onlooking presences
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
REPETITION IN THE MAHABHARATA 433
enlarge the scene from earth to heaven, deepen the present with the
ironic poignancies of the ever-active past (like the heroes' births).
Protagonist and antagonist are matched for life beginning with this
scene: Bhima and Duryodhana, Arjuna and Karr;ia. And their fortunes
oscillate. This oscillation is dramatic in the case of Kan:ia's rising and
falling fortunes in the course of this one scene-which is paradigmatic of
all of his life. These oscillations are echoed not only in the shouts of the
crowd but in the heart of Kun ti who alone knows the identity of Kan;ia.
When she hears the shouts of praise for her Arjuna, "her breasts became
damp with tears that commingled with milk''. When Kan;ia gets ready
for battle with Arjuna, Kun ti, "who knew the issue, fell in a faint".
"When her breath had returned, she stared at her two sons, clad in
armour, but, however much grieved, she did not interfere". But we know
that before the very last battle of Arjuna and Karr;ia, she, who has held
her secret in silence till then, does interfere. By revealing herself and his
identity then to Kari:ia, she brings him inevitably closer to his defeat and
death.
To return to the contest: we begin by seeing Arjuna display his skills,
his mastery over the elements, fire, water, winds, rain, earth; he shoots
with different kinds of arrows fragile targets, tiny ones, hard ones, and
shoots five arrows into the mouth of a moving iron boar. These feats have
many resonances but I'll pick out only one. Arjuna shoots five arrows
here exactly as he does later when he wins Draupadi-it's as if he is not
alone in these acts but he is all five brothers.
Just as he finishes his display, we hear the sound of arms being
slapped, "like the crash of a thunderbolt", and Karr;ia enters. The
attention of the spectators shifts to Karr;ia. His beauty and prowess and
sun-like luster are fully described. He challenges Arjuna and calls him
Partha, son of Prtha or Kun ti- without knowing.that he, Karr;ia, is also a
Partha, Son of Prtha.'
' In this passage, as elsewhere, the repeated epithets and names play a crucial role.
Arjuna is called Panha (son of Prtha or Kunti), Kaunteya (son of Kunti), Pa9cjava, son
of Pa114u, Bharata ("de$Cendant of Bharata"), Kaurava, a scion of the Kurus, etc. Each
of these epithets highlights and descrioo an aspect of the hero, often ironically. Several
play on the irony of this apparent difference and deeper kinship with Karva to whom all
the lineage and matronymic names ("Kaunteya") apply as well, though no one present
knows it. The irony reaches a climax here when Bhima taunts Kar11a, laughing at his low
birth: "Son of a •iita, you do not have the right to die in a fight with a Partha"! I've
already commented on Arjuna's recital of his ten names lO Utlara in the act of self·
revelation. The Gita too uses several names for Arjuna and Knr;ta in significant ways: e.g.,
Paral'(ltapa, "chastiser of foes", reminds him of his duty as a warrior. Each of these
epithetic names, here and in the Purai:ias, summarize the history, index the actions and
relations of the character. The agent here is a sum of his actions, a point of intersection
for multiple relationships. Acts constitute the actor.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
434
A.K. RAMANUJAN
When he challenges Arjuna, the crowd rises "like a pitcher heaved
from the· well". Pleasure floods Duryodhana who offers Kan:ia friend
ship--one that lasts throughout the epic. When Arjuna and Kan:ia arc
about to begin the contest, "the Sun carried off the clouds that came too
close", reminding us of the divine fathers. Arjuna is "hidden by the
shadow of the clouds", and Kan;ia appears "in a nimbus of bright
sunlight". The arena is divided, the women take sides.
It's then that Karr;ia is asked to name his father and mother. He hangs
his head in shame (Arjuna is called Partha again here}, and his face fades
"like a lotus showered by the rains", suggesting the rivalry of the parent
gods, sun (friend to lotuses) and rain.
Duryodhana quickly interferes, instantly crowns Karr;ia a king with
royal insignia, raising him up again. At the height of this good tum,
enters an old man, swaying on his feet, held up by a stick, Kan:ia's
lowborn (foster-) father, moved by his son's good fortune, his tears
mixing with the water of his son's consecration. Now Bhima calls him the
son of a chariot-driver and shames him further. Throughout, there is also
a rivalry of explanations-what qualifies a man, might or birth? Herc
too the argument vacillates and is inconclusive, like the contest itself.
The crowd itself is divided in its opinions and it cheers for Arjuna now
and for Kan;ia again. Kunti too oscillates from grief to hidden love and
pleasure as she recognizes Karr;ia, now king of Anga, by his birthmarks.
Such oscillation of fortune, outcomes, rights and wrongs, and emotions
within characters in characteristic of this epic's movements, enacted even
in the texture.•
• Four outstanding images recur throughout to describe the war between the cousins:
(I) encounter between the gods and demons; (2) a forest of 1rees felled by some natural
calamity; (3) man as a sacrificial beaSI, the war as a sacrifice, and the end of a baule as
the dying sacrificial fire; (4) universal dissolution in the uhimatr fire. These images
extend the human time-span into mythic time, magnify the significance of the action and
its terror. Furthermore each is ~mbodit'd in some important incident within the act·ion:
(I) KotJa beheading Sisupala; (2) the Khar;u;lava forest decimated by a fire, devouring
1ree, bird and beast; (3) the sacrifices undertaken (the Afvamedha, the Rajasiiya, and the
bizarre vengefulness of genocide in the Snake Sacrifice); (4) fires, beginning with the fire
trap sel for the Par;u;lavas, the Khlil)<;lava fire mentioned above, and the forest fire in
which Dhrtara~1ra, Gandhari and Kunti die, and lastly, the fiery terror of Time in the
Gita when Kol)a is seen as the ageni of universal dissolution. I may add that each of these
should be seen as a ltitmotiv, subordinated to the total human action, not as a central
overarching theme. Madeleine Biardeau ( 1987) sees the epic as an extended sacrifice,
and Alf Hiltebeitel ( 1976) secs KntJa as a form of "Siva, destroyer of all". While each of
these emphases is truly illuminating, their overemphasis seem to me to underrate the
architectonic complexity of the human action of the epic.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
REPETITION IN THE Af.~HABH.1R.~TA 435
(5)
The dubeity and oscillation of fortunes, outcomes and emotions are fully
matched by the legal or legalistic ambiguities, arguments and counter
arguments that precede and succeed every major act- Karr;ia's rights in
the above passage, Knr;ia 's rights to receive the first honors at the
sacrifice, arguments regarding whether five brothers could marry one
woman, the rightness of the dicing game, whether Draupadi could be
rightfully wagered, whether Arjuna came out of the life to be lived
incognito before the contracted thirteenth year, and so on. It is not
dharma or right conduct that the Mahabharata seems to teach, but the
siikfma or subtle nature of dharma-its infinite subtlety, its incalculable
calculus of consequences, its endless delicacy. Because dharma-siikpnata is
one of the central themes that recur in an endless number of ways, the
many legal discussions are a necessary part of the action.
Related to this ambiguity is the ineradicable mixture of good and evil
in each of the main characters. The Piir;i<;lavas, with Knr;ia, who are "the
good guys", manage to kill every Kaurava hero, BhTsma, Dror;ia, Karr;ia,
and Duryodhana, by foul means. And the Kauravas, especially Duryo
dhana and Karr;ia, are not just villains, but heroic and honest warriors
despite everything. Neither is ever underestimated or underdescribed.
Also, the major Piir;i<;lava heroes are tested and found wanting in the one
virtue around which their ego, their character, and their great fame are
built. YudhiHhira, famed for his truth-telling, tells a lie to kill Dror;ia and
is at once taken down several notches- this virtuous man's chariot which
always moved inches above the ground now has to come down to earth
and run on it like any other defective mortal's. Arjuna, the greatest and
best equipped of warriors, loses nerve and morale in the first moment of
battle.'
' Folklore and latrr ,1,faJiiibharatas continue these tests and question Draupadrs chastity
also. For instance, both the Tamil Bharata of Villippunurar, the Kannada one by
Kumaravyasa, and a Tamil chapbook tell the episode in the VaMparva (third sand/11), the
Forest Book. In the Kannada Bhara/4, Draupadi secs a beautiful mango on a rrcc in a
sage's garden and covets ir. Bhima ferchcs it. The brothers soon learn that ir is a fruit
grown specially for the sage who wakes up from his tapa.r only once in six moths, when he
breaks his fasr wirh this single fruir in the garden. To forcsrall his anger, they wish
somehow to restore the fruit to its place in the tree. A$ only Kooa can accomplish such a
deed conrrary ro nature, they summon him. He docs arrive and says that the fruir would
return to its stalk only if each of the five brothers and Draupadi reveal their deepest
desire. The five brothers say nothing surprising or shameful- for instance, Bhima and
Arjuna desire fame and battle, and YudhiJJhira speaks of oneness. With each revelation,
rhe fruir rises magically roward rhe sralk from which ir was plucked. When it is
Draupadfs turn. she says that womcn desire all handsome men, even brother, father and
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
436
A.K. RAMANUJAN
Yet amid all these doubts, arguments and ambiguities, one thing is
certain-everyone's destruction. Through all the oscillations, there is a
single unrelenting direction-the destruction of the Kuru race. The
pervasive ambiguity here is not a structural uncertainty. In the short
range, what seems doubtful in outcome, in the long range leaves no
doubt at all about the outcome-which is neither winning or losing, but
nothing less than total destruction. Both Draupadi and Glindhliri, the
two queens on opposite sides, arc left childless.
Part of this relentlessness is the way pairs of enemies grow up together
or apart: Bhiima and Sikhar;i4in, Dror;ia and Dh~1adyumna, Bhima and
Duryodhana, Arjuna and Kan;ia. Vows and weapons gather towards the
moments of battle. And as Arjuna gathers weapons from Siva and others,
Kan:ia too gathers them. But the latter also gathers curses and forfeits, all
because he docs not know who he is, i.e. a K$atriya as well-born as
Arjuna. When he finally comes to know who he is, he is denuded further
by his promises to Kunti. In fact, his tragedy is not caused by a "fatal
flaw" but a fatal virtue-his generosity that makes him give away the
armour and earrings of immorality to Indra, his rival's divine father, and
that makes him promise Kun ti that he would kill none of the Plir;i4avas
but only Arjuna and that he would not use the same weapon twice.
With each day of the war, there is a further decimation until
Asvatthlimli kills all the Plir;i4ava children with his ultimate weapon, a
burning arrow that cannot be withdrawn, which reaches into the wombs
of the Plir;i4ava women to kill their foetuses (a terrifying prophecy of the
nuclear threat, as Peter Brook sees it), while hides the Plil)4avas.
K~i;ia
Only one foetus in Uttarli (wife of Abhimanyu) is revived from still
birth, leaving the Plii;i4avas one lone descendent. He is Pan1t$it, who by
his discourtesy to a sage, cams a curse, and is killed by a snake. So his son
vows vengeance and performs a sacrifice for the universal destruction of
serpents--during which the text comes full circle, for the Mah4bh4rala
itself gets told to this grandson, sole survivor. And the epic begins with the
snake sacrifice.
son. But the fruit docs not go back to the stalk, and Kni;ia insists that she tell the truth
about hc11el[ She then reveals that though she has five husbands, sht has six in htr
htart- a suggestion that she dt>irt$ Kan.ia as wdl, though sht do..n't know that ht is tht
sixth. In the Tamil chap-book, Pa1wwar Vall4Vlisam, this desitt for Kan;ia is madt txplicit.
Sht says sht had Sttn Kan.ia at htr bridt·choict befort Arjuna won her with his ftat of
.Jarchtry, had mistaktn him for Arjuna and desired him for htr hwband. Thus, Draupadi
the chastt wife is also shown up as having lewd desires. In Kumlravyiisa, she says,
"Womtn arc chaste only when men are not availablt". Set th< rectnt essay by Shulman
( 1989) for further discussion of this episode. I'm indebted to David Shulman for the
r<f<rtnces to Villipputtiirar and the Tamil chapbook.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
REPETITION IN THE ,\lAHilBHARATA 437
(6)
It's time to step back and sum up the conception of action in the epic
and how the replications are part of a total world-view.
I. The relentless march of each character towards his death is
accompanied by the suggestion of infinite regress in motivation, often
into previous lives. Yet, what's presented in "close-up" and in dramatic
terms is the present life.
Sage has cursed the divine Vasu brothers to be born as
Vasi~tha
mortals and suffer the thousand ills that such flesh is heir to. Ganga saves
the first seven from mortal lives by drowning them at birth. But the
eighth drowning is interrupted by Santanu who knows nothing or'the
curse and the release that Ganga is attempting. He saves the eighth child
for mortal strife, and he is Then the central act of life,
BhI~ma. Bh'i~ma's
his vow of celibacy, uncoils the rest of the action, including his refusal to
marry Amba, who vows vengeance and commits suicide to be reborn as
Sikhar;ic;lin, who alone can face and kill Bhi~ma. Thus a prenatal curse
and an early noble deed together fire the life that leads relentlessly to war
and death.
2. Many characters undergo similar experiences, as we have seen, for
example, in the kinship diagram with its repetitious patterns (e.g.
SatyavatI and Kunt'i) in relations, settings, acts, etc., or in the inset tales
like the Nala story wherein what happened to YudhiHhira (dice game,
loss of kingdom, exile) happens also to Nala.
3. Thus the experiences are not bound to one character. It's as if
action is released from character. Furthermore, the same man undergoes
an experience more than once-e.g. living incognito, or engaging in the
dice game, almost rehearsing it once and playing it for real a second or
third time--like a neurotic's compulsions to repeat, or certain "auto
nomous complexes". It's as if there's a kind of autonomy of action. Once
set into motion, the act chooses its personae, constitutes its agents.
4. Characters usually know what they are doing and still do it.
Counsellors advise YudhiHhira against the dice game, giving him
reasons, quoting texts. But he still accepts the invitation to the game.
The Par;ic;lavas are told that DraupadI is born out of a sacrifice chiefly to
wipe out the Kuru race, but then they still marry her.
5. No action goes unrecorded, unjudged, unexpiated- whatever be
the motives or the total character of the person. for his own good
Bh'i~ma,
reasons, rejects Amba's offer of marriage and so must die at her
hands. YudhiHhira yields to casuistry and tells a single lie. So he must
visit hell at least briefly. No action is withdrawn from consequence.
Kuntl's early indiscretion by which she gives birth to Kari;ia and
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
438
A.K. RAl>fANt:JAN
abandons him, dogs her and Kan;ia. Even KnQa dies ofGandhans curse
that he be killed by a lowborn hunter in an unknown place.
6. Not only action, not even a passion in the mind can pass unpurged
or fade without expre.ssion and consequence in the world outside the self.
Action, once it begins in thought and feeling cannot be repressed.
(Hence, Patanjali's yoga aphorism: YogaJcittaur,ttinirodha'1 "Yoga is the
stilling of the waves of the mind"). That's why when Dhrtarli$µa is
angry with Bhima and embraces him, KnQa pushes an iron image into
the blind old king's embrace. Dhrtarli$µ-a crushes the effigy in an
upsurge of repressed anger and that expressive vengeful act purges him of
his grief and rage. Gandhari's anger too must find expression: as her
sight (through the blindfold) lights on Yudhinhira's toes they begin to
smolder and bum. And she curses Kni;ia with an obscure and ignoble
death. As the passions already are a form of action with consequences,
mere self-control is not enough: they should not arise at all: hence
Patafijali's second aphorism quoted above. The Cita's ideal man is
therefore a sthitaprajna "the man with the steadied mind"; ideal action is
nifkiimakarma "the act without desire". For once the passions come into
being, they issue in actions. They'll get themselves enacted. So, says the
Citii, act without thought of results or attachment.
7. Hence, the dramaturgic notions of action issuing from character,
character transformed by action in some direct way, do not fit here.
Characters do not change here. The usual kind of expectation of
character change, of growth and maturation, is disappointed. Arjuna,
after the obviously mind-blowing experience of the Citii and the vision of
the Cosmic KnQa, docs not become a different man. He gains just
enough perspective to return to battle and to remain himself. The only
change in a character usually is one of knowledge, a shift from ignorance
to knowledge. U ttara sees Arjuna in his true form, but does not lose his
natural cowardice. Arjuna sees the true form of KnQa and is restored to
the action that is true to his "nature" (svabhava).
8. Furthermore, thanks to the replications, patterns of action are not
confined to single characters: similar things happen to Satyavati and
Kunti, to and Nala, in the past and in the present. Thus the
Yudhi~thira
notion of "character" as something finite (etymologically "engraved",
"fixed") crumbles as it opens into other lives and parta.kes of their
patterns.
9. The chain of causation, central to the notion of karma, is structured
so that one undergoes the same experience one has caused. If MliQc;lavya
thrusts a blade of grass in a fly as a child, later he is impaled on a
stake.Par:ic;lu kills a sage in a sexual act, so he dies in the act of sex. The
structure repeats itself, except that the subject (Par:ic;lu) of the first act
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
439
REPETITION IN THE MAHABHARATA
becomes the object in the second. Curses, boons, and the consequences of
past acts cannot be withdrawn- they have an autonomy independent of
character. Action thus becomes prior to actors. Knowledge of precedent
and legal advice do not prevent disastrous action- Yudhinhira gambles
after hearing all the arguments against dice as a breeder ofd isputes. And
the Par;u;lavas marry DraupadI after learning that she has been born out
of a sacrifice to root out the Kauravas.
(7)
In view of this way of thinking, the cast of characters can be divided into
watchers and actors: Vidura (the god of Dharma reborn in a servant
maid's womb) and Vyasa, the ancestor of all and the watcher/narrator of
the whole epic, and Sanjaya in the battle scenes, watch all the action.
and Droi;ia, after their initial actions, interfere very little-they
BhI~ma
can only watch the inexorable unrolling of events. Such watching and
witnessing is part of the silence and failure of the elders in catastrophic
scenes like the dice-game or the disrobing of DraupadI. The entire cast of
dramatis personae seems to illustrate the ancient conception that the self
has two aspects, a watching one (sakjin) and an active one:
Two birds, twin images
in plumage,
friends, ever inseparable,
cling to a tree.
One eats the fruit,
eats of the sweet and eats
of the bitter,
while the other watches,
watches without eating.
Buried in the bole
of the self-same tree
one suffers, engulfed
in his impotence.
Yet as he watches the watching
bird, the adorable one, and secs
the sweet bitter glory
as His alone,
he rises, free
from grief.
freely rendered from
III
Mu1Jefakopani~ad,
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
440
A.K. RA~IANUJAN
We said earlier that characters were not quite "fixed", or "finite" as
they are open to past lives as well as other lives around them. In another
way too their status as characters is changeable: they tend to act as
individuals sometimes, as representing classes and values at others, and
at other times as part of one composite unit. Others (e.g. Goldman 1980)
have noticed the composite character of Indian heroes like Rama and
In this epic, the Piir;ic;lavas act as one person· vis-a-vis KuntI,
Lak~mar;ia.
DraupadI and the Kaurava cousins. As noticed earlier, both in the early
exhibition of skills and in winning Draupadi, Arjuna shoots five arrows
into the target. He represents all five as warriors in the first instance and
as suitors to DraupadI. The Mahabharata says that was the
Yudhi~~hira
root and his brothers the branches of one tree. At another level,
centrally concerned with ethical issues, stands for Brahmin
Yudhi~!hira,
ical values and the others for the Bhima accuses him more than
K~atriya.
once of acting like a Brahm in, not a This pair is the focus of a
K~atriya.
central division and conflict in classical Indian society. Bhima and
Arjuna, frequently mentioned together as Bhimiirjuna, are clearly
warriors. Bhima is further distinguished by his physical power and
Arjuna by his art and skill. Nakula/Sahadeva, the twins, are the "main
tenance" men, like the Vaisyas. As Dumezil points out, here is an Indo
European tri-partite society. Their true natures are hinted at when they
. { Kn1.1a '
.
.
{ Kunti
Level I. / Pa1.1<;!avas ~ v1s-a-v1s
>
{ Draupadi
2. Dha~a thcfuur { Kauravas.
/
Counsel
''companion·· War
3. Bhimarjuna
I \
Maintmanct
4. Bhima Arjuna Nakula-Sahadeva
I \
Power Skill
'''A•restler "dancer and Nakula Sahadeva
and chef" charioteer'' Maintenance Su.rttMnct
''groom•• ··herdsman''
Level I. Unity of the Five Piir)c;lavas
2. Dharma vs. Karma
a
3. Tripartite (lndo-European, la Dumezil)
4. The five heroes individuated by the poet.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
Rt:P£TITION IN THE MAHJBHARATA 441
choose their disguises in Vira1a's court: YudhiHhira as a brahmin
counselor; Bhima as wrestler and chef (he's also known for his enormous
appetite and called Wolf-Belly, vrkodara); Arjuna as an artful dancer and
later as a charioteer; N akula as a caretaker of horses and Sahadeva as a
herdsman of cows. As Oscar Wilde says, "Give a man a mask, he will tell
you the truth".
The five heroes are also individuated by the poet (especially the first
three) by separate episodes for each-ex. YudhiHhira's dice-game,
Bhima's romance with the domoness Hidimba, Arjuna's with Uliipi and
UrvaSi, and his special relation with Knr:ia. They also have special
foibles, as revealed in their deaths. These various relations at different
levels may be summed up as in the diagram on page 44-0.
(8)
\Vhile I was contemplating the form of the Mahabharata, I happened to
browse in the section on crystallography in the Enc;·clopedia Britannica. I
found that the following sentences offered apt analogies for what I've
been talking about.
All crystals have at least this kind of order, which can be described as a
periodic repetition of their atomic chemical motif by translations. (p. 852)
Repetition can be defined by translation, rotation, and by reflection ... or
combinations of these simple devices. (p. 858)
On the Mahii.bhii.ratas in different languages, appearing in different
sizes:
\·Vhen a crystal is placed i11 contact with a solven1, ir dissolves in such a way
as to be consistent with its symmc1ry. (p. 858)
Crystallographers also speak of crystal growth in steps wherever there
is a "dislocation", which makes for both order and growth, an open
ended system. When one compares the many Mahii.bhiiratas or other
works based on the epics, the way new incidents are added only in
certain places where there seems to be a need for them, one thinks of such
an analogy with crystal growth. Of the scores of instances, I shall cite
only one. The way loses evrything in dice seems to many
Yudhi~Jhira
readers a little incredible. Others {like van Buitenen) have offered
ingenious, somewhat extra-textual explanations of why the dicegame was
necessary-e.g., it is because it was part of the Rajasiiya sacrifice, the
sacrifice that performs. There are other good reasons given
Yudhi~!hira
in the Sanskrit text: for one, Sakuni says, "Invite YudhiHhira to a dice
game. He loves to play dice but doesn't know how". Lest there should
still be any doubt regarding the absolute certainty of Sakuni's victory,
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
442
A.K. RAMANL]AN
both later and folk-Mahabharatas tell a story about Sakuni's past. Sakuni
and his brothers were once cruelly imprisoned by Vicitravirya in the
generation before Part of the cruelty consisted of giving all
Dhrtar~µa.
six brothers only one plate of food, just enough to feed only one, each
day. As they were all starving, tantalized by these morsels, they decided
to give it to the cleverest of them, so that he could survive and take
revenge. The test: to thread a bone without a needle. Sakuni, clever
Sakuni, threads it by tying a thread to an ant and baiting it with a grain
of rice. So the brothers give Sak uni the daily plate and starve to death.
Sak uni makes dice out of his dead brothers' bones and waits for a chance
to take revenge against the Kauravas. The dead men's anger in the dice
makes sure that Yudhi$fhira will win at no throw and will lose kingdom,
brothers and himself, and lead to a total war of destruction. Such a story
adds one more past and one more motive to the action. That's a
characteristic "growth step" for the Mahabharata.
$Surprisingly, many of the most important properties of the crystal are one
/ of the few odd places in which the crystal goes wrong. Many crystals could
.'., not have grown at all without having imperfections in them. (p. 866)
References
Bharati, Subramanya (Parati, CuppiramaQiya), Kacitaikal l\.1adras: Pumpukar,
(P~ms),
1976.
Biardeau, Madeleine, Lt Mali4bhiirala, I & II, Paris: Flammarion, 1987.
Oumciil, Georges, Mylht ti Epoplt, I, Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1968.
Goldman, Robert P. "Ramal) Sahalak1maoah: Psychological and Literary Aspects of the
of
-i.C'omposite Hero ofV1ilmik.i's RimliyaQa", Jo•rnal Indian Philosophy, Vol. 8, No. 2,
June 1980.
of
Hiltebeitel, Alf, Tht Ritual Ball/t, Krishna in the MaJr.ahhiirata, Ithaca: Cornell
U nivenity Press, 1976.
of
--, Tiu Cult Draupalfi, I, Mythologies: from Gingee to Kurulqctra, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1988.
Rajagopalachari, C., Tht Mahiibhiirata, Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan (in Tamil:
l\1aJ:izpizratam, VinoI i patippakam, 1973).
Ramanujan, A.K., "ls There an Indian Way of Thinking"? Conference on the Hindu
Persons, sponsored by rhe SSRC/ACLS Joint Committee on South Asia, 1980;
reprinted in Contrihulioru lo Indian Sociology, (n.s.) 23, I (1989).
--, "The Indian Oedipus", in Alan Dundcs and Lowell Edmunds (eds.), Otdipus: A
Folklort Casebook, Garland Press, 1983; revised version of"The Indian Oedipus," in
Indian Litnal•rt, ed. A. Potdar, Simla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 1972.
Sax, \Villiam, "The PaoQava Li11i", typescript, 1987.
Shulman, David D. . Tiu King and the Clown in South Indian Myllr and Pottry, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1985.
- , "On Fate and Being Human in the Sanskrit Epic: The Riddle of Nala"
(typescript), 1989.
--, "The Yak$a's Questions" (typescript). Seminar on Enigmatic Modes, Jerusalem,
1989.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
443
REPETITION IN THE MAHABllARATA
Tubb, Gary, "Siintarasa in the MaM.bluuata'', Journal of South Asian Lit<ralurt, vol. xx, no.
I, Winter, Spring 1985 (issue devoted to the MaM.bh.arata, guest editor: Arvind
Sharma).
van Buitcncn,J.A.B. (tr.), The MaM.bliiirata, vol. I, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1973.
Venkatcsa Ayyangar, M., Bhifratatirtha (in Kannada).
Google Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
HIMALAYAN VARIATIONS ON AN EPIC THEME
JOHN LEA VITI
For the several thousand years that we have any information about, the
tide of tradition has flowed across the South Asian subcontinent, giving
forth stories. These stories were (are) told to suit local needs for
amusement, explanation, or connection with the past or the gods; but
sometimes stories have stuck to each other and grown into more
extensive, complex, and fixed wholes, crystallizations (Ramanujan's
term, this volume) out of the intergenerational flow of tellings. The
growth of a large body of fixed discourse, an epic or a collection of
hymns, may be encouraged by the development of techniques such as
writing, oral-formulaic composition, or the disciplines of memory; once
in existence, such a textual monument changes the flow-pattern ofs tories
around it. These continue to develop and change, but they will begin to
draw on, refer to, and feed back into a text that is now a continuing
point of reference.
My use of a liquid metaphor to characterize the history of tradition in
South Asia is not, of course, original.' It reproduces a South Asian
metaphor, since many collections of poems or stories are called siigara,
'ocean', the most famous being the Sanskrit tale-collection the KaJhiisarit
siigara, literally 'the Ocean of Streams of Story'. The oceanic metaphor
also has the virtue of highlighting the continual process of interchange
between levels of tradition, between fixed text and folk text. While such
interchange takes place in all parts of the world, it is particularly marked
in South Asia, to the point of requiring rethinking of a whole series of
Western assumptions. Western scholars have generally accepted a dicho
tomy between a literate tradition made up of written and therefore per
manent texts meant to be read privately and an oral tradition ofs poken and
therefore ephemeral and public texts. This neat lining-up of oppositions-
= = =
written/oral fixed/fluid lasting/ephemeral private/public- is re
organized in surprising ways in some of the most important textual
1 The importance of patterns of flowing and liquidity in many aspects of South Asian
conceptualization has been most consistently and convincingly argued by McKim
Marriott. Sec, for instance, l'.iarriott 1989.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t•ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
445
Hl~IALAYAN \"ARIATIONS ON AN t:r1c THt:~H:
corpuses of South Asian tradition. Three cases: First, the Vedas, the
central texts of Hinduism, have been passed down for thousands of years
in a virtually fixed form not through writing, which has played the role
of an after-the-fact aid, but through prodigious feats of syllable-by
syllable memorization in one generation after another. Second, the great
epics, the Mahiibhiirata and the Riimiiyarµi, were composed essentially in an
oral formulaic mode/ woven together around central narrative frame
works, and transmitted as structured masses of story. While writing may
have contributed to their formation, here too it has primarily served as
an aid to oral performance--and a variable and impermanent aid at
that, due to the short lifespan of the writing materials available through
most of South Asian history.l Finally, in South Asia much of the folk
tradition has developed in interaction with the oral and written classical
tradition, and the prestige of writing is such that illiterate tale-tellers
often claim written sources for their stories. As often as not, these sources
are either vaguely remembered from several generations in the past or
are mysterious, legendary, or lost books that no one can quite get a copy
of any more.
Thus central to South Asian tradition are cases that violate our
expectations about literacy and orality: fixed and frozen bodies of oral
material that have lasted longer than anything written; writing as an
ephemeral aid to oral performance; an orality that co-exists with literacy
and often claims written origins. Rather than an oral or a literate
civilization as such, South Asia is a civilization of fixed orality, of writing
for reading aloud, and at the same time an oral civilization of the
phantom book.
This is not to say, however, as many have, that all aspects of classical
and folk traditions in South Asia are manifestations of a single under
lying pattern. The continual interchange between levels of tradition has
led, in my view, not to a single cultural monad (Marriott 1976) in which
all variation is to be seen as "the local working-out of (a general) idea"
(Dumont 1957: 25), but, on the contrary, to a situation so complex that
scholars have a hard time conceptualizing it. In most parts of South
Asia, multiple traditions continue to coexist and influence one other,
' As Sheldon Pollcwk puts it (1986: '.Iii. "1hc Riim4m~a. in 1hc form we han· i1, muSI
rrprc·sr11t lht• rt1lrllinatic>11 of a lo11g traditit>ll of l1cr<Jic Slltlg. ·· 'l'}1r m<>st am}Jitiot1s t'tfort
t() a11alyzr the Sanskri1 t'~>ic:~ in terms oforal.forn1tilair tl1<•(JT)' i.s that ofGrin1~r (1974).
For disl'ussions of 1hc oral naiurc of 1lw Sanskri1 epic. sec ln)lalls and Ingalls 1985:
O'flaheny 1978. 1988: Poll1x·k 191H.
1 On <>ralit\' and lit('r';lC'\' ar1<I on fixil\. and flt1iditv i11 5()\tth :\~ian lit('raturt'. sec
O'Fl<1hrrl\· 1988. rsp<'<·iall\' ·,hr «<li<>n "Fi~r<l and Fluirl Tc•xis in 1hr F.a<1" \PP· 56- 63\.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
446 JOHN LEAVlTI
without any one clearly dominating: rich and coherent oral literatures
continue to flourish check by jowl with orthodox oral and literate
traditions, to draw on the latter, and to overlap with them in subject
matter while maintaining their autonomy. Thus within a couple of
square kilometers in the Central Himalayas, some Brahmallll may be
chanting to an audience from a copy of the Hindi Riimaya,,a, other
Brahmans in a nearby house may be studying the Sanskrit Riimayll1}4
among themselves, in the village center a Hindi Riim Lilii may be going
on, while in a third house a local bard may be singing an orally
composed epic in the regional language telling of the deeds of Lord
Ram-here portrayed as a kind of village chief who slays demons in a
familiar landscape, and whose deeds may not be found in any written
text.
One way to begin to come to grips with this extraordinary complexity
is to focus in on the vicissitudes of particular bits of tradition, particular
themes. This is what I will be attempting here by presenting several
variations on one theme from the MaM.bhiirata, the story of the hero
Bhima's killing of a demon and his marriage to the demon's sister. I will
be comparing the Sanskrit version with variations that are told for
particular occasions in the village life of the Kumaon hill region in
northern India: first a translated retelling published in a scholarly work
on the region, then a performance of the story in its ritual context. In
both cases, I will be seeking to show ways in which differences in the
stories' content may be seen as responses to differences in their contexts of
telling.'
Classical and Folk Mahabharatas
The Mahabharata clearly illustrates this contiguity, interweaving, and
autonomy of traditions. It exists both in a relatively fixed written form
and in many oral folk forms that diverge more or less widely from the
written version. The written version itself is not an individual composi
tion but the end-product of centuries of oral transmission, crystallizing
out between the fourth century B.C. and the fourth century A.O. Like
the Iliad and the Odyssey, it is a written text that retains clear marks of its
oral composition. And the written text itself has only recently and
' For a discussion of similar issues in the analysis of a Himalayan venion of an
international folktale, see Leavitt 1981. On the worship of Hi9imba in South India, see
Hiltebeitel 1988: 212-215.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
447
HIMALAYAN VARIATIONS ON AN EPIC THEME
partially, with the introduction of printing, become an object in and for
itself, a book for reading in the Western sense. Through most of its
history, it existed in "a fairly small number of hand-written transcripts,
fatefully fragile, that assisted word of mouth" (van Buitenen 1973:
xxviii). Since its crystallization between the fourth century B.C. and the
fourth century A.O., the MalW.bhiiraJa has provided material for regional
and local traditions all over the subcontinent and wherever Hindu
civilization has had an influence. Vernacular versions of the epic have
generally remained autonomous while developing according to specific
cultural dynamics alongside and in interaction with the continuing
transmission of the Sanskrit version.
Commentators are always marvelling at the bulk of the Ma/W.bharata,
and it was long the fashion to decry its shapelessness, to consider it a
simple repository of all kinds of folkloric and religious accretions around
an original and straightforward narrative core. More recent scholarship,
on the other hand, without denying the syncrctistic nature of the epic's
development, has concentrated on its overall structure, whether as a
manifestation of more ancient patterns (Dumezil 1968}, in light of its
Hindu context (Biardeau and Peterfalvi 1986), or through noting
repetitions that weave the epic together, often in surprising ways
(Ramanujan, this volume). In this, contemporary Western scholarship is
in line with traditional Hindu views (Ramanujan, this volume; Tubb
1985). What is most striking about the Ma/W.bhiirata would seem to be not
its enormity and diversity in themselves, but the coherence that the text
imposes on this enormity: while it may indeed be a repository for the
odds and ends of lndic tradition, the Mahiibharata possesses mechanisms
for weaving these together and incorporating them into a coherent
whole--mechanisms that may have been furthered by writing, but that
do not depend on it.
The Mahabharata also, of course, exists in many regional and folk
versions. In the Central Himalayas, folk versions of the epic are
performed in single episodes. These fragments of epic material are made
to serve a wide variety of functions, including ritual, healing, and
entertainment. This is to say that folk Mahabharatas participate in a set of
occasions regulated not primarily by textual considerations as such, but
by social and cultural ones more generally: they depend on occasions of
storytelling, serve the ritual goals of a performance, provide justifications
for social institutions or explanations of the landscape. This complex and
changing symbolic economy, provoking the telling of stories of many
kinds, existed before the forging of the Sanskrit Mahiibharata, and indeed
provided its varied source material; it continues to develop alongside and
around the epic, drawing on and feeding back into it over the centuries.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
448 JOHN LEAVITT
Tiu Hil/imbii Story in the Sanskrit Mahabharata
The story of Bhima and Hi9imba in the Mahiibhiirata is found in the
Adiparvan (Mahiibhiirata 1.139- 143),5 immediately after the five Pai:i-
9ava brothers, the heroes of the epic, escape from the burning of the
Lacquer House in which their enemies the Kauravas had sought to trap
them. It is retold much more briefly in the Vanaparvan as part of the
Pai:i9avas' wife Draupadi's narration of their adventures up to then
(3.13.85-100). I'll be giving an extremely abridged version of the main
rendition, selecting bits from the van Buitenen translation ( 1973: 294-
301) and adding some explanatory material in brackets. I have not
bothered to note omissions, since doing so would have meant separating
nearly every two phrases with ellipsis points. The reader can easily refer
to the original; here I have simply pulled narrative phrases out of the
mass of descriptive and intensifying material that makes up the major
part of the Sanskrit text.
While [the Pa1.1<;lavas] were sleeping (in a wood), a Ra~asa by the name
of Hi<;limba was living not very far from the wood. He was hungry and
looking for flesh when he happened see them. Then (he] said to his sister,
10
"Kill all those humans and bring them 10 me." The Rak~asi hurriedly went
to the spot where the Pa1.1<;!avas were lying. No sooner had she seen
Bhimasena than the Rak~asi fell in love with him. "That swarthy, strong
armed, lion-shouldered, lustrous, conch-necked, lotus-eyed man is the right
husband for me! I won't follow my brother's outrageous orders. If I don't
kill them I'll be pleasured for years without end!" She took on a beautiful
human shape and approached Bhimasena, and smilingly she said to him,
"Where have you come from and who are you? This desolate jungle is
haunted by Rak~asas, and a wicked Rak~asa lives here. He is my brother,
and he sent me from sheer wickedness. But I chose you for my one and only
husband."
The lordly Rlik$asa Hi<;limba descended from his tree and went down to
the Pa1.1<;lavas. [Bhimasena challenges him.] They set upon each other with
all their might. Their great noise awakened the bulls among men, and they
and their mother saw Hi<;limbli (the demon's sister] standing before them.
[The other Pa1.1<;lavas try to help Bhima, but he rejects their efforts. Arjuna
warns him to kill the Rak~sa before dawn, "the grisly hour when Ra~asas
become stronger."] Bhima tossed up the body of the terrible Rak$asa and
spun it around over a hundred rimes. [After some taunting from Arjuna,]
Bhima became very indignant. He strangled [Hi<;limba] to death like a
sacrificial animal. (Bhima thinks it would be wise to kill Hi<;limba as well,
but she and Yu!lhi~thira persuade him to marry her instead.] She took
' Refr"nccs arc to the Critical Edition of the .~fahobhiirala. V.S. Sukthankar, ed. .
Poona: Bhandarkar Orienta.I Research Institute, 1933- 1966.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
449
Hl~·IAL.,YAN VARIATIONS ON AN F.PIC THEME
Shima and strode up above. On lovely mountain peaks she took on a
superb body, and she made love to the Par;u;lava. The gave birth to
Rak~i
a son by the powerful Shimasena. He was a terrifying sight [but appeared
human because] assume any shape they want. The shiny child
Rak~asas
bowed and touched his father's feet and his mother's, and his parents gave
him a name: GhaJotkaca, Shiny-as-a-Pot. This GhaJotkaca was devoted to
the Par;tc;lavas, and they loved him. Then Hic;limba said to Shima that the
time of their life together had run out; and she went her own way.
Ghafotkaca promised his father that he would come to them whenever he
was needed. For he had been created by Maghavat for power's sake, so that
he might destroy the great-spirited Kart)a, whose prowess was unmatched.
The story stands as an independent unit with its own internal
structure, the story of a remarkable meeting, battle, marriage, and birth.
Historically, the marriage of a hero with a demoness is found elsewhere
in Indo-Iranian mythology, and Dumezil (1968: 64) sees evidence for the
existence of a Hi<;limba-like story predating the formation of the Mahab
harata as a whole. In the form we now have it in, however, certain
elements of the story lead out of the episode itself and serve to bind it into
the overall Mahiibhiirata narrative.
Three such elements stand out. First of all, the very fact of the odd
marriage between a prince and a demoness serves to point up the special
traits of this particular prince. Bhima is a clearly defined character: he is
the biggest, strongest, fiercest, least thoughtful, most short-tempered of
the Par:i<;lavas; indeed, his very name means "frightful" or "fierce".
Because of this, since demons are defined by these very qualities, Bhima
is the most "demonic" of the Par:i<;lavas, something this marriage serves
to highlight. The centrality of Bhima's character to the Mahiibhiirata as a
whole has been stressed by Georges Dumezil (e.g., 1968: 63-65), who
sees him as representing the ferocious "berserker" aspect of the warrior
function, in opposition to his brother Arjuna, the courtly or knightly
warrior. For Dumezil, the Hi<;limba episode exemplifies this "demonic"
side of Bhima's character:
Unlike Arjuna, whose good fortunes link him to honorable women, Shima
unites himself with a Hic;limha, and gives her a son (an excellent
rak~asi,
one, by the way), just as [the Iranian hero Keresaspa, who in many
respects corresponds to Shima] lets himself be seduced by a demoness
(Dumezil 1968: 64, citing Wikander 1947: 38).
A second and more obvious way in which this episode connects into
the narrative as a whole is in the loose end provided by the birth of
Ghafotkaca, the formidable kinsman and ally of the Par:ic;lavas, who will
play an essential role in the great battle of toward which the
Kuruk~etra
whole multilayered narrative is made to build. As we have seen, this is
quite explicit in the text, which, foreshadowing th(' story ofGha1otkaca's
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
450
JOHN LEAVITT
death in the Drorµzparoan (Makabhiirala 7.149-155), tells us that Ghatot
kaca was created by Indra (Maghavat) to serve as a means of nullifying
the power of Kan;ia, the most dangerous enemy of the Par;u;lavas. More
specifically, Ghatotkaca will represent such an enormous threat that
Kan;ia will finally decide to use his one irresistible weapon against him,
instead of saving it, as he had intended, to kill Arjuna. The weapon, a
magic lance, was given to Karr;ia by Indra, and it can only be used once.
In the Jloka foretelling this outcome (Makabhiirata 1.143.38), which ends
the selection given above, van Buitenen translates Jaktihttor, "because or'
or "for the sake of Jakti", as "for power's sake". In this context, however,
Jakti is used not only for power in general, but specifically for Kan;ia's
magic lance, and it is in this latter sense that Peterfalvi translates the
phrase: "because of the magic lance (Jakti)" (Biardeau and Peterfalvi
1986: I, 142).
A third linking of this episode into the overall narrative structure of
the epic also derives from the fate ofGhatotkaca. He was born to counter
Kan;ia's "power" by serving as a substitute victim for it- a kind of
sacrifice. This too is part of a major theme of the epic as a whole, since a
whole series of sons of the Par;ic;lavas die on the field of battle, apparently
as sacrificial counterparts for the deaths of their enemies (Biardeau
1979).
In all of these ways, the story of Bhima and Hic;limba, which at first
glance seems an independent adventure, is linked into the structure of
the Mahiibhiirala as a whole. This kind of linking is, I think, typical of a
long, relatively fixed text that has developed its own internal
imperatives, its own tendencies toward structuration. We shall see that
folk versions of this story operate very differently, responding to a very
different set of imperatives.
The Regional Cycle: Mahabharat in the Central Himalayas
The Central Himalayan region, which covers the mountainous portion
of the Indian state of U ttar Pradesh, lies along the chain of the
Himalayas between Nepal to the southeast and the state of Himachal
Pradesh co the northwest. The region includes zones of high mountains,
of less i·ugged hills and valleys, and of flat land along the foot of the
mountains. The central hill and valley zone has always formed the
civilizational nucleus for the region. The people of this zone, called
Paharis or mountain people, formed the core population of the two
kingdoms of Garhwal and Kumaon, which were overthrown by the
Nepalis in the late eighteenth century, and were soon after that incor
porated, for the most part, into British India. The population of this
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
451
HIMALAYAN VARIATIONS ON AN EPIC THEME
region is mainly Hindu, mainly rural, mainly poor but not starving.
Economically and politically, the region is peripheral to the North
Indian scene; no longer independent kingdoms, Garhwal and Kumaon
now form the mountainous part of a state dominated by the enormously
larger population of the North Indian plains.
Historically, the people of the central hill and valley zone have been
fairly, but only fairly, open to influence from the plains, which was
slowed down by the malarial jungle at the bottom of the hills and by the
ruggedness of the outer ranges. As a result, the hill population, not only
in the Central Himalayas, but in much of Himachal Pradesh and much
of Nepal, speaks languages related to the great lndo-Aryan languages of
North India, but distinct from them and forming a distinct Pahari
language family. The dominance of Hinduism indicates the relative
openness of this region to the plains, but the kind of Hinduism practiced,
centered primarily on local divinities and heroes, is an indicator of its
relative isolation. Both of these factors- language and religion- are of
central importance in understanding the nature of Central Himalayan
oral literature.
The linguistic situation in Kumaon-which is the sub-region that I
will be discussing-is highly complex (as are most linguistic situations in
South Asia). Before the Nepali and British conquests, Sanskrit was the
language of orthodox ritual, and the regional Pahari language, now
called Kumaoni, with its various dialects and registers, the dominant
language of village, bazaar, and court. The British introduced adminis
trative Hindustani, and Hindi, the official language of the state of Uttar
Pradesh, is today the language of administration, education, broadcast
ing, most publishing, including all newspapers, and much of urban life.
Sanskrit has retained its place in orthodox ritual. Kumaoni remains the
major language of everyday interaction, especially in rural areas, where
the people have been massively illiterate until very recently; and it is the
language of an extraordinarily rich and vibrant tradition of bardic
performance.
Versions of the Mahiibhiirala exist in all three languages. Copies of all
or part of the Sanskrit text, especially the Bhiigavad Gitii, are common,
particularly in Brahman families. Mass-published Hindi versions and
translations are widely available, although there is neither a popular
Hindi version of the Mahiibhiirata nor a public performance tradition
based on the epic, both of which are the case for the Riimiiyal]a. Finally,
the oral tradition in Kumaoni includes an enormous mass of Mahii
bhiirata-related material. But to give an idea of this material requires a
clearer distinction between traditions related to the Pai:ic;lavas, on the one
hand, and the Kumaoni use of the word mahiibhiirat on the other.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
452
JOHN Lf,A VITT
In folk literature, toponymy, and local historical traditions, the
Pai;u;lavas ·have a special link to the Central Himalayan region, which is
where the Mahabharata tells us they came at the end of their lives. The
association is particularly strong with Garhwal, and in Garhwal the
Pa1:u;lavas are considered both ancestors of some living clans and still
active, still present in the region. In Garhwal, Pai;u;lava-worship has
developed into an elaborate cult, the Pii1}t/av Li/ii, that involves controlled
possession by the heroes of their devotees (Berreman 1963: 381-385; Sax,
this volume). This strong link between the Pa1;1<,lavas and this region led
Gerald Berreman to postulate that rather than being borrowed from
Sanskrit literature, the Par;ic;lavas "may well be indigenous objects of
worship in these hills who have been universalized to become part of the
literary tradition of Hinduism" (1963: 382).6
Par;ic;lava-worship is less developed in Kumaon than in Garhwal, but
here too the heroes are important in landscape and legend; one of the
most important lakes in the region, for instance, is called Bhimtfil,
"Bh'im's Lake." In Kumaon, the stories of the Par;ic;lavas arc sung by
semi-professional bards as ballads or sung epics. The bards classify them
as mahiibhiirat, but it is important to note that this use of the term refers
not just to the Sanskrit epic, but to a genre of bardic performance:
mahiibhiirat includes the whole set of ballads that arc derived from
classical epic or Puranic sources. Mahiihhiirat present regional versions of
the stories of orthodox Hindu gods and heroes such as Ram, Knr;ia, Siva,
and so forth (Gaborieau 1974, 1975; P. Je>Si 1971: 6- 8; Par;ic;lcy 1962:
171-179). Mahiibhiiral versions are thus distinct from the orthodox
versions of the stories, which are retold by Brahmans and in performan
ces, such as the Riim Li/ii, which are not a particular preserve of the
bards-who are usually of low caste and of very limited formal educa
tion. As one bard put it when I asked him whether Raval) figured in his
mahiibhiiral version of a story of Ram, "That's in books, that comes in the
Riim Lila. Ravar;i and so forth, that comes in the Riim Li/ii." At the same
time, mahiibhiirat is equally distinct from the other genres of oral literature
that the bards perform, which tell primarily of regional divinities and
heroes. Ballads of regional gods are performed as part of nocturnal
possession rituals of healing and blessing calledjiigar or 'vigil'; ballads of
non-divinized heroes are sung at fairs and to inspire work in the fields at
highly labor-intensive points in the agricultural cycle.1 These are all
' Even ifit is true that the Pi1,1c;lavas originated in the hills-and it is not clear how one
is to tell this- there has been a great deal of feedback from the Sanskrit epic onto the hill
re~resentations of the heroes.
On indigenous and scholarly definitions of oral gmres in Kumaoni, see Gaborieau
197+: Leavitt 1985; Pa1,1c;lcy 1962.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
453
HIMALAYA:\ V.~RIATIONS ON AN F.PIC THF.Mf.
distinct from the many folktales and fables that circulate among the
population as a whole.
Mahii.bhii.rat is performed not primarily for entertainment, but either as
an adjunct to jii.gar, in which case it is seen as an additional offering to
the regional god, who likes hearing these stories of the great Hindu gods
and heroes, or as rituals in their own right, meant to bring blessings on
the family sponsoring them. Mahii.bhii.rat are generally said to be stories of
avatars, but here again the term has a greater extension than it has in
classical literature: these auatii.rs arc not descents of to earth, but
Vi~r;iu
rather divine beings who have acted on earth. Ram, K11r;ia, Siva, the
Par;ic;lavas, and often the Goddess are all auatii.rs in this sense (cf.
Gaborieau 1975: 150-151). Unlike thcjii.gar, mahii.bhii.rat performance as
ritual does not involve possession, and, while it is meant to bring
blessings and control demonic forces in general, it seems less focused than
the jii.gar on dealing with specific illness or trouble.
While mahii.bhii.rat seem clearly derived from epic and Puranic models,
these regional versions have usually been transformed-sometimes dras
tically-through a period of oral transmission. In an essay on Kannada
folklore, A.K. Ramanujan ( 1986: 64- 67) asks, "What happens when
classical myths are borrowed and retold by folk performers?" He offers
four ways in which such myths are transformed, all of which fit Kumaoni
mahii.bhii.rat. First of all, these stories "appear mostly in bits and pieces" in
the folk tradition. This process of fragmentation, as I argued at the
beginning of this essay, seems to be a result of the great difference in the
requirements of village performance from those of a relatively integrated
fixed text. Ramanujan continues by pointing out "three kinds of striking
changes in the folk form." First, the gods and heroes are domesticated,
that is, made more like the people who are telling and listening to the
story. Ramanujan cites Rama's runny nose in a Kannada version of his
story; compare this to Bhim's prodigious urination in the version below.
Second, "the folk renditions localize the pan-Indian epics and myths,"
that is, they re-set them in localities familiar to the story's audience.
Finally, "folk renditions tend to contemporize the action." All three of
these processes serve to bring the events of the story nearer to those who
are telling and hearing it, whether in time, space, or the nature of the
protagonists-all are processes, if I may coin a term, of proximatior:. Both
fragmentation and proximation make sense in a context of ritual
performance, since the first allows the story to be used in internally
coherent pieces in performances, and the second heightens the pertinence
of the performances for those who take part in them. I will be drawing
on these concepts to orient the discussion of Himalayan variants of the
Hic;limba story.
Afahohhiirat s1orics about the Par;i<;lavas may be found in a few books on
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
454
JOHN LEAVITI
Kumaoni folklore, where they are generally arranged in a way that
follows the chronology of the Sanskrit Mahiibhiirala, forming a kind of
cycle of stories within the mahahhiiral genre (K. J oSi 1971: 89- 95; Pa9c;ley
1962: 172- 174). These stories show a high degree of proximation to
contemporary rural life in Kumaon. The Pa9c;lavs and the Kauravs, for
instance, live in two villages with their respective mothers; the cause of
their enmity is a fight between the Pa9c;lavs' cat and the Kauravs'
chicken.
The longest such set ofretellings is found in U.D. Upadhyay's book in
Hindi, A Literary and Cultural Study of the Folk Ballads of Kumaon (1979),
which includes a version of the Hic;limba story which I present in
translation below. U padhyay's version has passed through three filters
before reaching us: it is a retelling rather than an attempt to reproduce
the actual telling; it is retold in prose from a sung original; it is a
translation into Hindi of a story originally performed in Kumaoni. My
own translation, of course, is a fourth filter. While Upadhyay's book
offers discussions of many aspects of these ballads, it does not give
information about their singers or their region of origin within Kumaon.
Upadhyay's version (1977: 279- 281) sets the Hic;limba story during
the period of the Pa9c;lavs' dwelling in the forest. The Pa9c;lavs arrive in a
part of the forest in which there is nothing to eat. Here is an abridged
translation (for a full translation, see Leavitt 1988):8
Bh'imsen said to his family members, "Around here there aren't any fruits
or flowers . .. So I am going away to look for food, and I'm going to put
you people in some safe place ... " Bh'im made a tree-house in a tall tree
and settled his family in it and went away looking for food. Going, going,
Bh'im came to Hic,lamba's house. Hic,lamba challenged Bh'im play at
10
swinging with her. "If you win at swinging, thea I will go with you; if I
win, then you'll stay in my house . . .. " At that time Hic,lamba was
pregnant and her months were almost fulfilled. Bh'im and Hic,lamba started
playing on the swing. Sometimes the swing would brush one edge of the
sky, sometimes it would brush the other. Sometime's Bh'im's side was on the
point of winning and sometimes Hic,lamba's side. Finally, when the swing
was at its highest on Bh'imscn's side he gave it one extra push upwards.
With this great jerk of the swing, Hic,lamba's womb fell [i.e., she gave
birth), and Hic,lamba lost the swinging game. Out ofHic,lamba's womb fell
' Like most modern lndo-Aryan languagcs, Kumaoni has lost Sanskrit final -a, and
thi$ principle has been extended to Sanskrit loanwords. So, for instance, Sanskrit Bhima
gives Kumaoni Bhim. At the same time, in Kumaoni the differences between b and v
(with v sometimes being pronounced like English w or a very short u). and betweens and
; are not phonemic, and pronunciation tends to fluctuate by position. So from Sanskrit
Siva we have Kumaoni Siv, Sib, or Siu, from Pa1;u;lava Kumaoni PiQdav or Pi1Jdab.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
455
HIMALAYAN VARIATIONS ON AN EPIC THEME
a child; he tied his umbilical cord around his waist and started to fight with
Bhimsen. Bhim knocked him down playfully. Both Bhim and Hi<;larnba
(the child] went into Hi<;lamba's house.
This first section of the story already gives a good deal of information.
It is evident, first of all, that we are not dealing with a parallel oral
tradition that has grown up independently since ancient times. The
names alone indicate close and fairly recent interaction with the Sanskrit
Maliiibnarata, and the story clearly seems to be derived from the epic.
Significant divergences from the Sanskrit version arc, however, already
evident. The meeting with the demoness has been elaborated to become
a contest. The role and importance of the son, on the contrary, have
shrunk drastically. He is no longer Bhim's son at all, but the result of
some earlier amour of the demoness's; and once Bhim has established
friendly relations with him, he disappears from the story. This severs
what the Sanskrit text presents as the main link between the Hic;limbii
episode and the Maliiibharata narrative as a whole, and so represents a
major step in the isolating of this episode, part of the general fragmenta
tion of the epic discussed above. This dual pattern of elaboration of the
internal clements of the story and weakening of its links to the epic as a
whole will keep recurring in the two Kumaoni versions being considered
here. We should note, however, that the disappearance of Ghafotkaca is
not universal in Kumaon. Under the name Ghiiiftu, he continues to be
an important figure in some parts of the region, with temples dedicated
to his worship (Atkinson 1884: 807). We may, then, presume that in
other parts of Kumaon the link between this story and Ghafotkaca's
career remains part of the tradition. This is simply to say that the
fragmentation of the epic is not uniform, but depends on local histories of
transmission.
Meanwhile, Hi<;lamba's brother Kinkar Danu [i.e., Kinkar the Dlnava,
the demon] went into the jungle where the Par:i<;lavs were ... Kinkar Dlnu
saw the Par:i(javs up in the tree, and he decided to steal them away ...
Calling to the Par:i<;!avs from below, the demon said, "Hey ascetics! There is
a piijii at my house, I've come to invite you all .. . "The Pau<;lavs said, "But
we're up in this inaccessible tree, how can we get down"? The demon set a
ladder up against the tree and underneath it he spread a net. All the
Par:i<;lavs came down ... and Kinkar Danu shut them all up in the net and
headed for home.
Meanwhile, Bhim was remembering his family. Bhim went back to that
jungle to look for them . .. He saw that the tree-house was empty ...
Lamenting, Bhim wandered all around the forest.
Kinkar Danu took the net with the Pau<;lavs in it to a temple of the
Goddess [Kali] in order to sacrifice them ... The demon brought the
net ... into the temple and tied it up tight. In his heart, his very heart, he
was delighted, thinking, "Today when she gets such powerful offerings, the
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
456
JOHN LEAVITT
Goddess will be filled with power [to grant me blessings]." The demon
asked each of the Pi11-i;lavs who or what could save them at such a time.
Each told of his own weapon, which now was far away. Only Draupadi
said, "Now ifBh'imsen is a warrior at all, then he will save us." The demon
burst out laughing: "Bhim is like a fly, what can he do?"
In the Sanskrit version, the demon comes to see what is going on, and
the fight takes place there in the wood. Herc a whole new theme is
added: the demon captures the rest of the Pi1;u;!avas and takes them
home to sacrifice to his patron goddess-it is, of course, appropriate for
bloodthirsty demons to practice blood sacrifice to Kali. The purpose
here, as in blood sacrifice practiced by humans instead of demons, using
buffaloes, goats, or chickens instead of people as victims, is to strengthen
and please the goddess, who in turn will grant blessings.
Meanwhile Bh'im, weeping, weeping, came back to Hii;lambi's house
and ... explained the whole situation. Hii;lambli told Bh'im of her brother's
evil deed ... Bh'imscn went to that Goddess temple, took on the form of a
flower-bug, and hid in a basket of flowers. Bh'im was brought into the
temple along with the flowers and he quietly started to cat the materials
and offerings for the pUjii.. When it was time for the six Pi11-i;lavs to be killed,
Bh'im took on a gigantic form and burst the roof of the temple. The six
Pir;ii;lavs escaped, and BhTm and the demon started to fight.
Bhim came out of the temple dragging the demon along behind him ...
For seven days and seven nights there was a ferocious battle. Bh'im staned
to feel tired and pinched by hunger . . . In his heart, his very heart, he
remembered Q).teen Hii;lambi. Suddenly Hii;lambi was there, and .. .
together [they] put an end to the demon. All the Pi11-i;lavs stayed at
Hii;lambi's house for some time, then they went back to the jungle.
Three areas of divergence from the Sanskrit Mahiibharata stand out in
this story. All represent both an elaboration or the internal structure or
the tale and a weakening of its links to the Pi1;u;lava-cpic as a whole.
The first area of divergence has to do with the plot and narrative
setting. In the Sanskrit Mahiibharata, the Hic;limbi story takes place
immediately after the escape from the Lacquer House, and so is bound
up in a highly structured series or events. Herc, however, the incident
with Hic;lambi has been made part of the Pit;1c;lavas' period of forest
dwelling (Book Three of the Sanskrit text}. This shift dccontcxtualizes
the episode, since the forest dwelling is here treated as an amorphous
period without overall narrative structure, during which one adventure
simply follows another. At the same time, some of the elaborate plot-line
that surrounds the Hic;limbi episode in the Sanskrit version has here been
incorporated into the episode itself. The battle between Bhim and the
demon, a straightforward fight in the Sanskrit Mahabharata, here
develops into a story of abduction, incarceration, imminent slaughter,
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
457
HIMALAYAN VARIATIONS ON AN EPIC THEME
and escape-a reversal of the syntax of the Sanskrit narrative, in which
the meeting with the demoness follows the Pai:iQavas' escape from
entrapment and murder in the Lacquer House.
The second area of divergence has already been noted: the folk version
loses interest in the son while greatly developing both the meeting with
the demoness and the battle with her brother. The shift in interest is
reflected in the use of names in the two versions. In the Sanskrit text the
demoness and her brother share a single name, each being simply the
masculinization or feminization of the name of the other, while the son
has a memorable name of his own. It seems to me that this pattern is a
key to the balance of the story as a whole, whose narrative elements fall
into two parts: first, Bhima marries/destroys HiQimba/HiQimba, allying
himself with a tractable demon while eliminating an incorrigible one,
and at the same time replacing her brother as HiQimba's lord and
master; this leads to the birth of Gha1otkaca, a figure fated to save
Arjuna, making the whole story one more example ofBhima's service to
his brothers. In the Kumaoni version, it is the son who has to share a
name with his mother; he is a kind of smaller double of hers. The two
main parts of the story are now, the namings suggest, first the subduing/
marrying/adopting ofHiQamba/HiQamba, then the complicated struggle
with her brother-a brother who has now earned a name of his own.
The subduing and destruction of demons is now the whole story,
contained in itself. And this is of great importance, since much of
Kumaoni folk religion is dedicated to the controlling of demonic forces,
and it is the gods celebrated in jiigar and mahiibharat who are called upon
to control them. How dangerous qemons are depends on whether they
are brought under control or allowed to run wild; properly subdued and
fed, demons can, as this story shows, be extremely helpful-especially in
fighting other demons.
A third area of divergence, closely related to the other two, is in the
character ofBhima himself. In the Sanskrit Mahabharata he is the biggest,
strongest, and fiercest of the brothers, as well as the least clever, and
through the length of the epic Bhima's physically strong and headstrong
character is contrasted with those of his brothers- YudhiHhira is wise
and cautious, Arjuna the "parfit gentil knyght," and so forth. In the folk
version, while Bhim is strong indeed, he is also clever and possessed of
magical powers of transformation. These changes of character are
necessary in Bhim's role as a subduer of demons. Herc it is not his rugged
charm that brings the demoness into his power, but his victory in a
struggle with her; and while it is his strength that ultimately defeats her
brother, it is his cleverness and magical skills that get him to the temple
on time. What we are seeing, I think, is Bhima 's transformation into the
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
458
JOHN LEAVITT
all-round divine hero of Kumaoni ritual narration, a figure charged with
controlling demons, who must at least match them in strength and
sorcery while beating them in brains---dcmons being notoriously and
fatally stupid.
In all of these areas of divergence from the Sanskrit epic, the process of
fragmentation, of isolating the folk text, is accompanied by one of
internal elaboration. Both of these processes are set in motion by the
requirements of ritual narration, which is meant to bring blessings and
the control of demonic forces for a specific group of participants.
The elaborations and alterations that are evident in this multiply
filtcred generic retelling of the story are, as we shall sec, even more
pronounced, more exuberant, in a version collected from a bard in
performance.
Mahabharat in Performance
In 1982 I had the opportunity to participate in and record a series of
mahiibhiirat performances in pargana Kufauli in northern Nainital Dis
trict, an area that is culturally and linguistically part of central Kumaon.
The singer was the bard Kamal Ram Arya, who is well known in this
area, particularly since his late father, who was his mentor, was
considered the area's finest bard. Kamal Ram himself maintains that his
ballads are derived from a book call the /)ho/ Sagar, "the Ocean of
Drumming;" he's never actually seen the book himself, nor has any other
bard that I was able to meet.
Kamal Ram performed a series of mahiibhiirat over several nights. The
stories sung were of the avatars of Ram, Knr:ia, Siva, and the Pat;1c;lavs.
During a conversation after the performance of the Ram avatar, Kamal
Ram told a prose version of this Par;tc;lav story, and I will be drawing on
this from time to time to supplement the material presented here.9
A translation of the entire performance of the Par;tc;lav avatar would be
far too long for this space. The bard uses several oral styles in perfor
mance, some of which involve a great deal of repetition, including
periods of singing certain lines over and over again. We will have to
make do with a retelling of the narrative in the ritual, illustrated with
translated excerpts from the sung performance. '0 In the translations, a
9 This story was told in mixed Hindi and Kumaoni prose, with the Kumaoni taking
over as the teller got more involved in the telling. It bcc:n published in an English
translation (Leavitt 1988). Herc I have corrected some mistakes in that translation.
'°
Final vowels, especially ·a, arc ofttn added in bardic chanting. I have sometimes
shown this in the translation for the sake of the rhythm: Pa11cjav or Pi\!Qava.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
459
HIMALAYAN VARIATIONS ON AN EPIC THEME
slash ( / ) is used to indicate breaks in the bard's chanting marked by a
long note held by an assistant or members of the audience; ellipsis points
(. ..) indicate the omission of material.
The bard begins with the chanting of sandhya, literally "evening," a
kind of evensong that opens the performance of both }agar and mahiih
hiirat, both of which arc done at night. While each bard performs sandhya
in his own way, all sandhya evoke the swinging fall of evening and invoke
regional divinities to be present and attend the performance. He sings
slowly and deliberately:
Oh, listen, Bhagvan, at evening time, oh evening time/
I
At evening time, Narayar;i, we take your name
Narayar:i, at evening time, evening time has come swinging/
Evening has swung, at evening time, oh Narayar;i, we take your
name, Mother Evening has swung in U ttarakhai;iQ / . . .
At evening time what work is being done, Bhagvan? At evening
time, ho, in the falling evening/
At evening time, Narayai;i, the little bird of the nest has gone into
the nest / ...
At evening time what work is being done, Bhagvan? The child of
the lap is sitting in the lap/ . . .
Thus far, we have the general setting of an evening ritual, using
formulas that are identical to those Kamal Ram sings in all his sandhyas,
and similar to formulas used by other bards. The bard orients the
participants in space and time, locating them and describing the
activities associated with evening time.
Uttarakhar;iQ, literally " the northern section" or "region," is the name
for the hill region including both Kumaon and Garhwal. Narayar:i,
Bhagvan, and, later, lsvar are all general divine names; the ritual is
being addressed to all the gods, but particularly the gods sung about in
mahiihhiiral.
From this point on, the sandhya is aimed specifically at the presentation
of mahahharal, the stories of avatars, rather than any other kind of ritual:
At evening time where has evening swung? To those houses,
Bhagvan, where there are such avatars /
At evening time in those houses, Narayar;i, what work is being done
at evening time? /
The bard then describes the cleaning and preparations of the house for
the performance and moves on to the blessings associated with houses
where mahahhiiral is performed. He contrasts houses that have a
"Lak~mi­
woman," i.e. a good mother described as preparing for the mahahhiiral,
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
460
JOHN LEAVITT
with those that have "a woman of evil signs." Where the
La~mi-woman
dwells is the dwelling of the goddess and so of prosperity and
La~mi,
'happiness; where dwells the woman of evil signs- presumably one who
does not encourage the hiring of bards to do flees
mah.ibharat-Lak~mi
fifty-two kos away.11
The bard then names the various avatars whose stories have already
been sung to us:
I have sung for you ['caused you to hear'], Narayai:i, lords, the
Siva avatar/
After singing you the Siva avatar, I sang you the Ram avatiir /
Whoever hears the Ram avatar goes to the heavenly world, to Ram's
world /
Whoever hears the Siva avatar, whoever hears it goes to Siva's
world/
I have sung you the Knua avatiir, I've sung it to you/
Whoever hears the Kni:ia avatiir, lords, he goes to dwell in Baikun
Jha I
Today I will sing you, Bhagvan, the Pauc;lav avatar /
In those houses where, NarayaQ, there are such avatars at evening
time/
In those houses, Narayai:i, from one comes ten million, from five
come fifty/
In those houses is the dwelling of Laksami, in those houses
fears stay far away /
At this point, without a change in melody or rhythm, the bard shifts
from sandhya into the narration of the mahabharat story. He begins:
There were, NarayaQ, at shady Jainti homestead, there were,
I
Narayai:i, the five Pai:ic;lava brothers
There were the five Pai:ic;lava brothers, Arjun, Nakul, Sahadev,
Bharata /
Bhim Singh Pai:ic;lava, they were at shady Jainti /
The five Pai:ic;lava brothers, Narayai:i, they were men of might, the
five Pai:ic;lava brothers /
Their mother was Kuntha at shady Jainti homestead, the five
Pauc;lava brothers I
So mighty was Bhim Singh Pai:ic;lava, at shady Jainti homestead /
He wielded a twenty-two pir sword, Bhim Singh Pauc;lava, ho the
I ...
five Pai:ic;lava brothers
11 I have not attempted to translat<' weights and measures.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
VARIATIONS ON AN EPIC THEME 461
Hl~1ALAYAN
[A.rjun's) wife was named Dropadi, in their house, Bhagvan, was
the Lady Dropadi / ...
One day the Pa1;u;lavas' mother said, DharmavaQi Kuntha, / ...
"Since your, our fathers' deaths in our shady Jainti homestead,
PaQ(,iavas, Bhim Singha, /
We have not performed your fathers' sariid [the ancestral rites,
Sanskrit Jriiddha]. Let's do it," said Kuntha, "our fathers' sarad." /
What is most evident here is an even greater degree of proximation
compared to the Sanskrit text. The PaQ(,iavs are here typical rural
Kumaoni brothers of the warrior caste, living at their homestead with
their mother and the wife of the eldest, here Arjun. As in such a
household, the mother tends to be the boss.
But the greatest factor of proximation in this version is the hero's
name. The Sanskrit Bhimasena, one of the forms of Bhima's name,
changed to the modern form Bhimsen in Upadhyay's retelling. Here,
however, the bard has heard the name as Bhim Singh. "Singh," from
Sanskrit sil'(lha, 'lion', comes in the second place, that of the caste marker,
in all Kumaoni names of men of the warrior caste. "Bhim Singh," then,
is a perfectly normal and in fact extremely common Kumaoni man's
name.
The bard goes on to tell how Mother Kuntha sends her sons off to find
their family priest, the Brahman Baru Josi. Another striking bit of
proximation: the priest lives in another village, presumably a village of
Josi Brahmans. Since the small villages of upland Kumaon, such as those
of the bard's area, are usually inhabited by a single patrician, intercaste
cooperation is also intervillage interaction. And Josi is one of the most
common Brahman clan-names in Kumaon (see, for instance, the two
JoSis cited in the references below).
The PaQ(,iavs go to the priest's house and ask for his help, but Bhim
Singh insults him, and he refuses to come with them. This aciir,
"excessive behavior" (Sanskrit aryiiciira) is typical of Bhim Singh's
character, and the word will be used in relation to him throughout the
performance.
The PaQt;lavs return home, and Mother Kuntha roundly chastises
Bhim Singh, who informs her of the Brahman's curse. She sends him
back against his will to apologize to the Brahman and beg him to come.
Bhim does so, returns home, and tells his mother to make ready for the
sariid.
At this point Dropadi goes to the spring to draw water. But there is
someone at the spring already: the Iron-Devil Demon, Luviisuri Daint
(Sanskrit dairya), who puts on Brahman's clothes and sandalwood on his
forehead. He tells Dropadi that he is the family Brahman, come to do the
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
462 JOHN LEAVITT
saraa, and she bows down to him and guides him back to shady Jainti
homestead. Mother Kuntha welcomes him, but Brum Singh is suspicious.
He says that this is no pandit, and his mother chides him again for his
rudeness. Bhim Singh points out some of the "Brahman"'s demonic
traits: he has shifty eyes and "so much filth on his body you could dig it
with a hoe" (ku/fluv klwdan mai/a). The demon, realizing that he'd better
get rid of the perspicacious Bhim Singh, says that to do the saraa he needs
sesame seeds from the Garden of Death (kaviihiiri ti/a), and that only
Bhim Singh can do the job. Brum accepts this task and departs.
Brum Singh got halfway on his road, halfway on his road Bhim
Singh Pal)ljava /
Bhim Singh got halfway on his road, and there Bhim Singh fell into
rolling, rolling sleep /
At shady Jainti homestead, Narayal), the demon said, "Oh five
Pal)Qava brothers, / . ..
We'll do our work when Bhim Singh gets back/ ...
Listen, Pal)Qavas," said the demon, "bring me a pot full of water/
I will give you darsan [a religiously-marked vision] of your fathers,"
said, Narayal), the Iron-Devil Demon/
The brothers bring the pot and the demon tells them to look into it.
They gaze at their own reflections, thinking them the images of their
ancestors.
ffi)
Behind them the "honorable pandit" (,parµJit pulled out,
Narayal), he pulled out his Iron-Devil net /
He threw it over them, he threw the Iron-Devil net over the
I
five Pal)Qava brothers
He threw the Iron-Devil net over Mother Kuntha too, he threw
the net over Dropadi too /
The demon tied up the net, the demon threw the net over his
shoulder and hit the road /
The five Pal)Qava brothers, Narayal), and the sixth Dropadi, were
all locked up (handurai) /
The demon mocks the Pandavs in the net on his back; Dropadi says
that if only her divar (husband's younger brother) Bhim Singh were there
he'd fix things, but of course he's not. She breaks her necklace and
throws golden jewels from it onto the ground to mark their way.
The relationship between a bhauji (elder brother's wife) and her divar
(husband's younger brother) is highly marked in Kumaon, as it is in
other parts of North India. Ideally, it is one of easy affection and
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
HIMALAYAN VARIATIONS ON AN I::PIC THEME 463
familiarity, often involving teasing of the divar by the bhauji and
reciprocal devotion on his part.
Brum Singh comes back to shady Jainti homestead; he laughs in anger
to see his family gone.
"Oh Mama," he said, "The demon has taken Mama. I told you so,
Mama, oh Mama Kunthli /
I told them it was inauspicious to do our fathers' sarad. Well, so be
I
it," said Bhim Singh Par.i4ava
Bhim Singh goes to the altar and eats all the heaps of food that had been
prepared for the ceremony.
Bhim Singh said, "I'm not going, I'm not going," said Bhim Singh,
"to look for the five PliQQava brothers, I'm not going to look for
them." /
Bhim Singh in shady J ainti homestead, Bhimi Par.i4ava spread out
his golden bed, Bhim Singh Par;i4ava /
When Bhim Singh was in his golden bed, Bhim Singh went to
rolling, rolling sleep / . . .
Bhim thinks better of his decision, however, and sets out to look for his
family, particularly for his bhauji Dropadi. He follows the trail of jewels
that Dropadi dropped 10 mark their way.
The five Par.i4ava brothers are now in the Demon Fortress (daintigarh),
tied up in the Iron-Devil net.
In the middle of the road, Narliyar:i, what work was being done, oh
in the middle of the road? /
That Iron-Devil demon, Bhagvlin, he had two, he had two little
sisters/
Two sisters, whose names were, Narliyar:i, oh my Bhagvlin, /
Hirmli and Khirmli were their names. What work had the demons
done in the middle of the road? /
Hirma is a predictable Kumaoni transformation of the name Hi4imba,
showing greater divergence from it than does U plidhyay's form
Hi4ambli. This repeats the pattern of divergence we saw with the
progression from Bhimasena through Bhlmsen to Bhim Singh and is
evidence for considering the Uplidhyliy version an intermediate one
between the Sanskrit text and this version.
(Hirma and Khirma) had spread out a twenty-two hand wide cloth,
and over it they had written a sign, at the Demon Fortress /
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
464 JOHN LEAVITT
They had cut a woman's skirt (glulgari}, Bhagvan, the demons had
made everything ready /
They had written on the sign, "Whoever is the son of a living
mother, he will jump over my twenty-two-handspan cloth. /
Whoever is the son of a dead mother, he will cross over walking on
my skirt." /
The demons had set up a game of dice, Narayar;i, a game of dice/
Any male traveller on the road has to choose between attempting a
superhuman leap or accepting the double insult of being called the son of
a dead mother and having to tread on a woman's skirt. This is a
deceptive dice game: the losing stake is beautifully decorated, the
winning stake is filthy and unappealing.
Going going Bhim Singh Par;i<;lava arrived there, ho Bhim Singh
I
Par;i<;lava
Bhim Singh saw the twenty-two-span cloth, Bhim Singh did this
aciira, Bhim Singh /
Bhim Singh did his Eastern Leap, Bhim Singh leapi over the
twenty-two-span cloth /
The demon's little sister said, "My bhin (elder sister's husband)
Bhim Singh has come! Come on, bhin, come on," she said.
In a variation on the already-established theme of affinal bonding, the
demoness- presumably as part of the deception-calls Bhim Singh
"elder sister's husband," a highly honorific title. This appears to be a
way of luring him into the dice game, which, it has been arranged, he
will lose. Bhim Singh not only accepts this kinship appelation, but turns
it to his own advantage: he calls the demoness "wife's younger sister"
(sdi), putting her in a relationship of service to him: a wife's younger
sister does what her older sister's husband asks. He asks for some water.
The demoness tells her servant girl (literally, "orphan," a terrn of abuse)
to go and get it, but Bhim Singh says that he will not drink water from
an "orphan'"s hands; the demoness has to go herself. In her absence,
Bhim Singh sits himself down at the winning stake, the one disguised
with mud and filth. The demoness returns with the water, asks him what
he's doing sitting in the mud, and he says, "Forget the water, let's throw
dice!"
Bhim Singh threw fives and sixes, Bhim Singh, ho Bhim Singh
I
Par;i<;lava
Bhim Singh won everything of the demons', he won the house, the
demons' house /
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
465
Hl~IALAY AN VARIATIONS ON AN EPIC THEME
The two demon sisters Hirma and Khirma, Bhim Singh, Bhim
Singh made them his own /
Bhim Singh said, "I'm going, I'm going, sai, I'm going", he said,
"to the Demon Fortress/
Now you tell me, tell me, my sai, /
Tell me where arc Mother Kuntha, my bhauji Dropadi, the five
I
Par;ic;lava brothers?"
The sisters tell him that his family has been kidnapped by the Iron-Devil
Demon and that they will be sacrified in the temple of Kalika the
following night. Bhim Singh sets out for the demon's fortress.
On the road there was a blacksmith. What work was the blacksmith
I
doing, Bhim Singh Par;ic;lava?
The blacksmith was carrying a trident, carrying it, that Blackie
Blacksmith (karyii Ivar) I
Bhim Singh said, "Hey, Blackie Blacksmith, that trident, Blackie,
where are you taking it?" /
Blackie Blacksmith joined his hands [in respectful greeting]; what
did Blackie Blacksmith say?/
"Oh our master," he said, "is having a piijii to Kalika in the Kalika
Temple /
Narayar;i, there will be a Kalika piijii and she'll be getting a sacrifice
of Panu birds." /
Bhim Singh said, "Oh Blackie Blacksmith, buddy, what will you get
paid?" asked Bhim Singh Pandava /
Blackie Blacksmith said, "Oh great king, I'll get a leg," he said,
Narayai:i, Bhim Singh Par;ic;lava /
Bhim Singh grabbed hold of Blackie Blacksmith, beat him to bits,
twisted his leg around and stuck it in his mouth/
This is how sacrificial goats are treated: after the goat is killed, its head
with one leg in its mouth is offered in the temple. "Panu birds" is an
obvious pun on Pai:ic;!av.
Bhim Singh then meets a basketmaker who says he will get a back
from the sacrifice, so Bhim tears off the basketmaker's back and leaves
him there with his back in his mouth. Finally, Bhim meets a flower
gardener picking flowers and filling a basket with them. These are
flowers, he says, that he is providing for his master's sacrifice of Panu
birds.
Bhim Singh seized his mother's truth (sat), he seized his bhauji's
truth /
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
466
JOHN LEAVITI
Bhim Singh, my Bhim Singh changed his shape, he changed to the
shape of a fly, Bhim Singh Par.1';lava /
Bhim Singh changed his shape to that of a fly, Bhim Singh went
inside a flower/
The flower-gardener took up his basket and carrying, carrying it
went to the Demon Fortress/
At the fortress, the piijii. is underway. Suspecting that Bhim Singh might
be hiding in a flower, the demons are weighing every flower that arrives;
any that seem heavier than usual they are tossing into a pot of boiling oil.
But when they weigh the flower with Bhim Singh in it, it's as light as can
be. They take that flower into the Kalika temple and put it right on top
of the ling, the phallic symbol of Lord Siva.
The demons in Demon Fortress, the demons were so happy in
Demon Fortress /
Bhim Singh did such an acii.ra, Bhim Singh Pandava, in Demon
Fortress, ho Bhim Singh Pandava /
Bhim Singh had to piss, Bhim Singh Par;u;lava did such an acii.ra /
I
Bhim Singh from the top of Kalika's ling, Bhim Singh pissed
This made the demons so happy, the demons said, "Our Kalika is
very delighted," /
The demons said, "Today Mother Ganga has come here! Demons,
come on and take a bath!" /
Now the Iron-Devil Demon took hold of his net, he brought the
Iron-Devil net/
The demon asks the Pa1;u;lavs who will save them now. They reply that
since he has captured them, no one can save them. Only Dropadi says
that if her divar Bhim Singh were there, he'd save them. The demon
replies that Bhim Singh is like a fly (speaking more truth than he
intends). Hearing this, Bhim Singh gets angry in his flower.
Bhim Singh's forearm hairs, Bhagvan, stood up from his forearms,
Bhim Singh Pa1;1e;lava {
The hairs on his waist, Bhimi, Bhim Singh Par;u;lava, stood up from
his waist/
Oh Bhim Singh's buttery throat, Bhim Singh Par;u;lava, sprang up
hundred-maund goosebumps/
Struck by anger, Bhim Singh suddenly stood up, Bhim Singh
I
Par;ic;lava
Bhim Singh takes on his true form, gets out his sword and starts
slaughtering demons. This is one of the bard's periods of fast repeating of
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
467
HIMALAYAN VARIATIONS ON AN EPIC THEME
sung lines:
Oh Bhima, now Bhima was waging battle, he was waging battle/
Oh Bhimiya, he started looking at his Eastern Thorn (his sword),
his Eastern Thorn /
Oh Bhima, he was waging battle, he was waging battle/
Oh Bhima, he was waging battle, he was waging battle/
The bard then continues in a fast, clipping prose:
Oh that Bhim Singh was giving battle, lsvar my father. For every head he
cut off a hundred demons were born. He was drowning in a river of gore
(ragal ki gangii). And Bhim Singh was getting sleepy. And Bbim Singh
Pa1;u;lav was getting hungry, hungry, he was getting thirsty, thirs1y. In
golden dreams, Bhim Singh wen! 10 Mocher Kun1ha. "Look here, Molher
Kun1ha. I'm drowning in a river of blood. I'm drowning in a river ofg ore.
I'm hungry-hungry, I'm thirsty-thirsty." Then Mocher Kuntha gave forth
a scream of milk [from her breast]. From this stream of milk Bhim Singh
had a milky feast ... Then Mocher Kuntha said, "Oh Bhtmi," she said,
"you won't be able to stop the demons' heads (from growing) the way
you're doing it. Press a black bumblebee (hh4oor) under your heel. Oh
Bhtmi, throw a whi1c bumblebee up into the sky," she said.
The bard goes back to singing as he tells ofBhim Singh doing this. In his
prose version of the story given several days earlier, he explained that
this stopped the reproduction of demons; here he moves right on to the
next thing. Bhim Singh picks up the net, tosses it over his shoulder, and
goes back to shady Jainti homestead.
Having reached this point in the story, it is time for the bard to bring
the audience directly into the narrative action: it's time to cut the
demon's web and led the Pa1:u;lavs out. The bard asks for a knife and a
brass plate with some rice and a small clay lamp on it. He has
constructed a little net out of string, and each person present comes
forward, passes his or her hand over the flame, and cuts part of the net
with the knife. The bard sings, over and over again, variations on the
following:
I have cut, I have cut today, oh I have cut the Iron-Devil net/
I have cut the Iron-Devil net, I have opened it up for the
Pa1:u;lavas /
For the five Pa1:u;lava brothers I have opened, I have opened what
was shut up / ...
As each person comes up, cuts the net, and offers a little money on the
brass plate, the bard modifies his song, names the person, and says that
he or she has cut the net and released the Par:u;lavas. When this ritual has
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
468
JOHN LEAVITf
been completed, the bard closes the performance:
Oh gods, the Pa1:u;lav avatar is complete, it is complete/ ...
Oh Bhagvan, the net has been cut, they have been released from
the net, released from the net/
Oh Bhagvan, from one come twenty-one, from five come fifty,
from five come fifty / ...
Oh Bhagvan, the Par:u;lav avatar is complete, the Par:u;lav
avatar/
Hail! (jay hO!)
This is not the place for attempting a rigorous analysis of this tale, one
which would take account, among other things, of its manipulation of
kinship relations, the bloodthirsty piety of its demons, and its streams of
urine, blood, and milk. Some things, however, can be said. While I
cannot tell how typical or idiosyncratic this version of the story is, there is
one overwhelming difference between it and those we looked at earlier:
this version was presented as part ofa ritual. In Kamal Ram's own view,
this ritual performance was the "real" one, and he considered his prose
retelling of it-which, after all, conveyed only information, not benedic
tion- unworthy of the tape it took to record it.
Some of the striking characteristics of the version presented here are
directly determined by this ritual context. This is most obvious for the
framing elements that open and close the performance. These consist
largely of reiterations of the effectiveness of the performance itself: where
the mahabharal is heard is the dwelling of there will be happiness
Lak~mi,
and increase. Insofar as these parts of the performance contain references
to other stories, they are to other similar rituals, other recitations of
avatars, not to other parts of a longer connected narrative. These framing
elements of the ritual replace the strictly narrative frames of the Sanskrit
text, which tell how one character told the story to another character
who recited it to a third, and so forth.
Within the telling of the tale itself, we find again the three areas of
divergence from the Sanskrit text that we noted for the Hindi prose
version; here, these divergences go farther in the same direction.
I. I noted earlier that themes of incarceration and escape that precede
the episode in the Sanskrit version were found inside it in the Upadhyay
version. Here these themes have grown more evident: the Par:ic;lavs are
caught in an iron net, and the whole point of the ritual is to let them out
again. And now the isolation of the episode is even greater: it begins and
ends not with the Par:ic;lavs between two adventures, as in the Sanskrit
text, nor while they are, exceptionally, drifting through the forest, as in
the Upadhyay version, but at home. This is a base situation of absolute
normalcy from which any adventure is equally possible. Such a fixed,
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
469
HIMALAYAK VARIATIONS ON AN EPIC THEME
stable opening and closing point, typical of folktales around the world,
effectively seals off this episode from any longer connecting narrative.
2. The demon son, the main link to the overall narrative in the
Sanskrit Mahabharata, has disappeared altogether. Hii;limba is doubled
again, but this time by a little sister with more or less the same name
whose function in the story is not at all evident. On the other hand, this
version shows an even greater elaboration of the agonistic game-playing
between Bhima and the demons. It is richly complicated with multiple
disguises, transformations, tricks and counter-tricks, all of which lead to
Bhim Singh subduing or destroying demons.
3. The rounding-out of Bhim Singh's character that typified the
Upadhyay version progresses in this one. BhTm Singh is now both the
youngest-this was specified in the prose retelling-and the most
intelligent of the Par:ii;lavs: the bard calls him antarjiinl, "knower of what
is inside (hidden}." He sees through the demon's Brahman disguise when
no one else in his family does, and his absence is what allows the demon
to trick and capture them. He outwits demonesses and sneaks his way
into the sacrifice just before his family is slaughtered, where he urinates
all over the demons, who in contrast reveal their stupidity by taking it for
holy water.
This version of the story also brings out a new aspect of Bhim Singh's
character by insisting on his aciir, his excessive behavior, both bad and
good. First of all, as in both the other versions, he is excessively strong,
and in Kumaoni folk literature this also means that he is an excessive
eater, drinker, and sleeper. More specifically, the deeds described as aciir
include both his troublemaking at the beginning of the story and his
wonderworking at the end of it.
We observed in discussing Upadhyay's version of the story that the
new facets of BhTm's personality all serve to make him an adequate
controller of demons, a central role of divinities in Kumaoni lore. This
ritual version of the story allows us to go farther and say that some
degree of excessiveness-the very trait that characterizes demons-is also
necessary for a Kumaoni divinity to be able and disposed to deal with
demons. Such divinities, typically the regional divinities of the hills, are
usually dangerous and somewhat demonic themselves, and the jiigar
ceremony is specifically designed to bring them under control by
inducing them to possess a human medium and dance. The aim is
focused relief of some trouble, often a demonic one.
Now Bhim Singh, like the other protagonists of mahabharat, is not this
kind of possessing god, 12 and his mahabhiirat is not performed to cure a
" Th• •xception here is the Goddess. who participates in both categorfrs and d~
fX>SS<"SS p<:Oplf.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
470
JOHN LEAV ITI
specific illness or a run of devilish back luck. Y ct the general blessings
that mahiihlraral arc supposed to bestow involve telling of a divine hero
controlling and destroying demons; and some of the stylistic devices
Kamal Ram uses for no obvious reasons other than aesthetic ones in fact
serve specific purposes in }agar. The periods of loud sung repetition of
lines, for instance, are used in jiigar for the possessed oracle to dance to.
The principles of the two genres, in other words, seem to parallel each
other, with the }agar representing a more "concentrated" form of
processes that are also at work in mahiihlraral. Here again, mahiihlraraJ
performance shows linkages not into a narrative universe as such, but
into the ideological and practical universe of Kumaoni folk religion.
Conclusion
It would be foolhardy to make any hard and fast claims on the basis of
three variants of a tale. At the same time, however, the comparison of
these texts does reveal clear patterns which might merit further investiga
tion.
We noted earlier that the differing forms of the names Hi<jimba and
BhTmascna suggest that this version has diverged more widely than has
Upadhyay's from their common source. Whatever the reason for this
pattern-a longer period of oral transmission, a bard's lesser exposure to
the classical version, his more active imagination, or any number ofo ther
factors-it is repeated in the structure of the stories themselves. The
Sanskrit text and the Kumaoni performance represent opposed poles
along a couple of dimensions: the first is relatively fixed while the second
is relatively fluid; the first is bound up in a larger narrative context while
the second, a separate narrative unit, is bound up in a specific situational
context, in this case a ritual one. The version published by Upadhyay is
intermediate on both scores: it is a fixed retelling ofw hat we must presume
to have been a far more fluid original; and it has been situationally
de-contextualized and narratively recontextualized as one of a series of
Pal)Qav stories, either by the author or his bardic informants. The three
versions thus progress from the dominance of an intra textual context to
that of an extratextual one. Two mutually reinforcing processes are at
work shifting the texts themselves from one kind of context to the other:
a process of increasing fragmentation, that is, of separation of the episode
from the rest of the epic; and a process of increasing proximation and
internal elaboration, both of which tend to increase the pertinence and
power of the story for those helping to realize it in a ritual meant to affect
their lives directly.
It remains to be seen whether other variants bear out this interpreta-
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
471
HIMALAYAN VARIATIONS ON AN EPIC THEME
tion and whether these processes can be seen at work more widely. My
effort here has been to chart the patterning in one small set of narrative
variations, an eddy in the ocean of story.
Appmdix
Kumaoni texts of a few of the excerpts from the Mahabharat performance
by Kamal Ram presented here.
• • •
First excerpt, beginning: "Oh, listen Bhagvan, at evening time. .."
sui:ia bhagvano, sandhya bakhat me ho sandhya bakhata /
sandhya bakhat, narait;io, tumara nam lhinfi ho/
naraii:io, sandhya bakhat maja jhuli ai ge ho sandhya bakhata /
sandhya jhuli ge, sandhya bakhat, Tho narait;io, tumar nam lhinfi,
mat a, jhuli sandhya ge uttarakhar;ic;la maja /. ..
sandhya bakhat ke kam hai rai, bhagvano, sandhya bakhat me ho
I
parar:ii sandhya
sandhya bakhat, narait;io, ghole ki cari ho gholai rai
phai~i
cha/. ..
sandhya bakhat me kya kam hai rai, bhagvano, godi ko balak ho
godi bhaiµ rau cha/. ..
• • •
Second excerpt, beginning "At evening time where has evening swung?"
sandhya bakhat me sandhya k~ jhuli ge cha? jin ghar5 me,
bhagvano, yasa-yasa avatara /
sandhya bakhat me un ghar5 maja, narai1.10, kya kam hai ri ho
sandhya bakhata /
• • •
Excerpt beginning "There were, Narayal), at shady Jainti homes-
ea d ... "
t
chiya bhagvano syoi jainti bara chiya, chiya narair.to pancai
bhai pa1.1<;1ava /
pancai bhai pa1.1<;1ava chiy a arjun, nakul, sahadev, bharata /
bhim siilh pa1.1<;lava chiya ho syoi jaintI maja /
pane bhai pa1.1<;lav, narair.to, baladhari chiya ho pancai bhai
I
pa1.1<;lava
uneri ma ta holi kuntha syoi jainti bar ho pancai bhai pa1.1<;lava /
yasa baldhari chi ya bhim sinh pa1.1<;lab ho syoi jainti bara /
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
472
JOHN LEAVITI
bais-baisa pirai ka kurkii Iagaii chi bhim sinh pa1.1<;!av ho piincai
bhai pai:i<;!a vii /. ..
uncri patni ka nama chiyo dropadi ho, un ghara bhagviino, uncri
holi ho dropadi niiri / ...
ekii dina par:i<;!av5 ki miitii kunii ho dharmavar:ii kunthii / ...
"tumiirii hamiirii pitar5k jaiyii batilt hamar syoi jainti bar me ho
par:i<;lab bhim siilhii /
tumarii pitar5 ko sariid ni hai rayo, karani'i," kunai kunthii,
"pitarai sariida." /
• • •
Excerpt beginning "The demons in Demon Fortress ..."
daintii daintI gara ho maja, daint ituk khusi hai ri daintI gara
I
maja
bhim sinha yas aciirii, bhim sinha piiQQava dainti gar me ho bhim
siilhii piit;1Qavii /
bhim siilh kai pcsiib Iagi ge cha, bhim siilh kai, bhim sinha
piii:i<;lavii, yas aciir bhim sinhii /
bhim siilh Iai kalika ki Iiilga mali bai, bhim siilh ho pesabai
I
kari hai cha
daint ituk khusi hai gaya, daint kun'i, "hamcri kalika ho
bhautai prasannai hai ge cha!"/
daint kunI, "aj gangii miii ai ge cha! daintiyii iivii, isniil) kari
I
lhiya!"
ab luviisuri daint javai kai pakari Jayo, luviisuri jal ho lai
I
bhalii gayii
• • •
Closing excerpt:
ire devo, piil)Qav avatara piirat;1 hai ga ho, piiral) hai ga ho/
iho bhagaviin, jiila kati bhera nirjiilii hai ga ho, nirjiilii hai ga
ho/
iho bhagavan, eka ki ckais, p~co ki pacasa, p~co ki pacasa /
iho bhagaviin, piiral) hai gayo piil)Qav avatiirii, piil)Qav avatiirii /
jay ho!
Acknowledgements
Field research in India was sponsored by the American Institute of
Indian Studies and the U.S. Office of Education and carried out under
the supervision of the Department of Anthropology, University of Delhi.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
473
HIMALAYAN VARIATIONS ON AN EPIC THEME
I am grateful to Kamal Ram Arya for performing the original material
presented here, to Indra Singh Negi for his invaluable guidance in
collecting and interpreting it, and to Lynn M. Hart, Margaret Lock,
Richard Lock, Wendy Doniger O'Flaherty, and Bruce Owens for their
help and advice. I would also like to acknowledge my gratitude to
Madeleine Biardeau and Charles Malamoud, whose seminar at the
Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes offered a glimpse into the depths of
coherent complexity of the Mahabharata.
References
A1kinson, E.T. 1884. Tht Him4U.7a11 Dutri<ts oftht Notth-Wtttmo ProviNtt of lndU.. Volume
IWO. Allahabad: Government Printing Office. [Gazetlccr of the North-West Provin
ces and Oudh, 11.)
Berreman, Gerald D. 1963. Hindu.s of tht Himalayu: Etllllogropll7 ON! Clumgt. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Biardeau, Madeleine. 1979. Compte rendu du seminaire "Religions de l'lnde." Annuoirt
th /'Ecole Pratiqut dts Hautts Etudts, Vt sution-Sdenus rtligi<MSts 87: 145- 171.
u
Biardeau, Madd<ine, and Jean-Michel Pcterfalvi. 1986. MoMblriirala. Two volumes.
Paris: Flammarion.
Dumezil, Georges. 1968. M7tht ti lpopit, I. l'idlologit dtt troiJjonclions dJur.s Its ~pits dts
ptuplu indo-turoplms. Paris: Galli mar d.
Dumont, Louis. 1957. Village Studies. Contributions w Indian Sotiolog I: 23-41.
Gaborieau, Marc. 1974. Classification des r&its chan1C.. La liucrature orate des
populations hindoucs de !'Himalaya ccnlral. Poltiqut 19: 313-332.
--1975. La 1ransc ri1uelle dans !'Himalaya cen1ral: Folit, ava1ar, meditation. PunqO.rtlra
2: 147-172.
Grintser, P.A. 1974. Drtvnrindijskij tpos: Gmt{is i tipologija. Moscow: Glaznaja Redaicija
Vos1otnoj Littratury.
Hiltebci1el, Alf. 1988. Tht Cult of Draupodi, I. Mytliologiu: From Gingu w KurvA:rttra.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ingalls, Danit! H.H ..• and Danid H.H. Ingalls, Jr. 1985. The Malriiblriirota: Stylistic
Study, Compu1er Analysis, and Concordance. Journal ofS autli Asian littraturts 20( I):
17-46.
umau
Jo5i, Kr11)1nand. 1971. K kQ lol: saniiya: Parita)'iilmak sangralia. Bareilly: Prakash Book
Depo1.
Jo5i, Prayiig. 1971. Kum4unl lok gatho.l. Dehra Dun: Jugal KiSor.
Leavitt, John, 1981. Himalayan Versions of "The Three Golden Sons": The Effec1 of
Con1ex1 on Narra1ive Con1en1. Jou,,,,,/ of Indian Fo/Jiloristics 4: 1-17.
-- 1985. Tht languagt of tht Gods: DiJtourSt and Exptritn<t in a Cmtral Himalayan Ritual.
Doc1oral dissertation, 1hc University of Chicago.
- 1988. A Mahabharata S1ory from the Kumaon Hills. Himalayan Rtuarch B•llttin 7(2):
1-12.
lvlarriou, McKim. 1976. ln1<rpre1ing Indian Society: A Monistic Alternative to
Dumon1's Dualism. Journal of Asian Studits 36: 189- 195.
- 1989. Construc1ing an Indian E1hnosociology. Contributions to lndU.n Sociolog (n.s.)
23: 1- 39.
O'Flaher1y, Wendy Doniger, 1978. Review of J .A.B. van Buitenen, ed. and trans., Tht
Mahabharata. Rtligiou.s S1udiu Rtuitw 4( I): 19- 28.
- 1988. Otlitr People's tW7ths: Tht Cavt of Ech0<s. New York: Macmillan.
Pal)Qey, Trilocan. 1962. Kum4: "8 /ok-sanitya. Almora: Sri Almora Book Depo1.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
474
JOHN LEAVIIT
Pollock, Sheldon J. 1984. The /lamayat>a Text and the Critical Edition. lo Robert J.
Goldman, <d. and trans., Tiu llam4.J<U14 of VOlmiki: An Epi£ of Attdntl India, Volume
one, pp. 82- 89. Princeton: Princeton University Prest.
- 1986. (<d. and traru.) The Riima.J<UIO of Viilmili: An Epic of AIUiml India. Volume two.
Princeton: Princeton University Prns.
Ramanujan, A.K. 1986. Two RealmJ of Kannada Folklore. In Stuart H. Blackbum and
A.K. Ramanujan, eds., Anotlitr Harmony: Ntw Essays on llu Folklore of India, pp. 41-
75. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Tubb, Gary. 1985. ~/arasa in the Mali0bft4rala. Jo"""'1 of Sot1U. Asian LiuraJmes 20(1):
141-168.
Upidhyiy, Urbi Datt. 1979. ,..,,,;;; ki lok-giitli06 kii siillityik aar siiftskrlik adhyayan.
Bareilly: Prakash Book Depot.
van Buitenen, J .A.B. 1973. Tht Malriibhiirala: Book Ont. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Wikander, Stig. 1947. P3J;i<;tava.sagan och Mahibhiratas mytiska rorutsattningar.
JU/igion ock Bibtl 6: 27-39.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
VIDYUT AKLUJKAR
Asian Studits
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC
Canada V6T JW5
B.N. SUMITRA BAI
157 Ka m'akshi Hospital Road
12th Main, 10th Cross
Saraswathipuram
Mysore 570023
India
MADHAV M. DESHPANDE
Asian languages and Cultures
Universiry of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1285
U.S.A.
JOHN DUNHAM
Departmtn/ of Indian Studies
Universiry of Melbourne
Parkville Vic. 3052
Australia
JAtvfES L. FITZGERALD
Department of Religious Studies
Universiry of Tennesstt
Knoxville, TN 37996
U.S.A.
ED\VIN GERO\V
Rttd College
3203 S.E. Woodstock Blvd.
Portland, OR 97202
U.S.A.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
476 LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
DAVID L. GITOMER
Departmmt of South Asian lAnguages and Civilization
Universiry of Chicago
Chicago, IL fJ0637
U.S.A.
ALF HILTEBEITEL
&ligious Studies
George Washing/on Universiry
Washing/on, DC 20052
U.S.A.
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS
The Yard
Hot Springs, VA 24445
U.S.A.
DANIEL H.H. INGALLS, JR.
The Yard
Hot Springs, VA 24445
U.S.A.
RUTH KATZ
Department of Religion
Florida State Universiry
Tallahassee, FL 32306
U.S.A.
KLAUS KLOSTERMAIER
Department of Religion
Universiry of Manitoba
Winnipeg, Manitoba
Canada R3T 2}.'2
JOHN LEAVITT
Dipartemenl d' anthropologie
Universitt de Montreal
Montreal, ()_uebtc
Canada
BIMAL KRISHNA MATILAL
The Oriental Institute
Universiry of Oxford
Pusey IAne
Oxford OX! 2LE
U.K.
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS 477
BARBARA STOLER MILLER
of
Department Oriental Studies
Barnard Collegt
Columbia University
606 Wts t I2 0th Strut
New York, NY 10027
U.S.A.
CHRISTOPHER MINKOWSKI
Wolfson College
Oxford OX/ 2]D
U.K.
INDIRA V. PETERSON
Mount Holyoke College
South Hadley, MA 01075
U.S.A.
A.K. RAMANUJAN
of
Departmmt South Asian languages and liltrature
of
University Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
U.S.A.
WILLIAM SAX
of
Department Philosophy and Religious Studies
of
Universi!J Canterbury
Private Bag
Christchurch I
.Vew .(,taland
T.R. SINGH
Head
Department of Sociolog)'
B.S.M. College
Roorku
U.P.
India
BRl\J M. SINHA
Department of Religious Studies
of
Uniutrsi!J Saslcatchtwan
Saskatoon, SK
Canada S7N OWO
Or al trcni.
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
478
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
MARY CARROLL SMITH
Religion Department
Vassar College
Poughkeepsu, Nr 12601
U.S.A.
BRUCE M. SULLIVAN
Department of Humanities and Religious Studies
Northern Arn;ona University
Flagstaff, AZ IJ6()11
U.S.A.
GARY A. TUBB
of
Department Sanskrit and Indian Studies
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
U.S.A.
VICTORIA URUBSHUROW
of
School Religious Studus
The Catholic University of America
Washington, DC 20064
U.S.A.
ROBERTJ.ZYDENBOS
157 Kamakshi Hospital Road
12th Main, 10th Cross
Saraswathipuram
Mysore 570023
India
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
INDEX
Abhimanyu, 31, 83, 107, 108, 109, 132, Arjunami;ra, 3, 8, I 08
135, 140, 145, 276, 309, 406, 436 Artaud, A., 274, 294
Abhinavagupta, 172, 173, 174, 178, 180, Aru1.1agirinitha, 197
182, 184, 187, 188, 189, 190, 192, 193, Arya, Kamal Ram, 458, 459, 468, 470,
194, 195, 199, 201, 202, 203. 315, 316, 471, 473
322 Aryaka, 396
Acharya, N.R., 323 Astika, 350, 385, 386, 395, 396, 397,
Achilles, 60, 137 398
Adhiratha, 58, 431, 432 Afvaghoia, 84, 98, 227
Aditi, 60 Afvapati, 324, 329, 331
Admetus, 325 Asvasena, 397
Agastya, 85, 87. 93, 312 Aivatthimi, 408
Agni, 94, 95, 106, 116, 126, 225, 229, 424 Asvanhima{n), 83, 130, 131, 132, 133,
Agnisvami, 387 134, 135, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 147,
Agnivciya, 92 148, 233, 306, 307, 314, 318, 400, 408,
Ahalyii, 327, 328 424, 427, 428, 429, 436
Aja, 227 Aswapathy, stt Afvapati
Aklujkar, A•hok, 177, 178, 193, 200 Athena, 91, 99
Alambuia, 23, 30 Atimuktaka, 255
Alauddin, 363 Atkinson, E.T., 455, 473
Alcestis, 325 Atri, 398
Alexander, 391 Augustine, 412
Alsdorf, L., 260 Aurangzeb, 354
Amba, 437 Aurva, 145, 398, 399, 400
Ambalikii, 422, 423
Ambikii, 422, 423 Baba, 349- 367, srt also Das, Kanval
Ami Cand, 363 Babarbhan, 355, stt also Babhruvahana
Anandagiri, 348 Babhruvahana, 288, 355, 396, su also
Anandavardhana, 171- 203, 421 Babarbhan
Andhaka (Vo1.1i), 254. 255 Badariyatia. 275
Antaka, 225, 233 Bihubali, 267
Aphrodite, 91 Bailey, Gr<-g, 210
Appar, 216, 242 Baines, Jcrvoisc A., 349, 367
Aptc, V .S., 89 Baka, 304, 306, 307, 308, 313
Aquinas, Thomas, 412 Baka Dilbhi, 398
Arbuda Kiidraveya, 390 Ba~isur, 284
ArikC.ari (King), 264 Baladcva, 252, 256, 257, 261
Ari11ancminatha, 251- 263, 266, 267, 270 Balarama, 83, I0 6, 252, 253, 258, 259,
Arjuna, 59, 60, 82, 83, 84, 85, 90, 97, 98, 299, 354, 411, 416
101- 109, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, Bali, 36
136, 137, 138, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, Bi1.1a, 169, 265
147. 148, 149, 161, 181, 185, 206, 212- Bandhuvarma, 269, 270
250, 256, 264, 276, 277, 278, 287, 288, Barnett, L.D., 251, 271
289, 290, 292, 301, 302, 304, 305, 307, Basham, A.L., 372
308, 309, 312, 320, 334-348, 390, 391, Bclvalkar, S.K., 131, 150, 348
396, 397, 402, 407, 409, 411, 414, 422, Senegal, Shyam, 420
424, 425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 430, 431, Berreman, Gerald D., 275, 294, 452, 473
432, 433, 434, 435, 436, 438, 440, 441, Bhadra, 124, 125, 126
448, 449, 450, 457, 460, 461 Bhadrabahu, 254
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
480
INDEX
Bhadraldili, 125 Manasi, Mania
Bhaga, 125, 126, 127 Bhiirisravas, 402
Bhagviin, 459, 460, 463, 464, 468, 471 Biardeau, Madeleine, 15, 101, 104, 109,
Bhairappa, 420 140, 141, 145, 212, 215, 226, 232, 235,
Bhimaha, 218 236, 237, 244, 323, 398, 434, 442, 447,
Bhandarkar, R.G., 251, 271, 314, 323 450, 473
Bhiinumati, 83, 298, 313, 316 Bimbasira (King), 377
Bharadvaj, O.P., 391 Blackbum, S., 295, 474
Bharavdvija, 90, 91 Blackie Blacksmith, 465
Bhara1a, 173, 180, 202, 203, 322 Bloodfiend, 309, 313, 314, 318, su also
Bhara1as, the, 204, 205, 342, 390, 400, ltudhirapriya
427 Brahmi82, 101, 114, 115, 116, 118, 119,
Bharati, Dharam Vir, 420, su also 120, 125, 126, 127, 128, 131, 139, 140,
Bharati, Dhannavir 150, 156, 157, 158, 162, 169, 170, 181,
Bharati, Dharmavir, 328, 332, stt also 197, 205, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 232,
Bharati, Dharam Vir 234, 235, 236, 275, 280, 308, 309, 396,
Bharati, Subramanya, 420, 442 414
Bharati, Yogi Suddhananda, 246 Brabmadeva, 270
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 420 Brahmanilla, 270
Bhiravi, 181, 203, 212- 250 Brahmanemidatta, 262
Bhisa, 5 7, 68, 148, 265, 297, 327 Brahma.Siva, 269
Bhat, G.K., 317, 323 Brhannalji, 106, 425
Bhana, Kumirila, 167, 170 Brhaspati, 374
Bha1ia, Niigcia, 203, 316, 323 Brook, Peter, 436
Bhanacarya, 333 Bruhn, Klaus, 260, 272
Bhauacharya, N.N., 133, 351, 367 Buddha, Gautama, 84, 94, 98, 158, 167,
Bhattacharya, P.R.T., 203 183, 200, 227, 377, 378, 379, 380, 382,
Bhattacharya, S.P., 177, 202 401
Bhan• Haraka, T., 13 Biihler, Georg, 154, 155, 167, 169, 170
Bhana Niriyai;ta, I 05, 265, 296, 299,
302, 310, 313, 315, 316, 319, 323
Cai1anya, 361
Bhana Niyaka, 172, 174, 193 Caland_, 389
Bha11anrsi1J1ha, 202
Cai:ilja, 390
Bhana Tau1a, 201 Candramuni, 262
Bhava, 116, 118, 242
Cii;tiira, 256
Bhavabhiiti, 314, 317, 323, 327
Qapck, Karel, 327
Bhim, 453, 454, 455, 456, stt also Bhima
Cappcller, Carl, 232
Bhlma, 82, 83, 107, 130, 131, 132, 134,
Cirvika, 309, 310, 318, 319, 320
140, 168, 181, 221, 226, 257, 265, 277,
Ca1urbhujamiira, 8
284, 285, 290, 296- 322, 340, 341, 354,
Civu1;11jariya (also: Camundaraya) 267,
355, 396, 402, 411, 416, 422,424, 428,
268, 269
432, 433, 434, 435, 436, 438, 440, 441, Ccdis, !he, 342
446, 448, 449, 450, 457, 461, 467, 469,
cek.kilir, 246
470
Chandola, A., 275, 294
Bhimascna, stt Bhima
Chatterjee, S.K., 251, 272
Bhimscn. set Bhima
Chattcrji, B., 129
Bhim Singh, 460, 461, 462, 463, 464, 465,
Chaudhuri, B.C., 254, 272
466, 467, 469, Stt also Bhima Chauhan, K.S., 350
Bhi1ma, 133, 204-211, 338, 340, 342,
Chopra, P.N., 129
347, 354. 369, 372, 373, 375, 383, 402,
Citrabhinu, 181, 182, 203, 214, 215
403, 406, 407, 414, 422, 423, 426, 427,
Ciuingada, 423
431, 432, 435, 436. 437, 439
Cohn, Bernard S., 295
Bhogaki1i, 263
Coulson, Michael, 314, 323
Bhojak, A.M., 272
Cour1righ1, Paul B., 295
Bhojaka (VoJJi), 255
Cowell, E.B. 98
Bhrgu, 118, 119, 126, 127, 307. 398
Cuntaramiirtti. 246
Bhujangajanani Kamala, 351, stt also
Cuder, Norman, 295, 296
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
481
INDEX
Cyavana, 398 Drooa, 25, 59, 83, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91,
92, 93, 94, 97, 131, 132, 133, 134, 140,
Dadhica/Dadhici, 113, 121, 122, 123, 142, 144, 307, 314, 318, 342, 347, 402,
124, 125, 432 403, 405, 406, 407,408,416,427, 426,
Dahlmann, Joseph, 134, 151, 152, 154 429, 430, 431, 432, 435, 436, 439
Daqa, 110-129, 144, 148 Dropadi, stt Draupadi
Dinavas, the, 429, 432 Drupada, 133
Dandekar, R.N., 11, 399 Dul;iiala, 82
Dao<lcia, Lakkaooa, 248 Oul;>iisana, 30, 31, 82, 104, 105. 107,
Dao<Jin, 213, 214, 218 296, 298, 300, 301, 303, 304, 313, 314,
Dange, S.S., 398 322, 348, 355, 420, 424
Dis, Kanval, 350, 363, '" a/10 Baba Dumi:zil, Georges, 89, 102, 134, 140, 301,
Dis, Tulasi, 281, see a/>0 Tulsidis 302, 323, 421, 424, 440, 441, 442, 447,
Daiaj yotis, 165 449, 473
Dasaputra, Ga~e$a, 13 Dumont, L., 445, 473
Daiaputra, Govinda, 13 Dumont, P., 394, 397
Daiaputra, Sundarapanta, 13 Dundcs, A., 295, 442
Dasaputra, Vinhala, 13 Durgi, 237, 300
Dasgupta, S.N., 57 Durgaprasad, Pandit, 213
De, S.K., 8, 12, 57, 146, 177 Durvisa(s), 58, 143, 284, 319, 424
Death, 326, 328. 329, 330, 332, su also Duryodhana, 59, 82, 83, 106, 107, 108,
Yama 109, 130, 131, 132, 138, 141, 185, 284,
de Jong, j.\V., 154 296, 298, 299, 300, 301, 304, 306, 309,
Derre11, J.D.M., 292, 295 313, 316, 320, 321, 337, 338, 339, 340,
Devadhar, C.R., 57, 82, 63 341, 342, 344, 348,354, 355, 358, 363,
Dcvaki, 254, 255, 256 402, 403, 404, 411, 412, 416, 417, 422,
Oevaprabhasiiri, 262, 270 424, 425, 428, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433,
Devascna, 255 434, 435, 436
Devavrata, Gingeya, su Bhiim• Du11, M.N., 108
Dcvendrasiiri, 263 Dull, Toru, 328, 332
Devi, 122, 124 Ovaraki, 253, 260
Dhanariljaya, 58, 202, 203 Ovaipiyana, stt Vyisa
Dhanariljaya/Dhanaiijaya, 396. 425, su Dvipiyana, stt Vyisa
olso Arjuna Dvipiyana, 253, 257, 258
Dhanika, 178, 183, 184. 202. 203 Ovivcda, D., 203
Dharma, 105, 116, stt also Yudhi$1hira Owivcdi, A.N., 328, 332
Dharmadisa, 254 Dyaus-Pitr, 207, 208
Dharmakirii, 262 Dyumauena, 324
Oharmariija, 341, 342, 409, srt also Yud·
hil(hira
Edgerton, Franklin, 6, II, 12, 15, 153.
Dhavala, 261, 262
155
Dh111adyumna, 133, 134, 405, 436
Edmunds, L., 295, "*42
Dhrtaranra, 82, 83, 90. 150. 206, 339,
Ekala,1·a, 407, 408
341, 342, 344, 389, 390. 396, 398,406,
Eliade, t.lircea, 95, 96, 97, 100, 147, 294,
407, 422,423, 424. 428, 429, 431, 432,
295, 357, 365, 368
434, 438, 442
Eliot, T.S. . 95
Dionysus, 91. 99
Esnoul, Anne-Marie, 208
Oilipa, 396
Eurydice, 325, 326
Di~anji. P.C., 260, 272
Evelyn-White, Hugh G., 99
Doshi, J.C., 261, 272
Draupadi, 31, 35, 101- 109, 131, 133.
134, 135, 143, 221, 253. 256. 257, 261, Falk, Harry, 387, 393
270, 271, 278, 284. 289, 290, 296- 322. Farquhar, J.N., 251, 272
J.,
328. 340, 341, 343. 348, 355, 411, 415, F erguJS<>n, 391, 392
416, 419, 420, 424, 425, 435. 436, 437, Findlry. Timothy, 327
439. 440, 441.448.456.461. 462,463, Finlay, John, 31
Flaubert, Gu<ta,..-. 426
466
Or1g1nal from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
482
INDEX
Gaborieau, M., 452, 453, 473 Hazra, R.C., 251, 272
Gajanana, 152 Hcesterman, J.C., 295
Gajasukumara, 254 Heggade, L.R., 270, 271, 272
Gandhari, 210, 397, 422, 423, 427, 428, Hein, N., 276, 295
432, 434, 436, 438 Held, GJ., 147
Ganeia, 150, I.SI, 152, 155, 156, 157, 359 Hemacandra, 190, 203, 262, 266
Ganga, 94, 95, 205, 279, 280, 422, 423, Heramba, 150
437, 466 Hershman, P., 299
Ganguli, K.M., 323 Hesiod, 99
Gargya, 394 Hess, Linda, 276, 281, 295
Garu4a, 354, 359, 395 Hidamba, 455, 45 7 '" also Haidimbii.
Gautama, 328, 407 Hidambi, su Hi4imbi
Gautama Buddha, stt Buddha, Gautama Hi<;limbi, 296, 304, 305, 306, 308, 309,
Gautama, Saradvat, 88, 89, 90 313, 314, 354, 440, 446, 448, 449, 450,
Geach, Peter T., 412, 413 453, 454, 455, 456, 457, 469, 470
Geidner, K.F., 87, 160 Hillary, Edmund (Sir}, 354, 355
Gerow, Edw;n, 57, 68, 177, 178, 193 Hiltebeitel, Alf, IOI, 103, 104, 105, 109,
Ghatge, A.M., 261, 272 140, 204, 215, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236,
Ghii1ku, 455 290, 295, 296, 298, 299, 300,301, 302,
Ghatolkaca, 30, 296, 304, 305, 309, 310, 303, 323, 358, 368, 398, 419, 420, 434,
311, 449, 450, 455, 45 7 442, 446, 473
GhoshaJ, V.N., 369, 371, 372, 373, 379 Himavin, 128
Ghrtii.ci, 90 Himavat, 94, 95
Ghurye, G.S., 112 Hiral)yakaiipu, 82
Gimbu!a!, Marija, 91, 98 Hiriyanna, M., 300, 323
Gi!omer, David L., 296, 297, 298, 300, Hirnti, 463, 465, su also Hi<;limbi
302, 311, 313, 315, 316, 318, 323 Holtzmann, Adolf, 138, 170
Gnoli, Raniero, 174, 187, 189 Homer, 31
Godbole, P.B., 328, 332 Hopkin., E.W., 38, 155, 157, 208, 225,
Gode, P.K., 148, 152 323, 395
Goldman, Robert P., 148, 275, 295, 399, Horowitt, Anthony, 325, 332
400, 440, 442, 474 Hroth~ar (King), 28
Gonda,Jan, 146, 147, 157, 160, 207, 395 H~ikesa, 107
Gotama Buddha, su Gautama Buddha Humphries, Rolf, 333
Govinda, 338
Grant, Michael, 325, 332 lks(h)vaku, 279, 345
Grassmann, Hermann, 86, 87, 90, 95 Indra, 30, 59, 60, 83, 84, 85, 88, 89, 90,
97, 98, 99, 103, 113, 120, 125, 126,
Grill, Julius, 323
Grinuer P.A., 154, 445, 473 128, 132, 137, 141, 162, 206, 212, 218,
Guba, 432 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 225, 227. 238,
Gul)abhadra, 262, 266, 268 242, 297, 302, 308, 337, 338, 385, 386,
Gul)avarma, 267 390, 392, 411, 428, 436, 450
Guoavijaya, 262 lndumau, 227
Ingalls, Daniel H.H., 19, 82, 173, 213,
445, 473
Hades, 325
Ingalls, Daniel H.H.Jr., 19, 32, 445, 473
Hai<;limba, 23, stt also Hidamba
lnsler, Stanley, 387
Hamlet, 35
lshimauu, Ginene, 328
Hanumin, 168, 311, 312, 354, 355, 356,
TSvar(a), 354, 361, 459
359, 363
Iyengar, K.R.S., 329, 333
Hari, 104, 105, 117, 118, 123, 197, 252,
299, 321, 338
Haribhadra, 266 Jacobi, H., 271
Haribhadrasuri, 262 Jacobson, Claire, 357, 368
Harinaigamc>i, 254, 256 Jagaddhara, 298, 299, 314, 323
Harrison, Jane Ellen, 99 Jagad-Gauri 351, set also Manasii, Mama
Hart, Lynn 1\1., 473 Jagannatha, 184, 191, 192, 196, 203, 316,
Hazel, John, 325, 332 317, 323
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
483
INDEX
Jain, J.C., 254, 259, 272 Ka11oappar, 246
Jain, K.C., 261, 272 Kapfercr, Bruce, 295
Jain, P., 255, 271 Karita, 387
Jaiswal, S., 146, 147 Karmakar, R.D., 168, 395, 399
Jilapadi, 89, 91 Karo•, 31, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 58, 59, 60,
Jamadagni, 59, 398 83, 99, 107, 108, 137, 233, 299, 304,
Jimadagnya, 148, 162, 307 342, 397,402, 403,422,423,424,427,
Jamts, Henry, 426 429, 430, 431, 432, 433, 434, 435, 436,
Janamejaya (King), 117, 136, 145, 146, 437, 438, 449, 450
147, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 169, Kamad, Girish, 420
192, 385, 386, 387, 389, 390,391,395, Karl)apirya, 268, 269, 270, 271
396, 397 Kir$11i, I 09
Janirdana, 119, stt also Visnu Ka.Ne, lravali, 225, 301, 323
JarisalJldha/Jau.sandha, 143, 252, 255, Kaiyapa, 394, 396
256, 259, 424 Kaiyapa Prajipa1i, 351
Jara1kiiru, 350, 351, 386, stt also Manasi, Ki1ayavema, 318, 323
Mania Katrc, S. M., 152
Jaratkumira, 253, 257, 258 Kauravas, the, 83, 130-149, 164, 165,
Ja1isura, 304, 305, 307, 308, 310, 311, 206, 207, 210, 277,299,304, 336, 337,
319 339, 340, 341, 342,3+4, 355, 404, 405,
Ja1iyu, 354, 359 406, 407, 408, 410, 411, 412, 414, 415,
Jayacandra, 262 416, 422, 423, 425, 435, 439, 441, 442,
Jayadralha, 106, 143, 302, 347 448, 454, Stt also itufiuiJuaJ NJmU
Jayasigara, 262 Kauravya, 396
Jcfl'rrds, K.N., 319, 323 Kau1ilya, 369, 373, 374, 376, 377
Jtsus Christ, 84, 98, 354, 355, 362 Kavi, M.R., 202, 322
Jha, Badarinalh, 316, 323 KaviparamC11hi/Kaviparamcsvara, 267
Jha, M.M., 316, 323 Kaviputra, 57
Jimutavihana, 183, 184 Kenny, Anthony, 412, 413
Jinascna, 255, 258, 261, 262, 266, 268, Kercsispa, 449
271 Kciava, 107, stt also Knoa
Jina.Jena, 262, 266 Kcii, 103
Jincivarasiiri, 263 Khandekar, V.S., 420
JiJQU, 104, 105 Khare, L.G., 138, 225
Jivinanda, 333 Khirmi, 463, 465
Johnston, E.H., 84 Kicaka, 270, 302, 303, 310, 424, 425
Josi, Baru, 461 Kinkar Oinu, 455
Josi, K., 454, 473 Kinsley, David R., 276, 295
Josi, P., 452, 473 Kirste, J ., 155, 167
Joyce, James, 327 Kirtirija, 262
.Jviilimilini, 270 Kosambi, 0.0., 58
Krishna, stt Kno•
Krishnamoorthy, K., 176, 202, 203
Kabir, 167 Krpa, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94,
Kidraveya, Arbuda, 392 97, 98, 106, 107, 108, 131, 141, 144,
Kadru, 385, 395, 397 342, 427, 430, 431, 432, 437
Kala, 414, stt also Knoa Krpi, 89
Kale, M.R., 299, 323 Knoa, 35, 36, 59, 83, 101- 109, 131, 132,
Kiili, 288, 289, 290, 304, 455, 456 135, 136, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143,
Kalidasa, 57, 197, 225, 226, 227, 243, 144,145,146,147,148, 158, 165,166,
264, 265, 315, 323, 327, 424 181, 197, 198, 205, 206, 215, 216, 224,
Kiili-Sa1yava1i, 102 225, 232, 233, 234, 242, 251, 252, 253,
Kiimandaka, 369 254, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 263,
KalJlsa, 252, 255, 256, 261, 269, 402 264, 266, 269, 275. 276, 278, 284, 288,
Kane, P.V., Ill 290, 299,320,334-348,390, 391, 397,
Kangle, R.P., 178, 180, 184, 187, 188, 401- 418, 424, 425, 426,433, 434, 435,
189, 190, 194, 195, 202, 377 436. 438, 441, 452. 453, 458, 460
Or1g1nal from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
484
INDEX
Kma Dvaipiyana Vyisa, stt Vyisa Maghavat, 449, 4~, ut also Indra
Krtavarman, 131 Mahibala, 270, 271
Kubera, 311, 312, 354, 361 Mahideva, 239, stt also Siva
Kiicibha11araka, 267 Mahiikila, 414, stt also Kala
Kuiper, F.B.J., 297, 323 Mahiikili, 124
Kulkarni, V., 190, 203, 266, 268, 270, Mahar, Caroline, 3~
271, 272 Mahar, J.M., 350, 352, 366
Kumira, 92, 93, see also Skanda Mahisena, 255
Kumiravyisa, 435 Mahiiscnicirya, 263
Kumarbi, 99 Mat>biib Khan, 354, 358
Kumbhakan;ia, 359 Mahendravarman, 216
Kuntaka, 185, 203 Mihdava, 93
Kunthi, Jtt Kunti Maladhiri Hemacandra, 262
Kunti, 58, 59, 60, 84, 85, 87, 98, 99, 104, Malamoud, Charles, 473
105, 143, 254, 255, 278, 284, 304, 306, Malayivati, 183, 184
339, 34-0, 342, 343, 397,420,422,423, Mallibhii~a. 263
424, 427, 428, 430, 431, 432, 433, 434, Mallinitha, 197
436,437, 438, 440,441, 460,461, 462, M all~el)a, 262
463, 467 Mamma1a, 316
Kuntibhoja (King), 58 J',1anasi, 350, 351
Kurus, the, 256, 428, 430, su also Manasi Dcvi Manasi,
stt ~1anil
1
Kauravas, the Mil)avaka, 318
Mil)t;lavya, 438
Laksami, see Laqmi Mandodari, 328
Lak1maQa, 83, 440 Mangarasa, 270
Laqmal}asiiri, 298, 299, 323 Mani, Vettam, 351, 368
Lak1mi, 460, 468 Mal)imat, 312,
Laqmidhara, 168 Mansi Devi, 3~, 351, 355, 361, 363, ""
Laodamia, 325, 326 also Manasi, Man$i
Lao Tzu, 99 Manu, 345, 372, 374
Lardbouquet, 309, 313, 314, set also Mirkar:it;leya, 398
Vasiga'ldhi Marrion, Mckim, 285, 295, 444, 445, 473
Lassen, Christian, 134 Mirtar;it;la, 60
Law, B.C .. 253, 254, 272 Masson,J.L., 58, 174, 177, 178, 193, 198
Lcavin, John, 446, 452, 454, 473 Masson--Oursel, Paul, 3 71
Levi, Isaac, 4-04 Matilal, B.K., 417
Uvi, Sylvain, 14, 138, 152, 225 Mazumdar, 133
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 357, 361, 362, 368, Matsubara, Mitsunori, 146
421 Mena, 128
Lincoln, Abraham, 354, 355, 364 J',1etis, 99
Ling, T., 369, 370, 372, 373, 375, 377, Miller, Barbara Stoler, 57, 323
380 Miller, J.H., 421
Lock, M., 473 Milton, John, 327
Lock, R., 473 Mirag, 279
Lomasa, 311 Mirashi, V.V., 314, 323
Lord, Albert B., 27, 353, 354, 357, 368 Mitra, 87, 94
Luhilappia, 309 Modi, J',1.C., 253, 271
Lurker, M., 392 Mohar, J.M., 368
Lutgendorf, P., 276, 295 Moropant, 328
Muchkunda, 279
Mudholkar, S.K. 158, 323
Maas, Paul, 16,
Mugali, R.S., 264, 269, 272
Macdonell, A.A., 87, 90, 392
Miika, 228, 236
Machiavelli, 383
Muller, F. Max, 86
Mackie, J.L., 413
Mundkar, B., 392
Madhva, 168
Midri, 181, 254, 255, 329, 422, 423 Mu11ika, 256
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
485
INDEX
Naciketu, 325 Pi.o(javu, the, 83, 130- 149, 161, 164,
Naganjit (King), 284 165, 176, 181, 185, 186, 196, 197, 200,
Nagarajaiah, H.P., 266, 268, 270, 271, 206, 207, 210, 212, 218, 220, 230, 233,
272 25 I, 252, 253, 256, 25 7, 258, 259, 26 I,
Nigarjuna, 277, 268, 289, 290 267, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 284,
Niga.iri, 253 2~. 286, 268, 289, 290, 291, 293, 296,
Nahup, 396, 397 303, 304, 305, 306, 308, 309, 310, 311,
Nakul, 289, su also Nakula 318, 320, 336, 338, 339, 34-0, 342, 343,
Nakula, 30, 107, 34-0, 341, 422, 44-0, +41, 3+4, 345, 355, 4-03, 4-04, 4-05, 4-06, 4-07,
460, su also Nakul 4-08, 4-09, 411, 412, 414, 415, 416, 417,
Nala, 424, 426, 437, 438 420, 423, 424, 425, 428, 429, 432, 434,
1'1i11acampan1ar, 216 435, 436, 437, 439, 44-0, +41, +48, +49,
Nanda, 256 450, 452, 453, 454, 455, 4S6, 457, 458,
Jliandi, 117, 118, 119 461, 462, 466, 467, 468, stt a/Jo
Nara, 104, 105, 138, 148, 206, 234, 236, individual
1141MS
239 Pandey, K.C., 177
Nirada, I 16, 132, 148, 253, 313, 324, Pandey, T., 452, 454, 473
331, 337, 338 Pandit, S.P., 323
Naraka, 337 Pio<lu, 27, 82, 98, 192, 206, 276, 277,
Narasimhachar, D.L., 268 289, 329, 422, 423, 429, 431, 438
Narasimhacharya, R., 267, 270 Panigrahi, Sanjukta, 3 I 7
Naravahanadatta, 259 Pioini, 4-09
Narayao. 459, 400, 462, 463, 464, 465, Paidva, 392
471 Pantaiijali, 438
Niiriyaoa, 138, 143, 148, 206, 209. 210, Parab, K.P., 213
211, 234, 236 Paramitman, 360
Nautiyal, S., 275, 290, 295 Parasara, 145, 160, 162, 204, 280, 308,
Nayak, G.H., 265, 272 398, 400, 422, 423
Nayak, H.l\.f., 267, 272 Paraiurima, 59, 306, 398, 399
Nccvd, W.G., Jr., 146 Parikh, R.C., 190, 203
Ncgi, 1.S., 473
~ri~t. ~109, 132,135,136,l~. 145,
Ncmicandra, 26 7. 269, 270 146, 14 7. 385, 391, 396, 397, 400, 436
Ntmini1ha, stt Ari$tancmin3tha Parry, M., 27
Netiki, 350 PiinvapaQ<;lita, 267
Nilakao1ha, 3, 8. 14, 155 Pirvati, 94, 129, 197, 227, 236, 237, 247.
Nirrti, 125 248, 249, srr olso Uma
Ni$ida, 424 Pasendi, 377
Niv(dita, Sisier, 325. 333 Pasupati, 140, 234, 235
Nrpatur\ga, 263 Patwardhan, l'vf.V., 174, 177, 178. 193.
198, 201
O'f laherty, \\'cndy Doniger, 8!'>. 86, 68, Pi,•aka, 125
P(du, 392
89, 91,93, 95, 110, 154, 233. 235. 246.
300, 305, 323, +45, 4 73 Perumal Mudaliar, l\.1.R .. 333
Pcrerfalvi, J.M., 447, 450, 473
Oldcnberg, H., 367
On.,;ikratos, 391 Pctcrson, Indira V., 216. srr also Shct·
Orphrus, 325, 326 tcrly, Indira V.
Ovid, 326, 333 Phi lguna. stt Arjuna
Pike, Ndson, 412
Owens, Bruce, 4 73
Pir\gala, 20
Padmaniibha, 253. 256 Pingncc, David, 385
Padmiivari, 270. 351, '" also Mnna.ii, Pisani, \litorrt, l52
l\.f ansa Pisharoty, A.K .. 57
Pampa, 248, 264, 265, 268 Pitrs, 116
Paiirajana, 116 Planringa, A., 412
Piiicilas, the, 132- 149, 342 Pollock, Sheldon. 445, 474
Piii\ciili, 299. 320, 322, ur also Oraupadi Polomo, Edgar. 102
Google Or g ;,I from
01g1tizea oy UNIVERSITY OF MICHi GAN
486 INDEX
Potdar, A., 442 Raval}, 452
Prabhadralr.as, 133 Raval}a, 227 308, 355
Prabhu Shanlr.ar, 272 Ravisigara, 263
Pracctas, 117, 121 Ravi$(Qa, 262
Pracetas, Daqa, 117 Ravisiddha, 263
Pradhan-JI, 359 Raychaudhuri, H., 134, 272
Pradyumna, 252, 254, 256, 263, 266 Raziii, 358
Prajapati, 110, 299 Rcgnaud, Paul, 190
Prajapati 117 Renou, Louis, 213
D~a,
Prasad, K.G., 267, 272 Rice, Stanley, 349, 367, 368
Prasiiti, 116 RohiQi, 255
Pratipa, 279 Rolla9a, 263
Prcmi, N., 254, 255, 261, 272 Roy, P.C., 94, I 08, 323
Priyollr.ar, A.K., 332 J!.,yairoga, 88
Propp, V.1., 421 Rudhirapriya, 309
Protesilaus, 325, 326 Rudra, 92, 110, 113, 117, 122, 126, 148,
Pr1ha, 342, 429, 430, 431, 433, "' also 234, 235, 239, 432
Kun ti Rudra-Niiraya1.1a, 126
Pulastya, 308 Rudra-Siva, 92, 110, 414
Puru, 279, 426 RukmiQi, 2.s6
Puriiravas (King), 88. 318 Ruru, 395, 398, 400
Puru,a, 236, 383
Pusalker, A.O., 57
Pii,an, 125, 126 Sahadev(a), 107, 290, 308, 340, 341, 422,
PU$padan1a, 262 423, 440, 441, 460
Puttappa, K.V., 420 Sahasrajyotis, 165
Saili, G., 350
~akalakirti, 262, 263
Qudrat, 354
Sakuni, 441, 442
Sakuntali, 319
Raghavabhana, 323 Salctore, B.A., 272. 372, 373
Raghavan, V., 146, 177, 201, 202 Sijva, 270
Raghu, 227 Salya, 59, 60, 342, 424
Radhakrishnan, S., 261, 272 Samba, 254
Rihu_, 225 SalJljaya/Sai\jaya, 150, 337, 339, 341,
Raidis, 366 • 342, 343, 405, 432, 439
Raighupa1.1dita, 263 SalJltanu/Santanu (King). 205, 279, 280,
Rajagopalachari, C., 420, 442 342, 422. 423, 437
RiJlmati, 253, 25 7, 266 Samayasundara, 263
Samudravijaya, 255, 256
Riqasas, the, 225, 226, 235
Rim~ set Rima Sanatkumara, 112
Rima, 176, 195, 225, 227, 255. 256. 276, Sanghadisa, 254
311, 349, 366, 410, 415, 446, 452, 453, Sankar, B., 350
458, 400 Sankara, 168, 334, 346, 34 7, 348
Ramachandran, T.N. , 216, 246, 24 7 Sannaiah, 8.S., 270, 271, 272
Ramakrishna, 167 · Santa, C.N., 269, 272
Ramanuja, 168 Santapau, H ., 82
Ramanujan, A.K., 289, 292, 295, 426, Santhanam, K., 328, 329. 330, 331, 332,
427, 442, 444, 447, 453, 474 333
Riimasiiraka, 202 Siradvata, 431
Ranganitha, 323 Sarasvati, 125, 128, 157, 270
Ranna, 265, 266. 268, 270 Siimgarava, 390
Rao, M.S.N., 216. 247, 248. 249 Sarvaji\a-Niriyat)a, 8
Rao, N., 419 Sastra, G., 316, 323
Ratnacandra, 263 Sastri, K., 261, 272
Ratnagarbha, 8, 155 Sastri, P.P.S., 12, 202
Ratnaka1,11ha, 13 Sastri, Raju, 331
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
487
INDEX
Sastri, R.S., 389 Siviidcvi, 256
Sastri, T.G., 57, 203, 215 S'varudrappa, G.S., 265, 273
Sastry, T.V., 264, 266, 268, 269, 272 Sivasankari, 328
Satajyotis, 165 Skanda, 85, 86, 92, 93, 94, 95, 99, 226, set
Sati, 115, 116, 117, 119, 120, 121, 123, also Kumara
124, 128 Smith, B.K., 295
Satyabhiimii, I 03 Smith, B.L., 109
Satyakiima, 407 Smith, David, 213
Siityaki, 131, 402 Smith, Mary C., 32, 88, I 05
Satyasraya (King), 265 Somakas, 133
Satyaviin, 329, ru also Satyavat Somakirti, 263
Satyavat, 324, 325, 326, 329, 332 Somascna, 263
Satyavati, 150, 204, 205, 355, 363, 422, Sorenson, Soren, 87, 102, 133, 390, 395
423, 437, 438 Sri Aurobindo, 167, 327, 329, 330, 332,
Saubala, 30 333
Saumadatti, 342 $n"bhii1aQa, 262
Saumilla, 5 7 Srikanthayya, B.M., 264, 265
Saunaka, 163, 164, 165 Sri KoQa Paramiitman, 351
Siivitri, 324-332 Sri-Lak1mi, 103
Sa\')'asici~ stt Arjuna Srinandi, 267
Sax, \Villiam, 276, 283. 295, 420, 442. Srinivasan, Doris, 109
452 ~tiijayas, 133
Siiyaria, 264, 387 Srutakirti, 262
Schcchner, R., 276, 295 Stein, M.A., 13, 14
Schein. • Seth L., 60 Stcsichorus, 99
Scheuer, Jacques, 215, 236, 244 Subhacandra, 261, 262, 263, 270
Schoepf, B.G., 357, 368 Subhadri, 106, 107, 108, 109, 135, 309,
Schrader, F.0., 146, 147 343
Seia. 395. 396, 398 Subhavardhana, 262
Sha<,taksharadcva, 249 SudcsQii, I 03
Sharma, Arvind, 419, 443 Sujata, H.S., 268, 273
Shastri, Madhusudan, 191, 192, 203, 323 Suka, 150
Sheed, Rosemary, 365, 368 Sukthankar, V.S., 2, 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 14,
.J .,
Shcnde, N 399 15, 16, 17, 84, 131, 148, 150, 153, 155,
Shetterly, Indira V., 213, 220, 221. 222. 157, 203, 204, 212, 298, 323, 385, 398,
stt also Peterson, Indira V. 399, 40 I, 448
S(h)ri, 290, 300, 302, 312, 322 Sukumiirikii, 253
Shulman, 0.0., 114, 297, 319, 323, 419, Sulasii, 254
424, 436, 442 Sullivan, Bruce, I 0 I
Siauve, Suzanne, 168 Sumitra Bai, B.N., 255, 260. 273
$ikhaQ<,tin, 133, 134, 402, 436, 437 Siiriieiirya, 262
Siliiirka. 262, 266 Siirascna (King), 58
Si!Jlharatha, 255 Surya, 58, 60
Singer, !'.lilt on, 295 Siita, 12, 83
Singh, P., 291, 292 Suyodhana, 298, 322, 428, 431, set alro
Singh, R.B.P., 263, 273 Ouryodhana
Singh, T.R., 350, 351, 352. 368 Sviihii, 92
Singh. V., 283 Svayambhii, 116, 255, 261, 262
Sinha. Braj !'.1., 380 Swaminathan, K .. 333
Sinha, J.P., 171, 202
Sircar, D.C .• 110, 115, 133
Sisupiila, 143, 434 Tak1a, 391
Sitii. 176, 327. 328, 355 Tak1aka, 385, 386, 389. 390, 391, 394,
Siva, 93, 94. 95, 97, IOI. 103, 105, 110- 395, 396, 397
129. 132. 140. 141, 142, 143, 144, 147, Tambiah, Stanley J., 276, 286, 287, 293,
148, 197. 212-250, 276, 434, 436, 452, 295
453. 458. 460, 466 Tiirii, 328
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
488
INDEX
J .,
Thomas, Edward 158 Visuki, 83, 350, 396
Thomas, F. W., 232 Vatsyayan, Kapila, 58
Thooran, P., 333 Viiyu, 125, 168, 206
Thrasher, A. W ., 349
Velankar, H.D., 6, 262, 273, 323
Trask, Willard R., 14 7, 35 7, 368 Venkatacharya, T., ~. 202
Trigarta, 82 Venkatesa Ayyangar, M., 443
Tubb, Gary A., 213, 214, 215, 217, 218, Vicitravirya, 423, 442
443, 447, 474
Vidura, 343, 344, 422, 423, 428, 429,
Tulsidis, 355, 356, see also Dis, Tulasi 431, 432, 439
Turner, Victor, 303 Vidyisigara, 8, 333
Turstig, Hans-Georg, 391 Vijayagavi, 262
Vikramiditya, 359
Uccail,isravas, 395 Villippuniirir, 435, 436
Udayaprabhasiiri, 262 Vimalasiiri, 254, 262
Ugrairavas, 150, 163, 164, 165 Vinata, 395, 397
Ugrasena, 255 Vira, Raghu, 3, 4, 7, 12
Uluga Mai, 288 Virabhadra, 113, 121, 123, 124, 125, 126
Uliipi, 396, 440 Viramitrodaya, 112
Umi, 118, 121, 122, 124, 236, set a/Jo Vira1a (King), 278, 424, 425, 440
Pirvati Virgil, 326
Upadhyay, U.D., 454, 463, 468, 469, Virini, 116
470, 474 Viroeana, 411
Upadhye, A.N., 251, 254, 260, 273 Viriipiikµ PaQdita, 249
Upcndra, 113 V~ahari, 351, su a/Jo Manasi, Mania
Urubshurow, V., 350, 352, 367, 368 Vi1Qu, IOI, 103, 105, 113, 114, 115, 119,
Urva!i, 87, 88, 89, 318, 440 l~In,123,12~1~,127,IU,129,
Uianas, 374 131, 141, 142, 143, 145, 146, 147, 148,
Utarika, 391, 395, 410, 411, 412, 415 162, 166, 206, 208, 209, 210, 211, 232,
Uttamaujas, 134 233, 234, 235, 252, 299, 337, 338, 352,
Uttari, 135, 136, 14-0, 425, 426, 436, 438 353, 354, 355, 356, 358, 359, 360, 361,
362, 363, 365, 412, 414, 453
ViSvimitra, 87
Vidicandra, 262
Vidirija, 262 Visvanitha, 179, 190, 191. 192, 193, 203,
214
Vadividyananda, A., 267
Vivasvat, 345
Vigbha1a, 262
Vaidya, C.V., 251, 273 Vogd, J.P., 392, 395
Vaidya, P.L., 12, 131, 150 von Simson, Georg, 138
Vaisampiiyana, 12, 132, 136, 161, 162, Vrkodara, stt Bhima
Vrtra, 225, 392, 411
163, 164, 165, 166, 386, 428, 429, 430,
Vyisa, 12, 15, 48, 101, 103, 106, 132,
431
143, 148, 150, 151, 154, 156, 157,
Vajrascna, 262 I~.
160, 161, 163, 164, 165, 168, 169, 170,
Vala, 30
171, 175, 176, 177, 186, 192, 197, 204-
Vilmiki, 167, 175. 177. 193, 265, 323,
211, 212, 210, 221, n8, 251, 254, 259,
356, 442, 474
260, 261, 264, 265, 280, 306, 341, 355,
Viimana, 188
420, 421, 422, 423, 439
van Buitcnen, J.A.B., 87, 89, 90, 91, 92,
93, 96, 146, 168, 212, 235, 244, 275.
295, 298, 300, 307, 311, 312, 323, 424, Waghome, J.P., 295
427, 441, 443, 447, 4411. 450, 473, 474 \\larder, A.K., 57, 213, 215
van Nooten, Barend A.A., 32 Wasson, R. Gordon, 90
VaruQa, 87, 94, 125, 297, 396 Welch, Holmes, 99
Varadanasuta, 394 Weller, F., 399
Vasagandhii, 309 West, M.L., 99
Vasinha, 86, 87, 160, 205, 437 Wikander, Stig, 134, 449, 474
Vasudeva, 107, 109, 195, 196, 197, 254, Wilde, Oscar, 440
255, 256, 259, 266, 340, 343, 402 Wintemitz, Maurice, 16, 270, 393, 400
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
489
INDEX
Bhima 167, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 212,
~Volfbelly, Ut
221, 238, 279, 290, 296, 298, 302, 304,
306, 308, 309, 310, 311, 318, 319, 320,
Yadavas, th<, 253, 256, 257, 258, 259,
321, 322, 338, 340, 341, 343, 375, 380,
260, 342, 410, 414
382, 383, 397' 402, 405, 408, 409, 411,
Yajiiasrni, I 05, Stt also Draupadi.
412, 414, 415, 416, 422, 426, 427, 428,
Yijiiikadrva, 387
432, 435, 437, 438, 439, 440, 441, 442,
Varna, 125, 126, 233, 311, 324, 325, 332,
448, 457
414, stt also Drath
Yuyuuu, 422
Yamaraja, 354
Ya$a~ltirti, 255, 262
Yayiti, 279, 426 Zarhnrr, R.C. 383
Yudhimanyu, 134 :Z.:us, 99
Yudhi1thira, 30, 31, 83, I0 3, I 06, I 07, Zimmer, H., 261, 273
108, 111, 130, 131, 141, 144, 149, 166, Zydenbos, RJ., 269, 273
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
.
Brill's lndological Library includes monographs, text editions, translations,
collaborative volumes, and handbooks of lndological interest in the
widest sense.
BRILL'S INDOLOGICAL LIBRARY
EDITED BY JOHANNES BRONKHORST
I. SHARMA, A. (ed.) Essays on the Malui.bhii.raJa. 1991. ISBN 90 04 09211 0
2. AGUILAR MATAS, E . .(lg11tdic Society. In preparation
3. FUSS, M. Buddhauacaru;i and Dei Verbum. In preparation
E.J. BRILL - P.O. Box 9000 - 2300 PA Leiden - The Netherlands
Google
Original frcm
oig1t1ze-0 by UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
