Kings without authority: The
obligation of the ruler to gamble
in the M1ah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata
PAUL BOWLBY
Kingship is a puzzle in the Hindu religious tradition. From a literary point
of view the Mahabharata2 portrays kings in a very negative way. The best
emperors claim to embody dharma3 and to rule according to it’ but they do
so surrounded by the threat of an inadequate knowledge about their role
and how to govern. Yudisthira and King Nala, for example, lose in the
ritual gambling match, part of the imperial consecration rite (rajasuya),
because they do not possess the knowledge of the dice; neither king can
govern chance. Each accepts exile from his throne as a result of a flaw for
which they seem at best marginally responsible. Their empires in turn are
left in the hands of men even less qualified to rule according to dharma;
and worse, these replacements are men whose character portraits in the
epic suggest that they will plunder the empire for all that they can gain.
Kingship, as Heesterman points out, is &dquo;roundly abominated&dquo;5 even in the
1 This paper in an earlier draft entitled "Precarious Authority: The Obligation of the
Ruler to Gamble in the Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata" was presented at the 1985 conference of the
Canadian Society for the Study of Religion in Montr&eacute;al.
2 J. A. B. van Buitenen, The M&raaha&mamataccrra;b;h (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975),
Vol. 2, p. 319-64. All future references will be to the van Buitenen translation and will
be indicated both by location in the M&b&raaammaaathcchrra;; (Mbh.) with volume, section, line, and
then volume and page references to the van Buitenen translation.
3 Yudhisthira is repeatedly called "King of Dharma" throughout the M&b&raaammataahccahrr.;;
4 J. C. Heesterman, "The Conundrum of the King’s Authority," in The Inner Conflict of
Tradition: Essays in Indian Ritual, Kingship and Society (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1985), p. 108-27. Heesterman states the problem of dharma for kings as follows:
"In Indian terms, the crux of the authority problem is the king’s standing in the matter
of dharma. Notwithstanding the tall claims made in behalf of the king’s being dharma
incarnate, it is made perfectly clear that in matters of dharma&mdash;that is, in practically
every aspect of his activity&mdash;he has no autonomy whatsoever and, instead of leading,
must follow" (p. 115).
5 Heesterman, "The Conundrum of the King’s Authority," p. 109. Heesterman states:
Paul Bowlby is Associate Professor and Chairperson of the Department of Religious Studies,
Saint Mary’s University, Halifax, NS.
3-
4
portrait of the best kings because they are fundamentally crippled in their
capacity to rule.
This scepticism about political life is rooted, according to Heesterman,
in a ritual enigma about kings and priests visible in the vedic liturgical
texts. There are two aspects to the enigma. On the one hand, Heesterman
shows that rulers originally held together the roles of priest and king.’ On
the other hand the liturgical texts display the collapse of that unity. Our
interest in this paper is with the epic inheritance of kingship without
liturgical authority. By the time of the Mahdbhdrata kings have clearly
emerged from the division of labour between priests (brahman) and war-
riors (ksatriya) without the authority to conduct the rituals and conse-
quently without a basis for their authority to rule. In the epic, kings live
within a division of labour in which power is invested in the ksatriya rulers
while authority is rooted in Veda, the knowledge and rituals possessed by
the brahmins. Yet even when the two castes effectively co-operate, the
tradition understands that the only authentic ritual is conducted in the
forest by the sannyiisin, the renouncer, whose interior liturgies can only be
effective with the abandonment of the world. The effect is to affirm a
profound political disillusionment in the name of the transcendent vision
of Veda. Political life-that is the rule according to dharma -is precarious
if not impossible and its alternative is a conception of political life defined
by the law of the fishes.~ In the world of human and social relations, the
best that one can hope for politically is that the big fish do not eat too many
of the little fish.
Political disillusionment is not the sole effect of the king’s limited
knowledge. The dilemma posed in the dice match about a ksatriya’s dharma
is the conceptual framework for Arujuna’s breakdown at the outset of the
battle in the Bhagavadgïtii.8 For the war between the Pandavas and their
cousins, the sons of Dhrtarastra, as we shall see below, is the completion of
the liturgical dice match for Yudhisthira and his brothers. In the face of
the battle Arjuna must either discover a part of the ksatriya’s knowledge
that permits him to understand his actions in terms of a dharyrza which
"... instead of being exalted as the benign protector of his people he is simply the ’eater’
of the people who devours everything he can lay hands on." This is already a clich&eacute; in
the Vedic prose texts. Later texts enlarge upon this point by stating, for instance, that
ten slaughterhouses equal one oil press, ten oil presses one tavern, ten taverns one
brothel, finally giving the ultimate price for wickedness to the king, who is as evil as ten
brothels; or the king is put on par with a butcher who keeps a hundred thousand
slaughterhouses (cf. Manu 4.85-86; Mbh. 13.126.67).
6 Heesterman, "The Conundrum of the King’s Authority," p. 109 and 125-26.
7 John W. Spellmann, Political Theory of Ancient I ndia (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964),
p. 4-8; 216-19.
8 I have made the argument for the centrality of ritual in the B&t&hiaammgaaavccarrd;;g in Paul
Bowlby, "Tradition in the B&t&,hiaammgaaa"vccarrd;;g Studies in Religion/Sciences R eligieuses 17, 2
(1988).
5
governs chance, or face the death and destruction of battle understood in
terms of the passionate desire for wealth and power elicited by the game
of chance that is war.
My purpose in what follows is to build upon Heesterman’s thesis about
the king’s obligation to gamble in the rajasuya in order to delineate the
character of the political-religious crisis in the Mahfbhfrata represented
by the king’s failure to possess the knowledge essential to rule.
1
At the basis of the vedic conception of kingship is the conviction that the
most powerful means by which society can be preserved from the law of
the fishes is to shape a public discipline, dharma, within the framework of a
complex ritual structure. The king is obliged to participate continuously
in a variety of private and public rituals. For the king to conduct the sacred
rites is to harmonize the kingdom with the power of the gods in order to
reinvigorate life. Fruitfulness, with all of its diverse possibilities of mean-
ing, is the sign of authentic rule. The means to establish that fruitfulness is
primarily the king’s ritual.
To hold that the primary role of the vedic ruler is liturgical is to assert that
there is at work in the Hindu conception of kingship an imperial model.
Like the Confucian emperor who mediates the order of Heaven into the
world, the Hindu ruler’s task is to mediate brahman to the world. Rituals
such as the riijasuya, the royal consecration, are structured not only to
install an emperor, but to renew the world and bring it again into a
harmony with the known order of the cosmos. These conceptions of
kingship are most clearly evident in the rajasuya rituals in general and, in
particular, the gambling match so compellingly documented by Heester-
man.
Heesterman points out that the throne on which the king sits for his
installation is conceived as the &dquo;navel and womb of kingship.&dquo;9 It is located
at the center of the world. Its elevation identifies it with the &dquo;central
mountain so prominent in Hindu cosmology.&dquo;’O The king’s installation on
the throne proceeds in the following
manner:
Sitting on the throne the king is proclaimed brahman in a dialogue with each of
the four priests who sit around him at the four quarters. In this ceremony the king
is manifested as the power that pervades and connects the discontinuous universe.
He alternately disperses this brahman power to the four quarters when address-
ing each of the priests with &dquo;0 brahman,&dquo; and reabsorbs, reintegrates this power
and thereby the whole universe (exemplified by the quarters and the gods con-
nected with them) when the priests answer the king &dquo;thou art brahman.&dquo;11
9 J. C. Heesterman, T heAncient Indian Royal C onsecration(’S-Gravenhage: Mouton, 1957),
p. 149; cf. p. 140.
10 Ibid., p. 149.
11 Ibid., p. 150.
6
The installation ritual shows that the purpose of rulers is to mediate
brahman to the four quarters of his domain. Such a role defines the
imperial conception of kingship in the ancient vedic world.
In the wake of such a conception it is at first puzzling to discover that
following the installation of the king there is a dice match in which the
stake is both the king and his empire.&dquo; According to Heesterman, how-
ever, ritual gambling serves to restate the king’s mediating role. 13 In the
game the five dice-called krta, treta, dvdpara, iiskanda and kali-are
moved in a circular fashion through the four cardinal points of the
universe. Each of the dice is identified with one of the cardinal points. The
fifth, kali, is located at the integrating apex as in a pyramid. Heesterman
describes it: &dquo;In another connection TS. 4, 3, 3 classifying the points of the
compass with the seasons, the deities, the stomas, the ayas, etc., puts krta
in relation with the eastern quarter, treta with the southern quarter,
dvapara with the western quarter, askanda with the northern quarter and
abhibhu (or kali) with the zenith.&dquo;14 This identification of the dice with the
cardinal directions is then applied in the rotary movement of the dice in
the game to recreate ritually the cosmos: &dquo;The rotary movement, with
which the dice are segregated to the points of the compass, brings them in
consonance with the cosmic order, if the number of dice coincides with
the points of the compass. In this way the dice exemplify the creation of
order among the dispersed and discontinuous elements of the uni-
verse.&dquo;15 Heesterman concludes that the purpose of the game is as follows:
it is tempting to compare the game of dice to the brahmodya; in both the
...
brahmodya and the game the purpose can be defined as seizing the principle that
connects and encompasses the discontinuous. In the game this principle is made
palpable by the right number of dice, the number five, the abhibhü-, for this is the
number connecting the quarters, the world ages, the gods connected with the
quarters, the varnas represented by the players together with the kings.’6
The integrative purpose of the dice match consummates in the over-
coming of death with the birth of the king. 17 The birth of the king is
coincident with the renewal of the earth at the New Year. In playing the
dice game, then, the stake for which the participants play is simul-
taneously the cosmos and the king. The king is symbolically coeval with
the fifth die, abhibhu or kali. Kali is the conquering die and conquest
places the king at the apex of the cosmos where he links the four cardinal
12 For bibliography on the dice match cf. ibid., p. 143, footnote 16.
13 Heesterman states: "... the game of dice in the hall may be considered a cosmogonical
rite intended to bring about the creation of the universe and the birth of the king. This
conclusion is corroborated by the fact that the game of dice is often connected with the
passing of the old into the new year" (ibid., p. 153).
14 Ibid., p. 145.
15 Ibid., p. 151.
16 Ibid., p. 151-52.
17 Ibid., p. 153.
7
points, the four quarters and the four varnas. From there, sitting on his
throne the king becomes the sole mediator between the cosmos and earth.
&dquo;It is the king himself who is to be ’won,’ produced by the gambling; he is
the regulating and connecting principle of the quinquepartite universe,
the embodiment of the cosmic order that ’bursts forth’ from the dice.&dquo;1g
The ruler’s purpose in the match is to win the earth and literally take
possession of it. He then imposes upon it the order he derives from
brahman. In his victory he returns possession of the earth to those who live
within his dharma. The citizens, along with their emperor, occupy a
defined geography in harmony with brahman. Both the emperor and his
citizens, then, can anticipate that their lives will bear fruit. The earth can
bear its crops; the sun, the moon and the stars will follow their course; the
rains will come in season; sons and daughters will be born; men and
women can live both protected and harmonious lives. As Heesterman
puts it:
Thus the winner of krta unites and integrates the totality of the universe. The
king, as the pivotal agency absorbing and releasing the universe, can also be
recognized in the dicing game as prescribed in Kaus’s account of the unction. In
the game he wins all the property from his subjects. Then ensues a dialogue with a
vaisya asking for the restitution of the subjects’ property. In his answer the king
grants the restitution successively to the brahmins, the ksatriyas and the vaisyas,
adding: &dquo;May the law rule in my country.&dquo; This addition seems the keynote of the
ceremony: the king as the pivot of universal flux and reflux emits the cosmic
order.’9
In this instance it is clear that the gambling match is a liturgical obligation
in which the substance of kingship is its capacity to mediate brahman to the
world and hence govern even chance. The puzzle of the obligation to
gamble emerges only on the assumption that the match can be lost. In the
Mahabhdrata this startling possibility is faced and narratively reflected
upon in relation to the liturgies of kingship.
2
Van Buitenen has convincingly argued that the entire second book of the
Mahdbha-rata is a narrative built around the structure of the royal conse-
cration ritual. He states: &dquo;I wish to submit that The Assembly Hall is
structurally an epic dramatization of the Vedic ritual. 1120 In this book of
the Mahdbharata Yudhisthira is not simply acting out his passionate desire
for conquest and samrall imperial rule, he is submitting to an obligation
imposed by the requirements of the sacred rite in which he is a partici-
pant. Neither the opulent hall, Indraprastha, which Yudhi~thira has had
18 Ibid., p. 156.
19 Ibid., p. 155.
20 Van Buitenen, M&b&raaammataahccahrr,;; Vol. 2, p. 6.
8
built in the midst of the Khandava forest, nor the violent power politics by
which he has claimed the right to samraj are sufficient to establish his
imperial claim. Only the rajasuya can achieve that end. It is his liturgical
means to an imperial end.
The rajasuya, however, is fraught with danger. As its structure unfolds
he must demonstrate the validity of his claim as emperor in a variety of
ways. He clears the Khandava forest with a fire. One of the survivors is a
deity, an asura, Maya by name, who builds the microcosmic palace,
Indraprastha. Once built the sabha- can house the actual rite. As it unfolds
Yudhisthira is educated in the art of ruling, demonstrates his power by
eliminating opponents and conquers the four quarters; finally there is the
consecration itself. It is in the wake of the bestowal of the unction waters
and the declaration of K rsna as his successor that there follows the
gambling match. Once he is challenged within the context of this liturgical
framework, Yudhisthira the samraj cannot refuse:
In the hall ... Once challenged I will not refuse,
For so I have sworn for eternity.21
Success in the gambling match will verify liturgically Yudhisthira’s impe-
rial claim in the context of the royal consecration rite.
While primarily imposed by the ritual itself Yudhisthira’s obligation to
gamble recognizes political reality as well. For example, the match has
been authorized by Yudhisthira’s uncle,22 the imperial regent Dhrtar-
dstra. Should Yudhisthira win, this authorization has the potential to
acknowledge his legitimate succession to the imperial throne against the
claim of his cousin and Dhrtarastra’s son, Duryodana. Therefore
Dhrtarastra’s acknowledgement of legitimacy and imperial right offers
the hope that the Pandava family can once more govern a unified empire.
It is therefore basic with regard to Yudhisthira’s ambitions.
What transpires in the gambling stage of the liturgy, however, sets the
narrative understanding of the emperor apart from the vedic imperial
conception. Yudhisthira loses. His loss is tied to a fundamental and
crippling defect: he does not know the secret of the dice. This lack of
knowledge is of course specific to the art of gambling but, in its context
within the epic, it is manifestly tied to a ritual defect. Yudhisthira cannot
complete the rfijasuya liturgical cycle for lack of the knowledge of gam-
bling. Yudhisthira may claim to be the embodiment of divine dharma in
the world, but that seems no guarantee that he knows unequivocally how
to function within the requirements of his royal dharma. Despite all his
successes in the royal consecration, his imperial ambition is flawed by a
fundamental defect of knowledge.
21 Mbh. 2(27)52.14-16, p. 126.
22 Mbh. 2(27)52.15, p. 126.
9
The reasons for Yudhisthira’s failure are explained to him once he is in
exile. The seer, Brhadasva, tells him the story of Nala and Damayanti7. 23
This popular story portrays a king in very similar circumstance to that of
Yudhisthira. Nala is &dquo;god-like&dquo; while Yudhisthira personifies dharma. Yet
both lose in their respective gambling matches and must go into exile. The
principle explanation of Nala’s failure is ritual pollution causing his lack
of knowledge about how to conduct ritual. The lack of knowledge opens
both rulers to dire consequences.
In the story, Nala goes to the evening sunset ritual, the sandhya, without
having washed his feet after urinating and touching water.24 The liturgi-
cal defect opens him to possession by the god, Kali. While this defect may
seem trivial, it points at the unthinkable. The mediator of brahman to the
world cannot even conduct the sandhya ritual without defect. How then
could such a king conduct the rajasuya?
Consequently both Nala and presumably Yudhisthira participate in the
ritual gambling sufficiently flawed that they transform the rite into an act
of passion characteristic of a common gambling match. It is not necessary
to imagine that there are two different games that the rulers play, though
that may be the case. Rather, the important distinction is between the
gambling in the ritual by a consecrated ruler and gambling which makes
chance central. The imperial conception, by mediating the power of
brahman through the ruler to the earth, presumes that the emperor
ritually governs chance. For others who play at the game, chance is
everything.
There is a long acquaintance in the tradition with gambling as a game of
chance. Rgueda x.3425 elaborates on the disasters that follow from gam-
bling and provides a basis from which to assess gambling and its relation to
a king’s dharma. Thus in the Law of Manu gambling is explicitly prohibited
because of its destructive effects on the kingdom:
221. Gambling and betting let the king exclude from his realm; those two vices
cause the destruction of the kingdoms of princes.
222. Gambling and betting amount to open theft; the king shall always exert
himself in suppressing both [of them].&dquo;
The reference to theft is important for it unlocks the key to the distinction
between the two types of gambling. Both Yudhisthira and Nala feel that
they have been cheated in the gambling match and hence have had their
23 Mbh. 3(32)50-78, p. 319-64; cf. Thomas Parkhill, "From Trifle to Story: A Study of
Nala and Damayant&imacr;," Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 52, 2 ( 1984): 325-41.
24 Mbh. 3(32)56.1-4, p. 330.
25 Ralph T. H. Griffith, trans., The Hymns of the Rgveda, The Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series,
35 (Varanasi: The Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1971), Vol. 2, p. 429-31.
26 G. Buhler, trans., The Laws of Manu in The Sacred Books of the East, ed. F. Max M&uuml;ller
(Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1970), Vol. 25, IX.221-222, p. 380; cf. IX.223-28, p. 380-81.
10
empires stolen. A thief is defined in the Bhagavadgit3 as a person who eats
the ritual offering but does not offer it to the gods in the appropriate
ritual contexts .21 The effect of such &dquo;theft&dquo; and the ritual ignorance that it
displays is to transform the fruits of human action from a gift of the gods
into an act driven by the passions. In the epic, then, the ritual defect of the
kings transforms the gambling match into an act of passion, a vice,
something which is scandalous. Thus, the epic narrator reports of Nala:
&dquo;He was crazed by the thrill of the dice, and none of his friends were able
to restrain him, when he was mindlessly gambling. 112’ Even a cursory
reading of the gambling match between Yudhisthira and Dhrtarasta
which culminates in the wagering of the Pandava brothers’ wife, Drau-
padi, is equally suggestive of the passion that overcomes Yudhisthira as he
loses everything.2s
Ritually flawed and now subject to their passions, the rulers are incapa-
ble of governing. There is a graphic portrait in the Nala story of the
consequence for the kingdom when the ruler is shown to be without
knowledge and hence given over to his passions. There is no administra-
tion of justice; the citizens can only wait at the gate yearning for a ruler:
All the townspeople came with the councillors to see the king, 0 Bharata, in order
to stop the sick man. The bard came and said to Damayanti, &dquo;All the townspeople
are waiting at the gate with business: the Nisadhan should be told that all his
subjects are waiting for him and are impatient with the vice of their king, who
understands Law and Profit.&dquo; In a tearful voice and wan with anxiety, Damayanti
said to the Nisadhan, her mind ravaged with anguish, &dquo;King, the townspeople are
waiting at the gate to see you, accompanied by all the councillors, and they pledge
their loyalty to their king. Pray see them!&dquo; she said over and over again. But the
king, possessed by Kali, gave no reply whatsoever to his plaintive, slim-waisted
wife of the shining eyes. Thereupon all the councillors and city dwellers thought,
&dquo;The man is lost!&dquo; and unhappily and humbled returned home. In this fashion
the dicing of Puskara and Nala went on for many months, Yudhisthira. And
Punyasloka kept losing.3°
In the vedic conception of kingship the ruler possesses the entire empire.
If he cannot govern his passions and chance, then he cannot mediate the
&dquo;world&dquo; to his people. In turn the citizens cannot possess their world in
27 J. A. B. van Buitenen, The B&t&hiaammgaaavccarrd;;g in t he M&b&raaammaaahtcchrra;; (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1981), p. 83. Van Buitenen translates the B&t&hiaammgaaavccarrd;;g 3.10-13 as
follows: "Praj&amacr;pati, after creating creatures and sacrifice together, said in the begin-
ning : ’Ye shall multiply by it, it shall be the cow that yields your desires. Give ye the Gods
being with it, and the Gods shall give ye being. And thus giving each other being ye shall
attain to the highest good. Themselves enhanced in their being with sacrifice, the Gods
shall give ye the pleasures ye desire: he who enjoys their gifts without return to them is
but a thief.’"
28 Mbh. 3(32)56.5f., Vol. 2, p. 330.
29 Mbh. 2(27)43.1-2(28)72; Vol. 2, p. 106-69.
30 Mbh. 3(32)56.5f., Vol. 2, p. 330.
1 1
confidence any longer. In such circumstances what remains for the citi-
zens is a rule primarily dependent upon arms. Rule by might, in the
absence of any knowledge of dharma and the liturgies of kings, is to hand
the empire over to the biggest fish whose might permits him to consume
the lesser fish. The citizens know they are to be ruled by a &dquo;thief&dquo; and
hence will be without protection and deprived of their possessions.
Nala’s brother Puskara and, more certainly, Yudhisthira’s cousin,
Duryodana, will rule during the exile. These victors in the epic’s gambling
matches are not men who themselves know the secret of the dice. If they
did, they would have a powerful liturgical claim upon the imperial throne.
Rather Duryodana’s ally, Sakuni, possesses the secret of the dice and
offers his services for the gambling match. In the Nala story, Puskara,
Nala’s brother, wins with Dvapara, a deity, controlling the dice and their
movement on the gambling floor. At the same time, of course, Nala is
possessed by the jealous god Kali who is set on revenge for Damayantis
rejection of the gods at the bridegroom choice. These men with their
allies, both divine and human, will rule in Nala and Yudhisthira’s places by
force of arms as the big fish, because that is all they know.
Nala and Yudhisthira are obliged by virtue of their loss in the gambling
match to leave their imperial capital and, exiled, live the life of the
homeless wanderer in the forest. For Nala, exile is divided into two stages.
The first part is the forest, the second stage is in disguise as Bahuka, the
horse master in the household if King Rtuparna. Not coincidentally, this
two-stage movement is the one required of Yudhisthira, though the time
span is different. Yudhisthira must spend twelve years in the forest and
one year in disguise, while three years will pass before Nala can obtain the
secret knowledge of the dice. Armed with the knowledge of the dice, Nala
will recover his kingdom, his wife and family at one throw of the dice.
For Yudhisthira exile interrupts the royal consecration ritual at the
point of the gambling match. Its completion must await the duration of
the exile when the gambling hall will be replaced by the battlefield and the
dice by weapons of war. The epic understands that for kings, both battle
and the dice match are rituals dependent upon the king’s liturgical capac-
ity to overcome chance. The correspondence between the gambling
match and battle is expressed in the Mah3bh3rata’s Book ofthe Bhagavadgft5
in the following way: &dquo;That dangerous and inhospitable gambling den on
the battlefield, where the carpet for the dicing has been spread out with
the bodies of men, elephants, and horses, and the dice rolled with the
arrows, spears, clubs, swords, and javelins-what slow-witted warrior
gamblers entered that den to gamble for the fearful stakes of their
lives~&dquo;31
Yudhisthira will conquer in battle and win his empire, demonstrating
his possession of an essential component of a king’s knowledge. His
31 Van Buitenen, T heB&t&hiaammgaaavccarrd;;g in t heM&b&raaammataahccahrr,;; p. 45; M.bh 6(63)15.66-71.
12
victory will depend on his brother, Arjuna, and his capacity to know how
to overcome his disillusionment with battle in which he sees his actions as
the expression of the passionate desire for wealth and knowledge.32
Within such an understanding Arjuna sees the battlefield as the embodi-
ment of the passions, elicited by ungoverned chance, which have brought
down his brother Yudhisthira and King Nala. It is of the essence of
Krsna’s response, then, to show how battle is not conceptually different
from the dice match. It is a ritua133 which-properly enacted as a kar-
ynayoga-permits human beings to rule their passions in a knowledge
powerfully envisioned in the eleventh chapter of the Bhagavadgztd. There
Krsna displays in his eternal form how he encompasses in his divine
karmayoga the overcoming of chance in the life and death conflict on the
battlefield. There it is Krsna who is both the recipient of the ritual action
of the warriors and the giver of life and death, success and failure on the
battlefield.34 The ritual of the warrior breaks the connection of means and
ends in human affairs.
Krsna’s teaching, then, is no less an essential component of the king’s
knowledge than that of the dice. Indeed it may be argued that Krsna’s
teaching goes to the very heart of the tension that arises for warriors and
kings haunted by the spectre of their partial knowledge. With knowledge
comes victory for both Arjuna and Yudhisthira. As samraj Yudhisthira
will then offer the horse sacrifice the authentic sign of his imperial
as
claim and as expiation for his losses. For all ksatriaya’s-Arjuna,
Yudhisthira and Nala-the forest equips them with the knowledge they
require to recover their respective empires.
What is crucial, however, is the effect of ritual ignorance on the ideal of
kingship. The pictures of kings overwhelmed by their passions and
thereby, ritually inept; or driven into prolonged exile; or leaving their
empires in the hands of rapacious substitutes all diagnostic of what
are
Heesterman calls the intractable &dquo;conundrum&dquo; of kingship. The ruler
must participate in a continuous round of liturgies without the proper
knowledge essential to conduct them. The epic tradition is heir to this
conception of kings as liturgical mediators of the cosmic order. As we have
seen, however, the kings cannot measure up to the ritual ideal. They lose
the gambling match in the rajasuya.
3
Submission to exile, however, does make a fundamental distinction
between the winners and losers in these epic gambling matches. Nala and
32 Ibid., p. 71-75; Mbh. 6(63)23 1.25-2.10. In the conventional chapter and verse notation
of the B&t&hiaammgaaavccarrd;;g alone, Arjuna’s crisis is found in chapters one and two ( 1.10-2.10).
33 Cf. ibid., p. 83; Mbh. 6(63)25 3.10-15.
34 Ibid., p. 115-17; Mbh. 6(63)33 11.25-31.
13
Yudhisthira accept the liturgical and dharmic consequences of their loss.
That is to say, they continue to live within the faith and assumptions that
underlie the ritual obligations of a king and warrior. The exile becomes,
then, an occasion on which they are able to engage in the quest for the
secret of the dice. Acquisition of such knowledge permits them to imagine
that the world can again be possessed and ruled by an emperor, now more
fully cognizant of dharma and hence of how the rituals must be conducted.
The problem, however, is that the hope, while present, is tied to a quest
which is endless and ultimately elusive-at least for the king’s capacity to
rule and mediate brahman to his empire. ’
In the epic the forest is an enigma. It does not reside outside the domain
of the emperor, as Nancy Falk points out: &dquo;It appears that a king had to
have some kind of transaction with the wilderness and the beings that
inhabited it to acquire or hold his kingship. Many varieties of transaction
can be found: kings conquer the wilderness, appropriate its powers, tend
its shrines and symbols and beings.&dquo;35 Thus, for example, the ritual of a
horse sacrifice by which the boundaries of the imperial governance are set
clearly imagined that the forest was incorporated into the empire.
Nonetheless the forest and its occupants are consistently portrayed as
intractable to rule. Thus the forest is portrayed in the Mahiibhiirata as a
place fraught with danger. Nala’s wife, Damayanti, quickly discovers that
in the forest the laws and conventions defined by dharma disappear. Her
husband Nala abandons her in the night; snakes threaten and hunters
rape; elephants range and trample caravans. Nala in turn discovers that
the forest is a place in which snake kings attack brahmins who conse-
quently must endure a cursed existence until they too find the secret that
unbinds the curse.
The forest has another face, however. Nala and Damayanti also dins-
cover hope for their separate quests. Once Nala liberates the snake king
from his curse, he receives the first indication that he will indeed succeed
in his quest for the secret of the dice.36 Similarly Damayanti is assured by
the ascetics resident there that ultimately she will be reunited with Nala as
kin g.37 The forest, then, is a place where dharyna cannot be enforced, yet
paradoxically it provides a home for brahmins, renouncers and ascetics,
the very persons who know Veda and the knowledge essential for kings to
rule. These homeless ones have separated themselves from the world of
the city and the life of the householders. They are dead to the world, yet
they live and have taken up a life which is subject to Veda alone. The
conviction is that the forest alone is the place in which knowledge can be
taught and learned and that alone is the hope which sustains both Nala
35 Nancy Falk, "Wilderness and Kingship in Ancient South Asia," History of Religions, 13
(1973): 1.
36 Mbh. 3(32)63; Vol. 2, p. 344-45.
37 Mbh. 3(32)61.86; Vol. 2, p. 340.
14
and Yudhisthira in their quest for liturgical knowledge that will enable
them to regain their respective empires.
Nala, for example, learns the knowledge of the dice in the forest. Nala is
driving King Rtuparna to Damayanti purported second bridegroom
choice. As Nala, disguised as Bahuka the horsemaster, guides the chariot
across the forest, King Rtuparna says to him:
Now you too watch my great talent at counting! No one knows everything, nobody
is omniscient-knowledge is nowhere lodged with any single person. In this tree,
Bahuka, the difference between the leaves and the nuts still on the tree and those
fallen on the ground is a hundred and one: one more leaf and one hundred more
nuts, Bahuka. Both those branches have five crores of leaves. Take off the
branches and their twigs and you get from them two thousand one hundred and
ninety-five nuts.38
The skill illustrated here by which Rtuparna instantly sees correlations
and is able to calculate the groupings represents the talent Heesterman
finds to be essential in the rtijasuya gambling match. He speculates on the
rules:
In general, however, we may conclude that the point of the game consisted in
making certain numerical combinations, based on the numbers four and five, with
unmarked dice.... Thus the purpose of the game seems to lie in separating a
number of dice and in establishing in visible form the concordance of this number
with the regions of the universe. All seems to depend on the skill of the player in
computing at a glance the number of the dice to be separated, taking at the same
time into account the number of dice to be left for his adversaries. 39
That king Rtuparna’s skill is directly connected to the dice match is made
clear in the text. He tells Nala after watching him count the leaves and
nuts individually: &dquo;Know that I know the secret of the dice and am expert
at counting.&dquo;4° Compounding the link to ritual gambling, it is no coinci-
dence that the vibhitaka tree around which this incident takes place pro-
duces the nuts which are used to fashion the dice used in the gambling
match.
The conviction that is here displayed is also an essential part of the vedic
imperial faith. It is possible by virtue of the ruler’s mediation of brahman
to calculate the correct number of dice and to correlate that calculation
with the four quarters. The ruler’s task is to show in the ritual context that
he possesses the knowledge to mediate order into the world by virtue of
his possession of the counting and correlating skill. His demonstration
indicates his mastery of chance. By contrast the epic’s image of Nala
groveling beneath the vibhitaka tree, counting the leaves and the nuts
individually, graphically displays his ignorance and lack of skill when
38 Mbh. 3(32)70.7; Vol. 2, p. 353.
39 Heesterman, Consecration, p. 145-46.
40 Mbh. 3(32)70.20-25; Vol. 2, p. 353.
15
compared to his ruler companion who possesses the secret knowledge of
the dice.
It is striking how the narrative at this point makes Rtuparna the mirror
image of Nala with regard to the knowledge necessary to rule. While he
possesses the knowledge of the dice, his knowledge remains defective in
another respect. In the story he yearns to possess Nala’s wife, Damayanti,
at a bridegroom choice to be held only a day later and many miles away.
Only someone who possesses the royal knowledge of horses is able to
cover the miles in time. Rtuparna shows all the impatience and ignorance
with regard to the selection and driving of horses that Nala shows in
counting the nuts and leaves .4’Thus either the skill with horses or the skill
in gambling may be understood as one of the many types of royal knowl-
edge which it is proper for a king to show. That Rtuparna and Nala
exchange their respective skills-the art of gambling for the art of
horsemanship-amounts to a partial, but by no means complete acquisi-
tion of the whole body of knowledge proper to kings. The perennially
partial character of the knowledge of kings is understood clearly by
Rtuparna:
No one knows everything, nobody is omniscient-
knowledge is nowhere lodged with any single person.42
The partiality of this exchange of knowledge is illustrated many times in
the Mahiibhiirata. Krsna, for example, will teach another aspect of
r3javidy3 or &dquo;royal knowledge&dquo; in the fourth and ninth chapters of the
Bhagavadgïtii.43 Similarly in the $3ntiparvan section of the Mah3bh3rata
Bhisma, the family patriarch, will discourse from his bed of arrows on the
art of kingship. Both of the latter teachings will take place on the battle-
field which, as we have seen, is another version of the sabha or gambling
den which is located in the forest.
The ritual vulnerability of kings because they lack essential knowledge
is repeatedly documented in the epic as a whole. The effect is stunning.
Both kings and their kingdoms are abandoned. The world is incapable of
mirroring the transcendent vision of Veda in the kaliyuga, the last of the
four ages of the cosmos. At best there are fragments, glimpses of the
brahmanic order envisioned by the ancients. The marginal place of the
forest/Veda in the world comes to be the central symbol of the disillusion-
ment with the world.
The ambiguity of the forest may be stated as follows. The forest exists
within the empire. However it is a place which the king cannot effectively
or consistently rule. At least part of the explanation for the ineffectiveness
41 Mbh. 3(32)69.1.10-30; Vol. 2, p. 351-52.
42 Mbh. 3(32)70.7; Vol. 2, p. 353.
43 Van Buitenen, T heB&t&hiaammgaaavccarrd;;g in t he M&b&raaammataahccahrr,;; p. 85-107.
16
of kings in the forest is that they discover there that they are subject to it.
They need knowledge only located in the forest. To put the matter
another way, the king is dependent on the forest. Rulers must submit
their imperial claim to a test adjudicated not by the capacity to command
armies in battle, but to a ritually defined contest, the essential skills for
which can only be learned in the forest. In doing so the king must submit
to an authority which resides at the margins of his empire. Submission
requires abandoning his position within the empire to others less qual-
ified to rule while he pursues a secret which will permit him to display a
portion of the knowledge required to rule.
4
Heesterman has studied the ancient Indian royal consecration rite in
order to understand the &dquo;conundrum&dquo; of kingship. He has done so
because &dquo;the ritual, however mindlessly performed, is based on penetrat-
ing thought. Ritual cannot escape the fundamental problem but must
somehow express it in well-defined acts. Ritual, in other words, should
make the insoluble at least acceptable without glossing it over. Putting it
plainly, the ritual cannot simply put the king on his throne and leave the
matter there.&dquo;44 The &dquo;penetrating thought&dquo; of the ritual texts about kings
and kingship was taken up again in a narrative form in the Mah3bh3rata
epic. It is possible to speculate that the rationale of the epic, at least in part,
lies in its public portrait of the end of imperial kingship-a conclusion
already drawn in the liturgical arena and now conveyed in epic narrative.
Drawing on the ritual gambling of the king in the riijasuya in which the
king’s task is already fraught with danger and risk, the Mahdbhdrata
elevates that peril in order to display anew the vulnerability of the impe-
rial institution. Rulers can still govern, but they do so dependent upon a
knowledge which exists in the forest, at the margins of the empire. To
obtain this knowledge they must abandon their empire and await the
pleasure of the forest to give up its secret.
The Hindu tradition makes much of this dependence on knowledge at
the periphery of the ruler’s domain. The brahmin, not the king, has
highest status in the caste or varna hierarchy because it is the brahmin
whose task it is to know the sacred rites and the secret knowledge of the
forest. The ruler is left explicitly dependent upon the brahmin with
whom he shares the imperial task. Success is possible in a limited way.
Kings can succeed in the liturgical gambling match or at war by discover-
ing the secret that can transform their action into a ritual called kar~nayoga,
as Krsna teaches Arjuna. Such a yoga in company with the specific ritual
knowledge of the dice, with the weapons of war or with horses permits a
44 Heesterman, "Conundrum," p. 117.
17
king to rule at least temporarily. Transforming skilled ritual actions into a
yoga, argues Krsna, separates means and ends in human action, and
places in Krsna’s hands the governance of chance and the task of sustain-
ing dharma in the cosmos.
As King Rtuparna points out, however, even the most skilled of kings
cannot possess all knowledge. There remains, therefore, simultaneously
hidden and explicit in the epic’s portrait of imperial kingship a profound
scepticism about the extent to which the world can be understood as a
cosmos, and its mundane image, an empire. While in general the brahmin
becomes the liturgical mediator of dharma to the world, it is finally the case
that his true home, along with that of the ruler, is in solitude in the forest.
The ordering of the human world, of human relations according to
dharma, is finally intractable even to the brahmin allied with the arms of
the ruler. Finally both must leave the world and take up a life in forest
devoid of human relations. In solitude they must interiorize the sacred
rite mediating the identity of brahman and dtman. Only in the forest and in
solitude as the renouncer, the sannyiisin, can the unity envisioned in the
ancient rituals be recreated.
The tragic component of this picture of kings constantly threatened by
the obligation to seek another facet of dharma in the forest, is that their
rule must always collapse, if only temporarily. The forest will draw the
king away to conquer the only kingdom which can be ruled, the self, and
that only for the solitary renouncer. The crippling of kingship is the
abandonment of hope that the world can be ruled; that a collective
well-being can exist, if only in balance with the solitary yearning for
transcendence.
