The Mahābhārata and
Dharma Discourse

The Mahābhārata and
Dharma Discourse
:
A Vision of Clarity through
Its Tales
By
Nitin Malhotra
The Mahābhārata and Dharma Discourse:
A Vision of Clarity through Its Tales
By Nitin Malhotra
This book first published 2020
Cambridge Scholars Publishing
Lady Stephenson Library, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE6 2PA, UK
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Copyright © 2020 by Nitin Malhotra
All rights for this book reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without
the prior permission of the copyright owner.
ISBN (10): 1-5275-6031-7
ISBN (13): 978-1-5275-6031-4
Dedicated to my teacher
Prof. Shrawan K. Sharma

CONTENTS
Preface ....................................................................................................... ix
Acknowledgements ................................................................................. xiii
Introduction ................................................................................................ 1
Chapter I ..................................................................................................... 9
The Structure of the Mahābhārata
Chapter II .................................................................................................. 19
Sva-Dharma (Individualism)
Chapter III ................................................................................................ 39
Sādhāraṇa-Dharma (Universalism)
Chapter IV ................................................................................................ 57
Āpad-Dharma: Practical Applications to Illusions of Modernity
Chapter V ................................................................................................. 83
Ethical Dilemmas and Visions of Clarity through the Tales
Conclusion ................................................................................................ 99
Appendix - Indo-Romanic Symbols ....................................................... 105
Select Bibliography ................................................................................ 107

PREFACE
Ever since reading the Mahābhārata, I have been gripped with an eerie
feeling that there is something in this incredible text which eludes my grasp.
During childhood, I was born and brought up listening to the stories of the
Ramayana and the Mahābhārata in a religious way. Some questions played
on my mind as I began my literary studies. Moreover, I was desperate to
search for all the answers to my curiosities, and finally, I selected Indian
classical texts to look for the meaning and purpose of human existence. I
can see the passage of my life in three texts which are all very close to my
heart—the Panchatantra fascinated me as a child, the Ramayana as a
teenager, and the Mahābhārata as an adult, with several questions concerning
dharma, the most vital question I have ever encountered among thinking
minds.
Dharma, the word reflecting the core narrative of the epic Mahābhārata, is
untranslatable. Words such as duty, rights, goodness, law, conduct, virtues,
and righteous way of living seem to be possible literal translations, but they
fall short when explaining the spiritual sense of the word dharma.
Nevertheless, a question arises: What does dharma mean? Does it mean the
faith or belief that Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, and Sikhs hold? Is there any
individual god, society or religion that is expected to be an authority on
dharma? Who is responsible for dharma? Is the root of dharma what Manu
said? The entire Vedas, the traditions and customs of those who learn, teach,
and practice the Vedas, the conduct of virtuous people, and what is
satisfactory to oneself is dharma. Is this correct? The Mahābhārata keeps
returning to Bhīṣma’s conclusion that dharma is subtle (sūkṣma). Draupadī,
Dhṛtrāṣṭra and others will repeat this phrase when they are in genuine
difficulty. It seems that dharma is subtle (sūkṣma) because it does not deal
with matters of fact and the world of power; rather, it deals with opinions
about how we ought to behave.
Tales of the Mahābhārata covers all the essential questions of human
existence which I believe have been the main concern of the major
scriptures of the world. However, in no other culture has a non-scriptural
text been so deeply embedded in the life of the people as the Mahābhārata
has been in Indian life and thought since ancient days. In the knowledge-
x Preface
centred oral Indian culture, like other intellectual texts, the Mahābhārata
has played multiple societal roles—as a source of knowledge and values,
sustaining the social fibre and fabric, as an inspiration in adversity, as an
entertainer and educator in happy times, and as a proto-explanatory model
for any number of problems encountered by society.
The origin of the genre of the tale, known as Katha in Indian tradition, is
often traced back to the Vedic times when stories were narrated during the
interludes of ceremonies accompanying a yajña and an act of sacrifice was
performed. The priest would fill in the intervening hours, days, or weeks by
narrating a series of stories in a digressive mode, which invariably had a
moral purpose. As the priest would sometimes take the liberty to speak
about the spiritual or religious purpose of the rituals to those participating in
the yajña, the Katha became a form of expository narrative or comprehensive
commentary. This is how the notion of the Katha as an interlude came into
existence, something that later evolved into the concept of a framed tale or
a “story within a story” mode of narration, widely recognized as a typically
Indian mode of story-telling. This all-time text interrogates the fundamental
verities of human life and thus poses perennial questions that face us at
every step in our life—What is dharma? On whose side is dharma—
Duryodhana? Yudhiṣṭhira? What is right and what is wrong? Who won the
war? Who lost it? What does it teach us? Should we fight for our rights?
Who is the protagonist and why? Kṛṣṇa? Duryodhana? Arjuna? Bhīṣma? Or
Bhīma? What is the difference between desolation and peace (at the end of
the Great War)? Is all effort futile? What is the greatest goal of life—
renunciation or possession? Is a human being helpless in the face of the
inviolate determinism of the consequence of his actions? Or is there a degree
of redemption available to him to transcend his karma? All these questions
are formulated, analysed and exemplified but a certain indeterminacy
remains and that indeterminacy is the marker of the profound wisdom of the
Mahābhārata. As Bhīṣma tells Draupadī, “It is difficult to decide what
dharma is (meaning the nature of righteousness and truthfulness) and what
adharma is (unrighteousness or wickedness)”.
The present book is the fruit of my extensive study of the tales of the
Mahābhārata, and my visits to the heads of different Indian traditions who
describe dharma in rituals, customs, and philosophy. It was challenging to
write on a topic that has already been discussed many times and to take a
philosophical slant. In the present book, the tales answer the questions more
easily. With gratitude, I take refuge among all the writers on the topic, and
the different saints of the Ṥruti and Smṛiti traditions who have helped me to
The Mahābhārata and Dharma Discourse: xi
A Vision of Clarity through Its Tales
understand the issues of dharma. This has helped me to write about the
universal message at the core of the epic Mahābhārata. I have strived to
discuss the issues of dharma described in the Mahābhārata. The book surely
provides an opinion about how to perform dharma that is individual,
universal, and situation-based in the present era.
(Dr Nitin Malhotra)

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am thankful to my teachers, Prof. Shrawan K. Sharma and Dr. Pramathesh
Bhattacharya, Department of English, Gurukula Kangri University, India
for satisfying my earnest quench for knowledge. I will not forget to show
my sense of gratitude to Dr. Kaptan Singh Nanda of the Indian Military
Academy, Dehradun, India. I owe my thanks to my family for their silent
prayers and unconditional love.

INTRODUCTION
A list of the types of dharma described in the Dharamśāstras (including
the Mahābhārata) can help us to understand the aim of the ancient sages
which was to develop an orderly, non-conflicting, self-contained, and
stable society. The several types of dharma that they envisaged, analysed
and presented are Sādhāraṇa-dharma (universal dharma), Viśeṣa-dharma
(dharma and injunctions of higher degrees at different higher levels),
Āpad-dharma (practical application of dharma), Strī-dharma (dharma of
women), Lokasama-dharma (dharma applicable to social groups and their
activities), Gṛhastha-dharma (dharma for the householder), Rāja-dharma
(dharma of the king), and Varṇāśrama-dharma (dharma for different
classes of people and stages in life). But the Mahābhārata focuses on three
dharmas—i.e. Sva-dharma (dharma of an individual), Sādhāraṇa-dharma
(universal dharma) and Āpad-dharma (practical application of dharma).
Most of us expect ready-made answers to all the fundamental questions
concerning right and wrong in life, instead of having to delve deep into the
problems, thinking them out completely, and understanding their whole
significance.
Human problems are not simple, they are very complex. To understand
them requires patience and insight, and it is of the highest importance that
we as individuals understand and resolve them for ourselves. What we
must realize is that we are not only conditioned by the environment, but
we are the environment, not something separate from it. Our thoughts and
responses are conditioned by the dharma of society, of which we are also a
part. Everywhere it is advised not to follow adharma, which means we
must follow dharma. This concept has served as a beacon of hope guiding
the lives of people all over the world for millennia. Although it is a
timeless and universal concept, the original concept evolved in ancient
India. The texts of India’s intellectual tradition define this concept in
different ways. They, in general, help us to understand questions about
life, instead of focusing on the issue of dharma. The concept of dharma
has evolved, its meaning shifting from a “ritual ethics of deed” to a more
personal virtue based on one’s conscience. In earlier Vedic times, dharma
meant doing visible “good deeds” endorsed by society, and Sanskrit
scholars generally translate this earlier meaning of dharma as “merit”.
2 Introduction
Often these deeds were specific to one’s caste, and this concept is called
sva-dharma. In Vedic literature, the word for dharma is ṛta meaning
firstly, the cosmic order, secondly, the field of sacrifice and finally the
sphere of human conduct (Zaehner 39). Thus, the Vedas provide, in an
abstract way, the principles governing life. The Purāṇas embody these
principles in various divine beings and tell stories of how God cyclically
creates and destroys the world (Patnaik 166). “With the rise of yoga sects,
Buddhism and Jainism, this meaning of dharma gradually changed to
mean social harmony, the cultivation of an ethical self, and to actions
required of all castes” (Das chapter III). In this sense, dharma has
universal appeal and is called sādhāraṇa-dharma. In Buddhism, the
history of dharma is very detailed and can be summed up by four noble
truths called ārya satyas. Jainism considers dharma differently and more
technically. Dharma means the condition of the movement of the soul
(Introduction JIAP 35). In the modern era, dharma is also treated as a
religion. Bearing in mind the above account, it can be said that dharma
does not involve religion but a moral principle that is subtle and has a
wider meaning following an appropriate place, time and person. The
definitions of dharma quoted by Sukthankar in his On the Meaning of the
Mahābhārata are all self-evident in this regard. These definitions define
dharma as:
“belief in the conservation of moral values”, “a mode of life or a code of
conduct which regulates a man’s work and activities as a member of
society and as an individual to bring about his gradual development and
enable him to reach what was deemed to be the goal of human existence”,
“that which holds a thing together, makes it what it is, prevents it from
breaking up and changing into something else, its fundamental attribute,
it’s essential nature, the law of its being”, “the code of life based on Vedas,
the due observance of which leads to happiness here and hereafter”, “that
scheme or code of laws which bind together human beings in the bonds of
mutual rights and duties, of causes-and-consequences of actions arising out
of their temperamental characters, in relation to each other and to society.”
(Sukthankar 79-83)
The definitions given above seem to include all conceivable aspects of
human life. This account also seems to say that we need to understand
dharma at a universal and socio-political level. This shows that dharma is
not a mathematical idea. It is a fluid concern and hence it has been
conceived and understood in various ways. One can feel baffled and so
pose questions: What is dharma? Or what is the ultimate criterion of
dharma? And why should one practice dharma? What is the need for
dharma in the present period? What type of dharma can help us to find
The Mahābhārata and Dharma Discourse: 3
A Vision of Clarity through Its Tales
peace? Can dharamshastras help us to obtain answers to resolve our
confusion?
The author of the epic, at the end of this massive composition, laments that
it is very difficult to attain dharma only through books because people are
unable to understand the maxim that artha (prosperity) and kāma (pleasure)
arise from dharma (Swargārohaṇ-Parva). Mokṣa is also discussed in the
Mahābhārata but is not considered as important to dharma. It is implicit in
the text that righteous living and moral integrity will automatically lead
one to salvation (Matilal 36).
Scholars say that if there is any text which can provide comprehensive
expositions of the issues of dharma, it is the Mahābhārata which is the
compendium of all conceivable aspects of human life. This is why it is
called the fifth Veda (Agni-Purāṇa), containing a code of life, a philosophy
of social and ethical relations, and speculative thoughts on human problems.
It is also called Dharamśāstra, listing different aspects of dharma, artha,
kāma and mokṣa, the four-fold ends of life. It is clearly stated in the text:
“Whatever is said about dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa in this epic can be
found elsewhere too, but what is not in this epic, cannot be found anywhere
else.” (I.62.26)
This shows that what runs through all multiple aspects described in the
epic is dharma. In the epic, whenever heroic men and women grapple with
problems or find themselves in genuine difficulty, they talk of dharma, i.e.
what to do and what not to do. The Mahābhārata articulates the character
traits of sva-dharma and sādhāraṇa-dharma in several places. It refers to
“not harming others, being truthful, and not getting angry”. Both these
senses of dharma co-exist in the Mahābhārata. Since they are often
contradictory, they contribute to the dramatic tension in the story. When
Draupadī uses dharma, she has its former meaning in mind. Given her bias
for action and the kṣatriya ethic, she usually thinks of dharma as sva-
dharma. When Yudhiṣṭhira uses the word, he usually means universal,
ethical dictates of his conscience and sādhāraṇa-dharma. Draupadī and
Bhīma use “dharma” to awaken Yudhiṣṭhira’s sense of duty as a kṣatriya
warrior, usually to get him to act as we shall see in the Mahābhārata when
the Pāṇdavas were in exile:
“If we are to observe our own dharma . . . it is in war that our task lies . . .
Others have stolen our kingdom . . . [Your idea of] dharma is not dharma,
4 Introduction
it is wrong dharma . . . O king of men, by scrapping a lesser dharma, a man
obtains a greater dharma, and he is judged to be wise.” (III.150.31)
Dharma can be taken as a standard for one’s moral conduct. Dharma or
“what one has to do” is a standard of conduct, and society needs standards.
Yudhiṣṭhira says:
“He who doubts dharma finds in nothing else a standard and ends in setting
himself as a standard.” (III.32.15)
He is saying, in effect, that following dharma is its own reward. When one
acts in this way, it is motives and not consequences that are important. The
Mahābhārata distinguishes between the two meanings of dharma: caste
duty as sva-dharma, which varies from caste to caste, and the duty of
conscience—sādhāraṇa-dharma—which is the same for all, i.e. universal
in its form.
The Mahābhārata keeps returning to Bhīṣma’s conclusion that dharma is
subtle (sūkṣma). Draupadī, Dhṛtrāṣṭra and others will repeat this phrase
when they are in genuine difficulty. It seems that dharma is subtle
(sūkṣma) because it does not deal with matters of fact and the world of
power; rather it deals with opinions about how we ought to behave. This
all-time text interrogates the fundamental verities of human life and thus
poses perennial questions that face us at every step in our lives: What is
dharma? On whose side is dharma—Duryodhana? Or Yudhiṣṭhira? What
is right and what is wrong? These issues are formulated, analysed and
exemplified but a certain indeterminacy remains and that indeterminacy is
the marker of the profound wisdom of the Mahābhārata. As Bhīṣma tells
Draupadī, “It is difficult to decide what dharma (righteousness) is and
what is adharma (unrighteousness)”. What is dharma (righteousness) and
what is adharma (unrighteousness) oscillate between two broad threads,
viz. (i) accounts or tales of the long conflict between the Pāṇḍavas and the
Kauravas, and (ii) dialogues or tales on the issues of dharma.
The issues of dharma constitute an equally (or even more) important part
of the Mahābhārata. In fact, from the perspective of the number of pages,
more than half of the Mahābhārata is devoted to such tales or dialogues.
In “Vana-Parva” three Ṛṣis (Brihdaśva, Lomaśa and Mārkaṇḍeya) tell
Yudhiṣṭhira a large number of stories. In all, it includes the following
stories and dialogues: Nala and Damyantī, Daḍhicī, Vyādha-Gītā,
Rāmāyaṇa, Sāvitrī, Śivi and Yakṣa-Yudhiṣṭhira. They all, in one way or
another, deal with the issues of dharma. Similarly, the dialogue between
The Mahābhārata and Dharma Discourse: 5
A Vision of Clarity through Its Tales
Dhṛtrāṣṭra and Ṛṣi Sanat-Sujāta, and the story narrated in “Udyoga-Parva”,
is based on the highest spiritual knowledge. Another relates to Lord
Kṛṣṇa’s speech at the Kaurava assembly where he tries to persuade
Dhṛtrāṣṭra to control the unrighteousness of Duryodhana. “Śānti-Parva” is
another important parva which contains a comprehensive coverage of
dharma. Here, there is a dialogue between Bhīṣma and Yudhiṣṭhira where
Bhīṣma illustrates most of his replies with the help of a story. In this way,
there are as many as seventy-five stories in “Śānti-Parva”. Probably the
most famous of these stories (from a socio-religious point of view) is
based on the dialogue between Tulādhāra (a person engaged in trade) and
Jājali (a brāhmiṇ). In the stories of these parvas, there is an exposition of
sva-dharma (dharma of the individuals), sādharaṇa-dharma (universal
dharma), and āpad-dharma (practical application of dharma or dharma
adjusted to difficult circumstances).
As far as “Āpad-Dharma-Upparva” of “Śānti-Parva” is concerned, it is
mostly related to āpad-dharma (dharma adjusted to difficult circumstances),
also known as practical applications of dharma. In “Aśvamedha-Parva”,
Lord Kṛṣṇa teaches Arjuna directly in Anū-Gītā. Last but not least is the
“Mahāprasthānika-Parva”, which has two important dialogues: (i) between
Yudhiṣṭhira and Bhīma, and (ii) between Yudhiṣṭhira, on the one hand,
and Indra and Dharamrāja, on the other. The occasion for both the
dialogues was “the great departure”, i.e. the final journey on foot to the
high mountains leading to heaven’s entrance, by the five Pāṇḍava brothers
and Draupadī, after having installed Parīkṣit on the throne.
In composing the great epic, the Mahābhārata, Vedvyāsa very eloquently
appealed to this concept as the very core value and source from which all
other values issue.
“It is dharma that leads to the behaviour which promotes harmony in
society, facilitates its growth, and ensures its happiness. It further explains
that one should not do unto others which is unpleasant to oneself.”
XII.251.19
Again,
“Whatever one desires for oneself one should desire the same for others.”
XII.251.21
Indeed, the Mahābhārata is in many ways an extended attempt to clarify
just what dharma is—that is, what exactly should we do when we are
6 Introduction
trying to be good in the world? Could one depend on dharma to protect
oneself in this uncertain world? If so, how does a person go about finding
dharma? In a life and death debate with the Yakṣa, a tree spirit, who
controls the waters of a lake, thirsty Yudhiṣṭhira is asked this very
question. The right answer will save him and his brothers; the wrong
answer will mean their death. He tells the Yakṣa that, in seeking dharma,
“reason is of limited use for it is without foundation; neither are the sacred
texts helpful as they are at odds with one another; nor is there a single sage
whose opinion could be considered authoritative. The truth about dharma
is hidden in a cave”.
The Mahābhārata is about our incomplete lives, about good people acting
badly, about how difficult it is to be good in this world. Although human
perfection may be illusory, and dharma may be “subtle”, there are limits to
what moral education can achieve. The epic leaves one with the
confidence that it is in our nature to be good. The Mahābhārata believes
that our lives should not have to be so cruel and humiliating. This explains
its refrain: “dharma leads to victory!” Although there is irony at times, the
epic genuinely wants our relationships to be more honest. Since the epic is
a narrative, the personal viewpoint dominates. But the story stops often
when the impersonal viewpoint takes over.
The idea of dharma based on one’s reason, thus, sits side by side with deep
faith in the existence of the gods in the Mahābhārata. But it is left to
individuals to decide how to best order their lives. Given the plurality of
authorities, one has to depend on oneself. No wonder the Mahābhārata
says that “dharma is subtle” (XII.130.36).
The present book attempts to look at the stories and dialogues embedded
in the text regarding issues of dharma, i.e. sva-dharma (individual
dharma), sādhāraṇa-dharma (universal dharma) and āpad-dharma (practical
applications of dharma or dharma adjusted to difficult circumstances).
For this purpose, the whole of the text of the Mahābhārata is studied,
but the focus of close critical analysis is on “Ādi-Parva”, “Sabhā-Parva”,
“Vana-Parva”, “Udyoga-Parva”, and “Śānti-Parva”, “Anuśāsana-Parva”,
“Mahāprasthānika-Parva” and “Swargārohaṇa–Parva” which are the
explanations of the issues of dharma. The study is further based on the
representation of various universal and socio-political expressions of
dharma as made in the Mahābhārata. This centres on the integral
aesthetics of dharma. Thus, through comprehensive and critical analysis,
this research subsumes the issues of dharma, the philosophy of life, and
The Mahābhārata and Dharma Discourse: 7
A Vision of Clarity through Its Tales
the worldview reflected in the narrative structure (tales and dialogues) of
the Mahābhārata. This framework is empirical, category-bound, and
linguistic.

CHAPTER I
THE STRUCTURE OF THE MAHĀBHĀRATA
The Mahābhārata is not merely a text, it is a tradition which “is built into
the extraordinary form of its text” (Ramanujan 2). In its present form, the
text consisting of over one lakh ślokas, “equal to about eight times as
much as the Iliad and Odyssey put together is by far the longest poem
known to literary history” (Macdonnel 282). It is unique and distinctive in
the sense that it is an epic that has blended within it, an encyclopaedia of
ancient Indian tradition and culture. It embodies most of the knowledge
about Indian tradition, culture, religion, mythology, law, ethics and
philosophy, statecraft, the art of war, history, and ethnology. For the
layman, the Mahābhārata is always considered as a battle between the
Pāṇdavas and the Kauravas. But in reality, it deals with all the foundations
upon which all human relationships are based. The text itself proclaims
that it is a Dharamśāstra (a treatise on dharma) and Itihāsa (historical
events, describing morality and ethics). Due to the multiplicity of many
subjects, it is said that “the Mahābhārata is not just a poetic production;
rather it is a whole literature” (Winternitz 316). This encyclopaedic nature
of the Mahābhārata is revealed in the text itself: “vyāsociṣṭam jagat
sarvam”, in other words, there is no subject under the sun which has not
been touched upon by Vyāsa (I.1.65). It has a universal appeal, immediate
and contemporary. The Mahābhārata styles itself not only as an Itihāsa,
Ākhyāna and Purāṇa but also as Kāvya-Śāstra, Dharma-Śāstra, Artha-
Śāstra, Kāma-Śāstra and Mokṣa-Śāstra. As such, it is a bridge between
the highly complex Vedic literature and ordinary people. It is the case that
an ordinary Indian, on average, is likely to be a highly philosophical
individual because texts like the Mahābhārata form a bridge between
people and learned traditions. In characteristic legendary mode, it is said
that when this narrative text with its stories from Purāṇas and of what
transpired weighed against the Vedas, it “out-weighed” the Vedas
(I.1.267). Its list of themes reads like this:
“…deep meanings of the Vedas…the essence of Śāstras…exposition of the
auxiliary sciences…the exposition of past, present and future…old age,
death, fear, disease, and the reality or otherwise of objects…duties and
10 Chapter I
stages of life…vegetation, earth, cosmos…planets and stars…birth and
death…places of pilgrimage, lands and peoples, rivers, mountains, forests
and seas…building forts and cities…languages and ethnic groups…arts
and crafts…all that is necessary for a fulfilled life and all that is necessary
to ensure the welfare of people…lineages and genealogies…all this has
been expounded in this grantha…” (I.1.62-70)
It can equally be viewed as a human drama, a cornucopia of myths and
legends and a well-chronicled text. The text itself says that “mahattvad
bhāratvad ca Mahābhāratam ucyate” (I.1.209), i.e. this epic is called the
Mahābhārata on account of its mahattva (enormous size) and bhārattva
(weightiness). This encyclopaedic treatment of various subjects belonging
to almost all branches of learning gives a complex structure to the epic.
The present chapter aims to give an account of the complex structure of
the Mahābhārata made by the sub-parvas within parvas, chapters within
sub-parvas, dialogues and talks within chapters, stories within chapters,
and stories within stories. The chapter also takes into account how the
outsiders operate as characters and how the characters act as outsiders.
Let us begin with the conception of the Mahābhārata. After conceiving
the Mahābhārata, the sage, Vyāsa, meditated on Brahmā. Brahmā advised
Vyāsa to go to Lord Ganeśa and, accordingly, Vyāsa meditates on Ganeśa
who appears before him. Vyāsa, with folded hands, bowing his head, prays
as follows: “Lord I have conceived the story of the Mahābhārata. I shall
dictate the whole story if you graciously agree to write it down”. Ganeśa
replies: “Yes, I can become your writer but with a condition. You must
dictate without pause lest my pen must not stop once I start writing”.
Vyāsa agrees to the condition, guarding himself with a counter-stipulation.
He says: “Lord, you must first grasp the meaning of what I dictate before
you write it down”. Ganeśa smiles and agrees to the condition. Then
Vyāsa begins to sing the story of the Mahābhārata and Ganeśa begins to
write. To keep the terms of the agreement, Sage Vyāsa very cleverly
dictates one abstruse couplet after every tenth one, which makes Ganeśa
pause to follow its sense. And Vyāsa avails of this interval to compose
new stanzas in his mind. Thus, the Mahābhārata is written by Ganeśa
following the dictation of Vyāsa. In this way, there are 8800 abstruse
couplets which deal with the cardinal issue of dharma, the sense of which
is not easily comprehensible.
Let us think about another interpretation of the composition of this great
text. Some scholars are of the view that there are three stages in the
composition of this epic based on its three names: Jaya, Bhārata, and
The Structure of the Mahābhārata 11
Mahābhārata. In its first stage, it was called Jaya and contained 8800
couplets. In its second stage, it was called Bhārata and contained 2400
couplets. It was narrated by Vaiśampāyana, one of the disciples of Sage
Vyāsa, as well as Sumantu and Paila at the time of the performance of the
serpent sacrifice of Janamejaya. As Janamejaya sought clarifications at
various times, Vaiśampāyana gave answers to him by adding new couplets.
In its third and final stage, containing one lakh, it was narrated by Sauti,
Ugraśravā, and the son of Lomaśa Ṛṣi to the ṛṣis led by Śaunaka in
Naimiśaraṇyaka. As Śaunaka and other ṛṣis sought clarifications at various
times, Ugraśravā gave answers to them by adding new couplets.
In its present form, the Mahābhārata originated in Naimiṣāraṇya, in the
assembly of sages led by Śaunaka, where Ugraśravā narrates its original
composition. Vyāsa’s disciple, Vaiśampāyana, had narrated it at the
command of Vyāsa after the Great War (5135 BC) in King Janamejaya’s
assembly of the learned at Indraprastha. It unfolds in the text itself that the
Sage Vyāsa illustrated through his deep learning:
“righteousness, material goals of life, desires that the human beings have…
the Śāstras that help the fulfilment of the threefold paths of knowledge,
action and devotion …the science of medicine, the science of weaponry,
architecture, the science of music and such other worldly sciences…has
unfolded the secrets of Śruti texts…has even expounded the meanings of
Upaniṣads.” (I.I.48-49)
The original epic, the Bhārata-Saṃhita attributed to Sage Vyāsa, is known
earlier as “Jaya” (the song of victory). There are three jaya-vijayas in the
Mahābhārata: i) The Pāṇdavas do not want a battle. They send Kṛṣṇa to
Dhṛtrāṣṭra as an emissary to establish peace and harmony. Seeing the zeal
in the Pāṇdava brothers, their mother, Kuntī, encourages them, and
conveys the story of Vidulā through Śri Kṛṣṇa… (V.132.14); ii) Accepting
a bribe from Duryodhana, Śalya comes to Yudhiṣṭhira and narrates to him
the story of Indra’s victory over Vṛtra… (V.9.10); iii) the first nucleus of
the Mahābhārata is Jaya. These episodes are known as Jaya-Vijaya as
they help us to attain Jaya (victory) in life and not suffer defeat…
(V.136.18). It is said that the Bhārata-Saṁhitā, less any extraneous matter,
was twenty-four thousand verses (I.1.102).
The episode of bhāratas is first recited in the snake sacrifice of King
Janamejaya. Under the instructions of Mahaṛṣi Vedvyāsa, Vaiśampāyana
recites the epic to King Janamejaya. To satisfy the king’s urge,
Vaiśampāyana elaborates on the theme and adds some episodes. A great
12 Chapter I
number of verses are added as a result. Next time, the story is narrated
during the twelve-year sacrifice of Sage Śaunaka at Naimiṣāraṇya. There,
the narrator is Ugraśravā Sauti, the son of Ṛṣi Lomharṣana. Again, a good
number of verses were added. These additions and the “Harivaṁśa”, an
addendum, increased the volume of this text named “Vijaya” and made it
become Śatasāhastri-Saṁhitā (a compendium consisting of one thousand
verses).
There is internal evidence in the Mahābhārata which speaks of its three
beginnings. The Mahābhārata states that Sūta, known as Sauti or
Ugraśravā, heard the epic as recited at the snake sacrifice and by
Janamejaya and Vaiśampāyana who had learned it from Vyāsa.
Urgraśrava, in turn, retells the story to the sages assembled in the
Naimiṣāraṇya during the sacrifice performed by Śaunaka. In the following
stanza, the Mahābhārata speaks of its three beginnings: (I.1.52)
i. Manvādi (beginning with Manu): the epic begins with the
benedictory verse, “Nārayaṇam Namaskṛtya” and then follows the
conversation with Sauti and the sages at Śaunaka’s sacrifice.
ii. Āstīkādi (beginning with the story of Āstīka): the Āstīka parva is
the beginning of the epic.
iii. Uparicarādi (beginning with Uparicara): from the commencement
of the narration of the history of the Bhāratas in Āstīkaparva.
Perhaps these three different beginnings were preferred by Sūta,
Vaiśampāyana and Vyāsa respectively.
The epic is divided into eighteen major sections known as parvas, each
with a title that relates approximately to its contents. Each parva is
subdivided into chapters made up of verses composed in various meters.
There are also sub-parvas into which the longer major parvas are divided.
The number of chapters mentioned below pertains to the Gitapress,
Gorakhpur Edition of the Mahābhārata.
The epic begins with “Ādi-Parva”, “Ādi” meaning beginning or the first.
Its 225 chapters present the cycle of myths leading up to King
Janamejaya’s snake sacrifice at which Vaiśampāyana, a disciple of Vyāsa,
first speaks about the Mahābhārata. After this introduction, it proceeds
with the origin of the Pāṇḍava brothers and their cousins, the Kauravas,
the marriage of the Pāṇḍavas with Draupadī, and the roots of the conflict
that form the main theme of the central narrative.
The Structure of the Mahābhārata 13
The “Sabhā-Parva” (72 chapters) takes the narrative further by recounting
how the kingdom was divided between the two branches of the family and
how Yudhiṣṭhira and the Pāṇdavas performed the great Rājasuya Sacrifice.
It tells of the envy of Duryodhana and the Kauravas and finally of the
gambling match, at which Yudhiṣṭhira loses everything to the Kauravas,
the Pāṇdavas are exiled to the forest, and Draupadī is insulted.
The “Vana-Parva” (299 chapters), while recounting numerous adventures
that befall the Pāṇdavas during their exile in the forest, also contains
several notable didactic interludes in which various ṛṣis give religious and
philosophical instruction to the main characters. It shows Virāta being
incognito at the court of King Virāta. Here, the drama is not punctuated by
didactic passages as in the “Vana-Parva”.
The “Udyoga-Parva” (197 chapters) describes the preparations for war
with lengthy debates in both camps over what course of action is righteous
and how success is gained in life. It is in this parva that Kṛṣṇa begins to
play a prominent role as a controller of events. The “Bhīṣma-Parva” (117
chapters) describes the initial drawing-up of the armies at Kurukṣetra and
contains the Bhagwad-Gītā, in which Kṛṣṇa is convincing up to the point
at which Arjuna shoots down the enemies on the battleground, i.e. the
Kauravas.
The “Droṇa-Parva” (173 chapters) takes the story of the battle further, up
to the point at which Droṇa was slain by Dhṛṣtadyumana. The “Karṇa-
Parva” (69 chapters) concentrates specifically on the conflict between
Arjuna and Karṇa. The “Śalya-Parva” (64 chapters) tells of the final stages
of the battle in which Yudhiṣṭhira kills his uncle Śalya and Bhīma puts an
end to Duryodhana during a combat.
The “Sauptika-Parva” (18 chapters) describes the massacre in the Pāṇdavas
camp by three survivors from the Kaurava side, and the “Strī-Parva” (27
chapters) describes the lamentations of women whose husbands and sons
have fallen and died on the battlefield and the attempts of the survivors to
philosophically understand the catastrophe that has taken place.
The “Śānti-Parva” (353 chapters) is comprised of numerous didactic
treatises covering a range of religious and philosophical perspectives. It
opens with the victorious Yudhiṣṭhira lamenting over the suffering he has
caused and wishing to abandon the kingdom he has won to take up the life
of an ascetic. There follows a lengthy debate on the proper duty of a king
14 Chapter I
before everybody returns to the battlefield where the fallen Bhīṣma gives
more detailed instructions on the subjects. This section discusses the Rāja-
dharma, Bhīṣma then presents the Mokṣa-dharma, teaching the subject of
salvation in the form of various loosely connected treatises based mainly
on the ideas of Sāṃkhya and Yoga. This parva concludes with an
exposition on devotion to the deity Nārāyaṇa known as the “Nara-
Nārāyaṇa-Parva”.
The “Anuśāsana-Parva” (154 chapters) contains a passage teaching
devotion to Śiva and then returns to Bhīṣma instructing Yudhiṣṭhira. The
teaching takes the form of a Dharma-Śāstra or social regulation, as well as
describing ritual acts that bring reward in the afterlife of human beings.
The “Aśvamedhika-Parva” (96 chapters) then narrates how the Pāṇdavas
executed a horse sacrifice to atone for the sins incurred by killing others in
battle. Much of the parva, however, consists of the teaching of Kṛṣṇa to
Arjuna, similar to those of Mokṣa-dharma, including the three chapters
known as Anu-Gītā.
The “Āśramavāsika-Parva” (47 chapters) describes the final meeting of the
surviving characters when the Pāṇdavas go to visit the elders (Dhṛtrāṣṭra,
Gāndhārī and Kuntī) of the family who have now renounced the world and
are practising religious austerities in the forest.
The “Mausala-Parva” (9 chapters) tells of the destruction of Kṛṣṇa’s
posterity, the Yadus, through civil strife, and the departure of Kṛṣṇa from
this world. The “Mahāprasthānika-Parva” (3 chapters) describes the deaths
of the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī after they have given up their kingdom and
journeyed to the Himālayas. The final parva, “Swargārohaṇa-Parva” (5
chapters) depicts the major characters of the epic residing among the gods
in heaven.
Over and above the eighteen parvas of the Mahābhārata, there is another
parva called the “Harivaṁśa” which is a supplement to the epic. This is
divided into three sub-parvas—the Harivaṁśa-Purāṇa, the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa
and the Bhaviṣya-Purāṇa. The “Harivaṁśa-Parva” is a Purāṇa in itself,
and, in addition to legends, it narrates several genealogies. The Viṣṇu-
Purāṇa gives an account of the life of Kṛṣṇa, and the Bhaviṣya-Purāṇa
speaks of future events. The material of the “Harivaṁśa-Purāṇa” seems to
have been drawn from the Viṣṇu, Bhāgavata and Bhaviṣya, and other
Purāṇas.
The Structure of the Mahābhārata 15
The introduction of tales into the main story was done with a purpose by
Vedvyāsa to make others understand the dominance of the impersonal
viewpoint over the personal viewpoint. The epic provides a golden thread
for understanding dharma which runs through all the complex movements
in the epic. Vyāsa has many important voices like Vaiśampāyana,
Ugraśravā, Bhīṣma, Vidura, and sages and ṛṣis who narrate tales to
understand the issues of dharma. From the perspective of the number of
pages, more than half of the Mahābhārata is devoted to talks, dialogues,
tales or narratives. In “Vana-Parva”, three Ṛṣis (Brihdaśva, Lomaśa and
Mārkaṇdeya) narrate a large number of stories to Yudhiṣṭhira. In all, it
includes the following stories: Nala and Damyantī, Daḍhicī, Vyādha-Gītā,
Rāmāyaṇa, Sāvitrī, Śivi and Yakṣa-Yudhiṣṭhira. They all, in one way or
another, deal with the issues of dharma. Similarly, the dialogue between
Dhṛtrāṣṭra and Ṛṣi Sanat-Sujāta, and the stories narrated in “Udyoga-
Parva”, are based on the highest spiritual knowledge. One more relates to
Lord Kṛṣṇa’s speech at the Kaurava assembly where he tries to persuade
Dhṛtrāṣṭra to control the unrighteousness of Duryodhana. “Śānti-Parva” is
another important parva which contains a comprehensive coverage of
dharma. Here, there is a dialogue between Bhīṣma and Yudhiṣṭhira.
Bhīṣma adopts a style of illustrating most of his replies with the help of a
story. In this way, there are as many as seventy-five stories in “Śānti-
Parva”. Probably the most famous of these stories (from a socio-religious
point of view) is based on the dialogue between Tulādhāra (a person
engaged in trade) and Jājali (a brāhmiṇ). Another important story is related
to Nārāyaṇiya-dharma. In the stories of these parvas, there is an exposition
of sva-dharma (dharma of individuals), sādharaṇa-dharma (Universal
dharma), and āpad-dharma (practical application of dharma).
In the structure of the Mahābhārata, dharma is the central issue to which
all human issues keep returning to Bhīṣma’s conclusion that dharma is
subtle (sūkṣma) as it does not deal with matters of fact and the world of
power. Instead, it deals with opinions about how man ought to behave.
This all-time text interrogates the fundamental verities of human life and
thus poses perennial questions that face us at every step in our life such as
what is dharma? This issue is formulated, analysed, and exemplified but a
certain indeterminacy remains which is the mark of the profound wisdom
of the Mahābhārata. The fundamental question of dharma is discussed and
every character asks questions of the more experienced ones about
dharma. It is advocated in the Mahābhārata that it is difficult to decide
what dharma is and what adharma is. What is dharma and what is adharma
oscillate between two broad ideas, viz. (i) accounts or tales of the long
16 Chapter I
conflict between the Pāṇḍavas and the Kauravas, and (ii) dialogues or talks
on the issues of dharma. It is these two threads that give structure to the
whole epic.
In “Vana-Parva”, three ṛṣis (Brihdaśva, Lomaśa and Mārkaṇḍeya) narrate
a large number of stories to Yudhiṣṭhira. In all, it includes the following
stories: Nala and Damyantī, Daḍhicī, Vyādha-Gītā, Rāmāyaṇa, Sāvitrī,
King Śivi and Yakṣa-Yudhiṣṭhira. All of the stories and dialogues deal
with issues of dharma. Similarly, the dialogue between Dhṛtrāṣṭra and Ṛṣi
Sanat-Sujāta, Vidura-Nīti, and the story of King Nahuṣa narrated in
“Udyoga-Parva” are based on the highest spiritual knowledge. One more
relating to Lord Kṛṣṇa’s speech at the Kaurava assembly, where he tries to
persuade Dhṛtrāṣṭra to control the unrighteousness of Duryodhana, is
worth mentioning in order to gain a practical understanding of dharma.
“Śānti-Parva” is another important parva which has a full explanation of
dharma. Here, in the dialogue between Bhīṣma and Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīṣma
adopts a way of illustrating most of his replies with the help of a story. In
this way, there are as many as seventy-five stories in “Śanti-Parva”.
Probably the most famous of these stories (from a socio-religious point of
view) is based on the dialogue between Tulādhāra (a person engaged in
trade) and Jājali (a brāhmiṇ). Another important story relates to
Nārāyaṇiya-dharma. In the stories of these parvas, there is an exposition
of sva-dharma (dharma of an individual), sādhāraṇa-dharma (universal
dharma) and āpad-dharma (practical application of dharma). Yudhiṣṭhira
announces the importance of dharma almost in despair:
“Whether we know or do not know dharma, whether it is knowable or not,
dharma is finer than the edge of a sword and more substantial than a
mountain.” (XII.260.12)
The nearest answer to the question of what dharma could be is given in the
“Śānti-Parva” by Bhīṣma:
“That one who regards all beings to be like his own self, who never does
any harm and who has wrath under control, obtains great happiness here
and hereafter.” (XII.66.36)
As far as “Anuśāsana-Parva” is concerned, it is mostly concerned with the
practical applications of dharma. Numerous tales describe the importance
of charity, non-violence, and austerity. The story of Gautamī brāhmaṇī
produces the best understanding of dharma. In “Aśvamedha-Parva”, Lord
