Article
Redefining Dharma in a
Studies in History
1–15
Time of Transition: © 2019 Jawaharlal Nehru University
- Reprints and permissions:
Anrs´amsya in the in.sagepub.com/journals-permissions-india
. .
DOI: 10.1177/0257643019852823
- -
Mahabharata as an journals.sagepub.com/home/sih
Alternative End of
Human Life
Kanad Sinha1
Abstract
Classical Indian thought has often stated that human life has four ends: dharma
-
(social righteousness), artha (material profit), kama (sensual pleasure) and moks.a
-
(spiritual liberation). The historical tradition called itihasa claims itself as a
-
comprehensive commentary on these four. The principal itihasa text available
- -
to us, the Mahabharata, boasts of containing everything that exists on these.
- -
However, the ultimate goal of human life in the Mahabharata is predominantly
- -
dharma. But, the dharma the Mahabharata speaks of is not necessarily what
dharma came to represent in classical Brahmanical orthodoxy: a combination
of the institutions of varṇa and āśrama Rather, in the narrative sections of the
- -
Mahabharata, which possibly originated in the context of the Later Vedic Kuru
kingdom of c. 1000–800 BCE, there is often a questioning of the traditional
- -
hereditary varṇadharma. Through the character of Yudhis.t.hira, the Mahabharata
-
unfolds an alternative understanding of dharma, known as anṛśaṁsya (non-
cruelty). Scholars have often considered it as an alternative to the heterodox
-
notion of ahiṁsa (non-violence). This paper shows the gradual evolution of the
-
ideal to show that its fundamental opposition is not with the heterodox ahiṁsa,
-
but with the orthodox varṇadharma, particularly ks.atradharma, the martial
heroism expected of the ks.atriya.
Keywords
- - - -
Ānṛśaṃsya, Ahiṃsa, Mahabharata, Varṇadharma, kṣatradharma, Yudhis.t.hira
1 The Sanskrit College and University, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
Corresponding author:
Kanad Sinha, The Sanskrit College and University, 1, Bankim Chatterjee Street, Kolkata 700073,
West Bengal, India.
E-mail: kanad.india@gmail.com
2 Studies in History
Human civilization stands at a crossroads as never before. Technological advances
have made life easier than ever; medical science has succeeded in providing us
with the highest average life expectancy in history; and information technology is
reaching new heights every day to dissolve the distance between places and time
zones. However, while all these should have made the world a safer, happier and
friendlier place, in reality, we are witnessing a world insecure to the core because
of the scary shadow of terrorism, hatred, communal violence and a new wave of
populist intolerant ultra-nationalist politics. Rather than relishing the fruits of its
successful march for centuries, people live in constant fear of the inevitable doom
represented by the nuclear weapons piled up in different corners of the world and
the rapid degeneration of the natural environment and ecosystem for pursuing
petty political and economic interests. Naturally, it is high time we ask ourselves
what the ends of human life are.
If we look to the past, the text that seems invaluable in addressing these ques-
tions is the Mahābhārata, composed as an itihāsa (a genre of early Indian histori-
cal tradition) depicting an epoch-ending transition (yugānta) marked by a violent
catastrophic war. The text seems to have reached its present shape over more
than a thousand years, and assumed an encyclopaedic character in due course.1
However, if there is a running theme the text concerns itself with, it is the question
about the ends of human life. In classical Brahmanical thought, there are four
major ends of human life, known as the puruṣārthas: dharma (social righteous-
ness), artha (material profit), kāma (pleasure of the senses) and mokṣa (spiritual
liberation).2 There are several discourses in early Indian literature attempting to
ascertain their relative merits. Interestingly, the traditional definition of the his-
torical tradition named itihāsa, as collected by Taranath Tarkavachaspati, places
importance on the tales of old times, containing lessons on these four aspects of
human life:
dharmārthakāmamokṣāṇām upadeśasamanvitaṃ/
purāvṛttakathāyuktam itihāsaṃ pracakṣate//3
1 There are opinions against this idea, but these are hardly supported by the available evidence. For
instance, Alf Hiltebeitel’s argument that the Mahābhārata was compiled in a short span of time by a
‘symposium’/‘committee’ seems to be more a result of the author’s imagination than of convincing
evidence. See Alf Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education of the
Dharma King (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago, 2011).
2 The idea first evolved as the concept of trivarga or the three aspects of human life: dharma, artha
and kāma. By the middle of the first millennium ce, the addition of mokṣa to the list transformed the
concept into caturvarga. From the Early Medieval period onwards, the caturvarga are frequently
represented in literature as puruṣārthas or the ends of human life. For a recent thorough discussion,
see Patrick Olivelle, ‘The Good Life in a Dis-enchanted World’, in the proceedings of ‘The Ends of
Human Life in Ancient Indian and Chinese Traditions’, A workshop organized by the Parekh Institute
of Indian Thought, Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS), Delhi and the Berggruen
Institute, Los Angeles (forthcoming).
3 Taranatha Tarkavachaspati, Vācaspatyam, vol. I (Varanasi: Chowkhamba Surbharati, 1990), 924.
Sinha 3
As we shall see below, the Mahābhārata claims to contain everything that exists on
the Earth about these four ends of human life. However, what is the Mahābhārata’s
position on the relative merits of these four ends? Though the text expresses sympa-
thy towards mokṣa in certain places (such as the mokṣadharmaparvan in the
‘Śāntiparvan’), while even artha and kāma have been espoused occasionally (for
instance, the kāmagītā in the ‘Āśvamedhikaparvan’ valorises kāma above every-
thing), the supremacy of dharma is acknowledged throughout the text. However, it
is the Mahābhārata’s treatment of dharma that makes it a curious text. Being a text
composed over a long time, worked on by several different authors, the Mahābhārata
contains various understandings of dharma. Unlike several other major Brahmanical
texts, it does not always equate dharma with a combination of the fourfold varṇa
system and the four āśramas. Rather, it continuously speaks of the multiplicity of
dharma. Among the multiple interpretations of dharma, some are even contradic-
tory to the ideal of varṇa. The historical milieu of the origin of the central narrative
of the Mahābhārata further complicates this narrative.
Though the composition of the text has usually been dated between 500 bce
and 500 ce, historians such as Romila Thapar and R. S. Sharma, who differentiate
between the narrative and didactic sections of the text, note that the older narra-
tive sections represent the context of the period of the Later Vedas (c.1000–600
bce).4 A similar view has been expressed by J. A. B. van Buitenen, on the basis
of the seemingly Later Vedic context of the Mahābhārata narrative and the Vedic
location of some of the characters,5 that ‘It seems more likely than not that the
origins of the Mahābhārata fall somewhere in the eighth or ninth century’.6 The
Mahābhārata tradition, in all probability, originated as an itihāsa of the Later
Vedic Kuru kingdom which, according to Michael Witzel, was not just the earliest
proto-state of the Indian subcontinent but possibly the location where the varṇa-
based Vedic orthodoxy and orthopraxy were formulated.7 The Mahābhārata’s
representation of dharma as the principal end of human life, though not necessar-
ily consistent with the hereditary varṇa system, is thought-provoking if we keep
this context in mind.
4 R. S. Sharma, Material Culture and Social Formations in Ancient India (Delhi: Macmillan, 1983),
135–52; Romila Thapar, ‘The Historian and the Epic’, in Cultural Pasts (New Delhi: Oxford
University Press, 2008), 613–29.
5 The history of the migration of the Bharatas and Purus into the Indian subcontinent and the eventual
formation of the Kuru clan, which dominated the early part of the Later Vedic Age, is well documented
in the Ṛg Veda, whose tenth book, the latest interpolation in the text, knows the Kuru chief Śaṃtanu,
while the Kuru chief Parikṣit is known to the Atharva Veda as a contemporary ruler (XX.127.7.10).
The descendants of Parikṣit were extinct by the time of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (III.3.1). The
Mahābhārata basically tells the saga of the Kurus between Śaṃtanu and Parikṣit. Janamejaya, the son
of Parikṣit and the patron of the first full narration of the Mahābhārata, and Vaiśampāyana, the first
narrator of the saga, are well-known Later Vedic figures, the latter being even named as the ācārya of
Bhārata or Mahābhārata in the Āśvalāyana Gṛhya Sūtra (III.4).
6 Vyāsa, The Mahābhārata, vol. I, trans. J. A. B. van Buitenen (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 1973), xxiv.
7 Michel Witzel, ‘Early Sanskritization: Origin and Development of the Kuru State’, in The State, Law
and Administration in Classical India, ed. B. Kolver (Munich: R. Oldenbourg, 1997), 27–52.
4 Studies in History
The sociopolitical landscape of Later Vedic India was a complex one. On the
one hand, the institutionalization of the varṇa system was taking place, while, on
the other hand, the ritualistic Vedic sacrificial religion was facing the first voice of
dissent from the Upaniṣadic ṛṣis (seers). The Upaniṣadic tradition allowed itself to
be incorporated into the Vedic corpus as its fourth subdivision, but it questioned
the infallibility of the Vedas and pointed out the futility of sacrificial ritualism. On
the political plain, rudimentary Kuru–Pañcāla kingships were seeking legitimacy
from the Brāhmaṇas who were demanding hereditary monopoly of spirituality
for themselves and hereditary kingship for their patrons. But the gaṇasaṃghas,
like the Yādava–Vṛṣṇis, were carrying forward a political confederacy based on
the older notion of power being shared by the members of the clan. The con-
flict of the two orders is represented in the Mahābhārata conflict of the Vṛṣṇi
chief Kṛṣṇa with the Magadha monarch Jarāsaṃdha, but still the gaṇasaṃgha
was strong enough to emerge victorious and its chief important enough to be ven-
erated in the most important monarchical ritual—Yudhiṣṭhira’s rājasūya. Thus,
it was a two-way struggle between Vedic-Brahmanical order based on heredity
and the older order (also supported by a large section of the Upaniṣadic thinkers)
based on ability. In this situation, ripe with possibilities, we can locate the text that
tells not just the story of a Kuru–Pañcāla political clash where the Pāñcālas were
aided by a junior branch of the Kurus but also the story of a clash between heredi-
tary succession claimed by Duryodhana (the eldest son of the king Dhṛtarāṣṭra)
and succession by ability claimed by Yudhiṣṭhira (a son of queen Kuntī, wife of
king Pāṇḍu, by a deity personifying ‘Dharma’), who had no blood relation with
the Kuru clan. Simon Brodbeck and Brian Black rightly describe the main issue
of the text as the conflict of primogenitive birthright and behavioural fitness.8
Primogeniture appears to be a new idea in kingship, not yet completely estab-
lished.9 The tribal notion of selecting the ablest as the chief was still present, by
virtue of which the great king Bharata chose Bhūmanyu, son of Bharadvāja, as
his successor, neglecting all of his own incompetent sons.10 The system continued
8 Simon Brodbeck and Brian Black, eds., ‘Introduction’, in Gender and Narrative in the Mahābhārata
(London: Routledge, 2007), 3.
9 For different readings of the issue of primogeniture in the Mahābhārata see J. A. B. van Buitenen’s,
‘Introduction’, in Vyāsa, The Mahābhārata, vol. I, xv–xix and R. P. Goldman, ‘Fathers, Sons, and
Gurus: Oedipal Conflict in the Sanskrit Epics’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 6 (1978): 325–92.
10 Vyāsa, I.89.17–20. All references to Vyāsa’s Mahābhārata are from the multivolume Critical
Edition prepared under the general editorship of V. S. Sukthankar, published by the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, Poona. The translations followed are Vyāsa, The Mahābhārata, vol. I,
trans. van Buitenen (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1973) (for the ‘Ādiparvan’); Vyāsa,
The Mahābhārata, vol. II, trans. van Buitenen (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1975) (for
the ‘Sabhāparvan’ and the ‘Āraṇyakaparvan’); Vyāsa, The Mahābhārata, vol. III, trans. van Buitenen
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1978) (for the ‘Virāṭaparvan’ and ‘Udyogaparvan’); Vyāsa,
Mahābhārata (Book Six): Bhishma, vols. 1 and 2, trans. Alex Cherniak (New York, NY: New York
University Press, 2008) (for the ‘Bhīṣmparvan’); Vyāsa, Mahābhārata (Book Nine): Shalya, vols. 1
and 2, trans. Justin Meiland (New York, NY: New York University Press, 2007) (for the ‘Śalyaparvan);
and Vȳasa, The Mahābhārata, vol. VII, trans. James Fitzgerald (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 2004) (for the ‘Strīparvan’ and ‘Śāntiparvan’). For the rest of the text, the translations are mine,
unless otherwise specified.
Sinha 5
up to the period of Śaṃtanu, in whose favour his elder brother, Devāpi, abdicated
the throne.11 However, Śaṃtanu’s passion for the fisherwoman Satyavatī brought
a disjuncture. Devavrata (Bhīṣma), who was the fittest to succeed to the throne,
made a vow to Satyavatī’s father, assuring the unborn children of Satyavatī the
throne.12 Bhīṣma’s famous vow unfolded into a crisis, as both the sons of Satyavatī
died young.13 In this situation, Satyavatī asked Vyāsa, her son born out of a pre-
marital union, to beget children on the two widows of Vicitrvīrya—Ambikā and
Ambālikā. Born of this levirate, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the eldest of the next generation
princes, was denied the throne on account of his blindness, and younger Pāṇḍu
became the king. However, this choice of the more able over the legitimacy of
primogeniture frustrated Dhṛtarāṣṭra, whose son Duryodhana fought hard to
establish his legitimate claim to the throne, and remained a staunch advocate of
the martial varṇadharma of the kṣatriya caste throughout the text. Thus, there was
a constant conflict between Duryodhana and the five surrogate sons of king Pāṇḍu.
The latter group, known as the Pāṇḍavas and headed by the eldest Yudhiṣṭhira,
escaped Duryodhana’s early attempts to kill them off, and became powerful
enough to force a partition of the kingdom, after Draupadī, the princess of the
strong kingdom of Pāñcāla, became the common wife of the five brothers. The
conflict reached its height when Yudhiṣṭhira not only lost all of his property in a
dice game against Duryodhana and his party, but in desperation staked and lost
Draupadī, who was molested in the open court. After this, war seemed the only
option left, despite Yudhiṣṭhira’s reluctance to fight. Gradually, events led to the
Bhārata War, in which the senior branch of the Kurus, as well as the Pāñcālas, was
nearly wiped out, and Yudhiṣṭhira became the king.
Standing against Duryodhana’s militant support for the hereditary kṣātradharma,
the violent varṇa duty of the kṣatriya, Yudhiṣṭhira emerged as the text’s most
vigorous critic of the varṇa orthodoxy. He opined, in reply to a question asked
by his ancestor Nahuṣa, that the notions of caste could hardly stand a test, since:
jātir atra mahāsarpa manuṣyatve mahāmate/
saṃkarāt sarvavarṇānāṃ duṣparīkṣyeti me matiḥ//
sarve sarvāsvāpatyāni janayanti yadā naraḥ/
vāṅ maithunam atho janma maraṇaṃ ca samaṃ nṛṇāṃ.
(I think, great and wise Serpent, birth is hard to ascertain among humankind, because of
the confusion of classes when any man begets children on any woman: language, inter-
course, birth and death are common lot of all men).14
Yudhiṣṭhira asserted that varṇa was determined by observance of task and, hence,
a brāhmaṇa was one in whom cultured conduct was postulated.15 Yudhiṣṭhira,
thus, was a complete contrast to Duryodhana. He was doubtful about varṇa, more
11 Vyāsa, I.89.53, I.90.47.
12 Ibid., I.94.
13 Ibid., I.95–6.
14 Vyāsa, III.177.26.
15 Ibid., III.177.30–5.
6 Studies in History
given to pacifism and renunciation than to his inherent kṣātradharma, always
questioning the rationale of warfare, and fundamentally Upaniṣadic rather than
Vedic in his virtue. Therefore, we see that after a long discourse about the relative
merits of dharma, artha and kāma among the Pāṇḍavas and Vidura—where
Vidura, Nakula and Sahadeva extolled dharma, Arjuna spoke in favour of artha
and Bhīma in defence of kāma—Yudhiṣṭhira subordinated all these values to the
Upaniṣadic ideal of mokṣa.16
In fact, Yudhiṣṭhira, the dharmarāja, was definitely not a follower of the tradi-
tional varṇa-based notion of dharma. However, despite his Upaniṣadic leanings,
he was not a renunciant either. Did he then represent a new notion of dharma?
Mukund Lath has identified this new notion in a concept called ānṛśaṃsya (non-
cruelty).17 He thinks that this was an ideal of the pravṛttimārga (path of action)
espoused by the Mahābhārata, in contrast to the better-known ideal of ahiṃsā
(non-violence), which was more suitable for the nivṛttimārga (path of renun-
ciation).18 Of course, ahiṃsā had been a cardinal virtue in non-Brahmanical
Śramaṇic religions such as Jainism and Buddhism, which also espoused renun-
ciation. Following Lath, Alf Hiltebeitel has also noted that ānṛśaṃsya has been
celebrated as the highest dharma nine times in the Mahābhārata (III.67.15,
III.203–41, III.297.55, III.297.71, V.32.11, XII.220.109, XII.316.12, XIII.47.2,
XIII.159.6), more than any other ideal, including ahiṃsā, which is called the
greatest dharma four times (I.11.12–4, III.198.69, XIII.116.1, XIII.117.37–41).19
He also connects the idea as a response to the notion that the Magadha kings
(including Aśoka), who patronized the heterodox religions celebrating ahiṃsā,
had been absolutist despots and murderers of their fathers and brothers.20
Sibaji Bandyopadhyay takes a cue from Lath and Hiltebeitel and maintains this
contrastive framework between ahiṃsā and ānṛśaṃsya, considering ānṛśaṃsya
as a critique of non-violence.21 Is ānṛśaṃsya, then, an alternative to ahiṃsā, a
response to the Śramaṇic religions such as Jainism and Buddhism, with little con-
nection with the Later Vedic context of the Mahābhārata narrative? It would seem
so if one were to focus on the long discourse on ānṛśaṃsya delivered to a proud
Brāhmaṇa by Dharmavyādha, a righteous meat-seller of Mithilā, who practised
an ‘impure’ profession for livelihood, but lived according to the tenets of dharma
in his personal life. Here, Dharmavyādha strongly pointed out the impossibility
of adhering to complete ahiṃsā and extolled ānṛśaṃsya as an alternative.22 Much
of Bandyopadhyay’s discussion on ānṛśaṃsya is based on this particular episode.
However, the ‘Śāntiparvan’ and ‘Anuśāsanaparvan’ were two of the latest didac-
tic books added to the Mahābhārata during its Brahmanization, with a principal
16 Ibid., XII.161.
17 Mukund Lath, ‘The Concept of Anrshamsya in the Mahabharata’, in Reflections and Variations on
the Mahabharata, ed. T. R. S. Sharma (New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 2009), 82–9.
18 Ibid., 89.
19 Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 207.
20 Ibid., 205–6.
21 Sibaji Bandyopadhyay, ‘A Critique of Non-violence’, in Three Essays on the Mahābhārata:
Exercises in Literary Hermeneutics (Hyderabad: Orient BlackSwan, 2016), 267–307.
22 Vyāsa, III.197–206.
Sinha 7
orientation to sanitize the anti-varṇa notions of the dharmarāja. Thus, Yudhiṣṭhira,
before he could assume kingship, had to be schooled by the old kṣatriya patriarch
Bhīṣma into a rājadharma that espoused a symbiotic relationship between the
brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya and strict maintenance of the varṇa order. The Dharmavyādha
episode is placed within the ‘Śāntiparvan’ discourse. If we look beyond this very late
addition to the text, we may see that the concept of ānṛśaṃsya has a gradual
development in the central narrative of the text, and it plays a crucial part in what
Hiltebeitel calls ‘the education of the Dharma-king’. In fact, if the central narrative
of the Mahābhārata has something to do with the establishment of Yudhiṣṭhira as a
new kind of hero, the role of ānṛśaṃsya is crucial in the process.
Hiltebeitel has also noticed that the term ānṛśaṃsya appears for the first time
in the Mahābhārata not in the context of Yudhiṣṭhira, but as advice to Vyāsa,
to whom the authorship of the text is attributed. When Vyāsa agreed to beget
children on the widows of Vicitravīrya, Satyavatī asked him to perform the act
with ānṛśaṃsya and anukrośa (crying with another).23 In fact, both Lath and
Hiltebeitel note that anukrośa is an ideal crucial for understanding the nature of
ānṛśaṃsya.24 Anukrośa, translated as ‘commiseriat’ by Hiltebeitel, literally means
‘crying with another’, a kind of consideration or empathy for beings. However,
Vyāsa does not seem to have succeeded in performing the task with ānṛśaṃsya
and anukrośa. Vyāsa got angry inconsiderately when Ambikā and Ambālikā were
repulsed by his appearance and body odour. Rather than dealing with their revul-
sion with empathy, Vyāsa ended up holding them responsible for the physical
deformities of their sons. The Mahābhārata narrative thus starts with the failure
of its author to fulfil an ideal set in front of him by his mother. Subsequently, the
author celebrates the story of a hero, Yudhiṣṭhira, who did not fail.
In fact, the birth of the Pāṇḍavas themselves has been set in the context of a
failure to practise ānṛśaṃsya. The curse that had caused Pāṇḍu’s impotence was
brought forth by his killing of the sage Kiṃdama and his wife, who were copu-
lating in the disguise of deer.25 The killing itself was not condemned, for it was
normal for a kṣatriya king to hunt deer. The act was lacking in ānṛśaṃsya because
Pāṇḍu did not have the consideration to wait until the deer finished making love.26
Yudhiṣṭhira, the eldest surrogate son of Pāṇḍu, therefore undertook a difficult
journey to establish an ideal his father and grandfather had failed to live up to.
We hear Yudhiṣṭhira speak of ānṛśaṃsya for the first time in a very unusual
context, as one of the qualities of Draupadī before staking her at the dice game.27
We shall see later that Yudhiṣṭhira’s assumption about Draupadī was not right in
this case. Ānṛśaṃsya might have been a virtue Yudhiṣṭhira had already started
to regard in high esteem and expected in his wife, but it was certainly not some-
thing that Draupadī had much respect for. However, that Yudhiṣṭhira’s regard for
23 Vyāsa, I.99.33.
24 Lath, ‘The Concept of Anrshamsya’, 84–5; Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 212.
25 Vyāsa, I.109.5–31.
26 See Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 109–200.
27 Vyāsa, II.58.33–7.
8 Studies in History
ānṛśaṃsya had gradually increased would be evident when he would declare it
to be the highest dharma to Dharma (a deity personifying the ideal) disguised as
a heron Yakṣa in the ‘Āraṇyakaparvan’.28 That he was now ready to live his ideal
could be seen when, given the option of saving the life of only one of his brothers,
he chose to save Nakula (and not Bhīma or Arjuna without whose valour he would
never get his kingdom back) out of consideration for his already deceased step-
mother Mādrī.29 Of course, Dharma was pleased with Yudhiṣṭhira’s ānṛśaṃsya,
and he passed the test convincingly.30 Gradually, ānṛśaṃsya became the cardinal
value of Yudhiṣṭhira’s life which he kept on preaching and practising.31 When
Yudhiṣṭhira seemed to have lost his composure temporarily, after the death of his
nephew Ghaṭotkaca in the War, the author himself intervened to remind him of
his virtues, including ānṛśaṃsya.32 Even after the battle, he continued to rule with
ānṛśaṃsya, empathetic to the war widows and the mothers who lost their sons,
as well as to the poor, blind and helpless.33 Such was the extent of his ānṛśaṃsya
that he was considerate and empathetic even to Dhṛtarāṣṭra who, along with his
sons, had been the cause of all of his sufferings.34 In the final journey of his
life, the mahāprasthāna, Yudhiṣṭhira’s ānṛśaṃsya faced its final test, which he
had also passed with distinction, by not agreeing to choose heaven if it meant
leaving out the dog that had accompanied him throughout his journey.35 The poet,
of course, is emphatic about the view that the journey of Yudhiṣṭhira’s ānṛśaṃsya
did not end with his mortal life, nor did the multiple tests that such a virtue needed
to undergo. Therefore, reaching the heaven in his earthly body, and seeing his
brothers and Draupadī suffering in hell, Yudhiṣṭhira decided to forego heavenly
pleasure at once, to share the torment of hell with his lifelong companions,36
for he declared that where his brothers and his dear Draupadī were, that was his
heaven.37 Finally, Yudhiṣṭhira earned another round of praise from Dharma, for
not swerving from his heart even after reaching heaven.38
Ānṛśaṃsya, therefore, is a philosophy of non-cruelty and considerate empathy
for all beings, including low-borns or former foes, half-rākṣasas or the lowly and
the destitute, a dead woman (Mādrī) or even a dog, as Hiltebeitel has noted.39
Moreover, it is a value to be practiced by the capable, who undergo multiple
tests in life and beyond, and has nothing to do with the varṇa assigned by birth.
Hence, it is stated that ānṛśaṃsya can be found among the people of all varṇas.40
28 Ibid., III.297.55.
29 Ibid., III.297.71.
30 Ibid., III.298.10.
31 Ibid., V.30.38, V.32.11, V.52.10.
32 Ibid., VII.158.53–62.
33 Ibid., XII.42.10–1.
34 Ibid., XV.2.3.
35 Ibid., XVII.3.1–15.
36 Ibid., XVII.3.36.
37 Ibid., XVIII.1.20–2.12.
38 Ibid., XVIII.3.28–30.
39 Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 213.
40 Vyāsa, III.117.8.
Sinha 9
Moreover, while most other conceptions of dharma were directed at the after-
life—either the attainment of heaven after death (the goal of the Brahmanical
kṣātradharma) or the liberation from the cycle of birth and death (the goal of the
Śramaṇic religions such as Buddhism and Jainism)—ānṛśaṃsya seems to be an
end in itself. It is an idea suitable even for a completely ‘disenchanted’ universe,
for neither divine grace nor a happy afterlife is supposed to be the reward of
its performance. Rather, Yudhiṣṭhira would choose ānṛśaṃsya over heaven and
continue its practice even in his afterlife.
It is worth nothing that nowhere in the referred instances is ānṛśaṃsya presented
as a counterpoint to ahiṃsā. Rather, we see the gradual establishment of Yudhiṣṭhira
as a counterpoint to Duryodhana, the strict adherent of his prescribed varṇadharma,
the violent kṣātradharma (for following which he won the promised reward of
heaven).41 In fact, Hiltebeitel’s list of the various acts considered nṛśaṃsa (cruel)
in the Mahābhārata—including Purocana’s attempt to burn alive the Pāṇḍavas
in the lacquer house (I.136.3), Śiśupāla’s verbal attack on Kṛṣṇa, Bhīṣma and the
Pāṇḍavas during the rājasūya of Yudhiṣṭhira (II.42.6–11), Kaikeyī’s intrigue to send
her step-son Rāma into exile (III.261.32), Kīcaka’s attempts to molest the helpless
Draupadī (IV.29.5), the Pāṇḍavas’ conspiracy to disarm Droṇa by deceit and killing
him unarmed (VII.166.19), and Jayadratha’s role in killing the young Abhimanyu
(XIV.77.38)42—clearly shows that what ānṛśaṃsya opposed was not the ahiṃsā of
the Śramaṇic religions, but the cruelty inherent in the violent conflicts in kṣatriya
clan society. Therefore, Yudhiṣṭhira faced most of the counterarguments not from
any non-violent ascetic, but from his own mother and wife, Kuntī and Draupadī,
both firm believers in the kṣātradharma.
Kevin McGrath rightly notes that ‘women in epic Mahābhārata, more than
male heroes, speak what is considered to be social truth: what is right for kṣatriyas
and what constitutes good behaviour’.43 It is the action of the women that ‘weaves
the tissue of kula clan’, and it is the women’s speeches which sustain and refine
the values of both kin and varṇa.44 Thus, placed in the context of a clan soci-
ety, Vyāsa’s heroines are quite vocal and assertive, particularly in the defence of
kṣātradharma. Kuntī, who controlled her five sons throughout her life, appears
to have been a staunch adherent of kṣātradharma. In the ‘Udyogaparvan’, she
tried to instigate the pacifist Yudhisthira to fight by praising kṣatriya virility.45
Criticising the notion of ānṛśaṃsya, she said,
na hi vaiklavyasaṃsṛṣṭa ānṛśaṃsye vyavasthitaḥ/
prajāpālanasaṃbhūtaṃ kiṃ cit prāpa phalaṃ nṛpaḥ//
41 See the celebration of Duryodhana’s heroic death on the battlefield and journey to heaven in Vyāsa,
IX.60–4; XVIII.1–3.
42 Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 211.
43 Kevin McGrath, Stri: Feminine Power in Epic Mahābhārata (Hyderabad: Orient BlackSwan,
2011), 154.
44 Ibid., 158.
45 Vyāsa, V.130.7.
10 Studies in History
(A king infected by cowardice, who does not act ruthlessly, does not win the reward that
results from the protection of his subjects.)46
She would rather see Yudhiṣṭhira deliver his patrimony by any kind of
stratagem:
pitryam aṃśaṃ mahāvāho nimagnaṃ punar uddhara/
sāmnā dānena bhedena daṇḍenātha nayena ca//
(Unearth your ancestral share that lies buried, strong-armed son! Do it with persuasion,
bribery, subversion, punishment, or policy.)47
Kuntī had no respect for Yudhiṣṭhira’s considerate policies which, she thought,
would only drown his ancestors if he did not fight.48 To inspire him, she also
narrated the story of another aggressive mother, Vidurā, who had urged her lazy
son Saṃjaya to fight for and recover his lost patrimony.49
However, the most striking female character in the epic was no doubt the
principal heroine, the polyandrous Draupadī. Sally J. Sutherland contrasts
the outward expression of Draupadī’s aggression with the inward aggressive
masochism of Sītā in the Rāmāyaṇa.50 Whenever there was a need to protect
herself, Draupadī was not reluctant to be aggressive. It was her questions that
perturbed the Kuru court during the infamous dice match, and she could rescue
not only herself but also her husbands from slavery. She was also continuously
critical of Yudhiṣṭhira’s passivity. In the ‘Āraṇyakaparvan’, she lamented to Kṛṣṇa
who was the friend, philosopher and guide of the Pāṇḍava camp:
garhaye pāṇḍavāṃs tv eva yudhi śreṣṭhān mahābalān/
ye kliśyamānāṃ prekṣante dharmapatnīṃ yaśasvinīm//
dhig balaṃ bhīmasenasya dhik pārthasya dhanuṣmatām/
yau māṃ viprakṛtāṃ kṣudrair marṣayetāṃ janārdana//
(I detest the Pāṇḍavas, those grand strongmen in war, who looked on while their glorious
consort in Law was molested! A plague on the strength of Bhīmasena! A plague on the
bowmanship of the Pārtha! Both stood by, Janārdana, when churls manhandled me.)51
She also complained,
naiva me patayaḥ santi na putrā madhusūdana/
na bhrātaro na ca pitā naiva tvaṃ na ca bāndhavāḥ//
ye māṃ viprakṛtāṃ kṣudrair upekṣadhvaṃ viśokavat//
46 Ibid., V.130.20.
47 Ibid., V.130.30.
48 Ibid., V.130.32.
49 Ibid., V.131–4.
50 Sally J. Sutherland, ‘Sītā and Draupadī: Aggressive Behaviour and Female Role-models in the
Sanskrit Epics’, Journal of the American Oriental Society 109, no. 1 (1989, January–March): 63–79.
51 Vyāsa, III.13.58–9.
Sinha 11
(I have got no husbands, no sons, Madhusūdana, not a brother nor a father, nor you, nor
friends, if you mercilessly ignored me when I was plagued by the vulgar.)52
When Jayadratha later tried to assault Draupadi, she physically resisted him, and
then wanted to avenge her insult by killing him. Infuriated by Yudhiṣṭhira’s pas-
sivity, she urged Bhīma and Arjuna:
kartavyaṃ cet priyaṃ mahyaṃ vadhyaḥ sa puruṣādhamaḥ/
saindhavāpasadaḥ pāpo durmatiḥ kulapāṃsanaḥ//
(If you want to do me a kindness, kill off that wretched abortion of the Saindhavas, the
evil, ill-minded defiler of his race.)53
Similarly, when in disguise in the Matsya realm, she was assaulted by Kīcaka, the
king’s brother-in-law, in front of the passive Yudhiṣṭhira, she became vocal in rage
against her husbands and even admonished the king Virāṭa and his court, despite
being in the disguise of a mere maidservant:
Where on Earth are the great warriors roaming in disguise, they who were the refuge of
those who sought shelter? How can those powerful, boundlessly august men like castrates
suffer that their beloved and faithful wife is kicked by a sūta’s son? Where has their
intransigence gone, where their virility and splendor, if they choose not to defend their
wife who is being kicked by a blackguard? What am I to do with Virāṭa here who sees the
Law violated, an innocent woman kicked, and allows it? King, you do not act like a king
at all in the matter of Kīcaka, for your Law is the Law of Dasyus and does not shine in the
assembly! Neither Kīcaka nor the Matsya abide in any way by their own Law. I don’t
blame you, King Virāṭa, in the assembly of the people, but it is not right that I am struck
in your presence, Matsya! Let the courtiers bear witness to the crime of Kīcaka.54
She vented out her disgust about Yudhiṣṭhira to Bhīma, her only husband who
tried to protect her:
ahaṃ sairandhriveśeṇa carantī rājaveśmani/
śaucadāsmi sudeṣṇāyā akṣadhūrtasya kāraṇāt//
(Because of that gamester I run about in the royal palace in the guise of a chambermaid,
cleaning up after Sudeṣṇā.)55
Draupadī would not undergo a fire ordeal like Sītā to prove her chastity. Rather, it
was the abusers who, according to her, deserved the vengeance of her kṣatriya
husbands. Thus, she had no remorse in asking Bhīma to crack Kīcaka like a pot
upon a stone (bhindhi kumbham ivāśmani)56 or tear him out as an elephant tears
out a reed.57 Clearly, she was not in agreement with Yudhiṣṭhira’s perception of
52 Ibid., III.13.112–3.
53 Ibid., III.255.45.
54 Ibid., IV.15.20–36.
55 Ibid., IV.19.1.
56 Ibid., IV.20.32.
57 Ibid., IV.21.38.
12 Studies in History
ānṛśaṃsya and detested such an idea. She would not consider a kṣatriya without
anger a valid entity (na nirmanyuḥ kṣatriyo’sti loke),58 and berated weakness.59 In
the series of debates she had on such topics with Yudhiṣṭhira in the forest, she not
only praised the path of rightful action (svakarma kuru mā glāsīḥ karmaṇā bhava
daṃśitaḥ),60 which probably meant performing prescribed varṇa-duties, but also
openly proclaimed violence:
yo na darśayate tejaḥ kṣatriyaḥ kāla āgate/
sarvabhūtāni taṃ pārtha sadā paribhavanty uta//
tat tvayā na kṣamā kāryā śatrun prati kathañcana/
tejasaiva hi te śakyā nihantuṃ nātra saṃśayaḥ/
(A kṣatriya who does not show his fierceness when the moment comes all creatures will
despise forever after. Pārtha! Don’t show patience to your enemies under any condi-
tions, for with authority alone you can cut them down, no doubt of that!)61
In fact, the poet describes the character of Draupadī as one who is perpetually
offended, particularly with Yudhiṣṭhira (abhimānavatī nityaṃ viśeṣeṇa yudhiṣṭhire),62
which is testified by Draupadī’s comment, ‘aśocyaṃ nu kutas tasyā yasyā bhartā
yudhiṣṭhiraḥ’ (What pity doesn’t a woman deserve who has Yudhiṣṭhira for her
husband?).63 Repeatedly complaining about Yudhiṣṭhira’s lack of anger,64 she
forcefully argued why neither extreme vengeance nor extreme forgiveness was
desirable, and one had to maintain a balance of both in his dealings.65 She went to
the extent of arguing that gentleness, patience, uprightness and tenderness—the
cornerstones of Yudhiṣṭhira’s cherished dharma—were futile.66
However, even these persistent complaints could not swerve Yudhiṣṭhira from
the ideal of ānṛśaṃsya. Dismissing Draupadī’s allegation that righteousness
did not produce any result, he emphatically claimed that he performed dharma
not because of its rewards but because it was the right conduct and his inherent
nature.67 Delivering a long discourse on the problematic nature of anger and why
forgiveness was preferable to cruelty,68 he declared that the birth of creatures was
rooted in peace.69 Arguing that patience and forgiveness were markers of a supe-
rior virtue, he pointed out the difference between himself and Duryodhana:
58 Ibid., III.28.34.
59 Ibid., III.31.42.
60 Ibid., III.33.8.
61 Ibid., III.28.35–6. Translation slightly modified.
62 Ibid., XII.14.4.
63 Ibid., IV.17.1.
64 Ibid., III.28.
65 Ibid., III.29.
66 Ibid., III.31.4.
67 Ibid., III.32.4–5.
68 Ibid., III.30.
69 Ibid., III.30.30.
Sinha 13
Suyodhana is not capable of patience, and therefore can find none: I am capable of it,
and therefore patience has found me. This is the way of those who have mastered them-
selves, this their eternal Law, to be patient and gentle, and thus shall I act.70
Yudhiṣṭhira’s ānṛśaṃsya therefore seems to be an alternative to the ideal of mar-
tial heroism, which celebrated violence and cruelty of a kṣatriya clan society,
rather than a critique of heterodox non-violence. The opposition to the ideal was
located not in the heterodox religions, but in his surroundings, particularly in his
cousin Duryodhana, his mother Kuntī, and, most vocally, in his wife Draupadī.
Yudhiṣṭhira never accepted that violence could ever be righteous, though he could
be persuaded to fight a war for the sake of his rightful claim when all attempts at
peace failed. However, the worst sufferer of this battle was Draupadī, the most
vocal advocate for the battle. She lost her father in the battle, and the night attack
by Aśvatthāman on the Pāṇḍava camp—probably the most nṛśaṃsa of all the
incidents in the Mahābhārata narrative—took away the lives of her brothers and
all her five sons. This was the pivotal moment that showed the vagary of violence,
since a war to avenge the humiliation of Draupadī produced the worst conse-
quences for Draupadī herself. Given her natural inclination, she initially wanted a
violent revenge, the death of Aśvatthāman. However, eventually she settled for
the gemstone on Aśvatthāman’s head and placed it on Yudhiṣṭhira’s head.71 Thus,
the cycle of cruelty and violence ended when the crown gem of the nṛśaṃsa
Aśvatthāman was passed on to the a-nṛśaṃsa Yudhiṣṭhira, and the irony that this
transfer was prompted by Draupadī herself probably marked the final establish-
ment of ānṛśaṃsya as a new form of heroism in the text.
The Mahābhārata narrative represented a new time, a new ideal, and the end
of an era. Not only did it represent the transition from the age of clan society to an
age of well-developed polity but also a transition where the attempts to organize
polity and society according to birth was not effective, except in theory. G. C.
Pande broadly notes the transition depicted in the Mahābhārata:
The traditional Varṇa system was becoming unreal in practice, and attempts were being
made to define and question the social order even as technology was changing tools and
weapons, trade and towns were emerging as a factor in social and cultural conscious-
ness, smaller Janapada states were leading to larger empires, the Vedic religious tradi-
tion was being subjected to scepticism and criticism, the doctrines of Karman, Saṃsāra
and Nivṛtti posed a challenge to the ritualistic order, new types of spirituality were
emerging, and attempts were being made of new philosophical syntheses.72
Though this description is too simplistic, the days when kingship would be a
monopoly of the kṣatriya clan chiefs, bound by a code of valour and depending on
the ritual support of the brāhmaṇas, were indeed coming to an end. Within roughly
70 Ibid., III.30.50.
71 Ibid., X.10–6.
72 G. C. Pande, ‘The Socio-cultural Milieu of the Mahabharata: An Age of Change’ in Reflections and
Variations on the Mahabharata, ed., T.R.S. Sharma (New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 2009) 60–1.
14 Studies in History
five centuries of the date we have surmised for the origin of the Mahābhārata
narrative, the throne of Magadha, the most illustrious kingdom of India, would
not remain beyond the reach of a barber, Mahāpadma Nanda. In fact, post-Nanda
India would hardly see kṣatriya kingship, at least not until the Early Medieval
period when the Rajput clans would emerge with a claim to kṣatriya status. New
channels of legitimization and patronage would be provided by the heterodox
religions that would question the very basis of the caste system. Almost ignored
by the Vedic tradition, the Mahābhārata, attributed to the low-born Vyāsa,73 spoke
of a new ideology as the ‘fifth Veda’, ‘a Veda for the women and the śūdras’,
greater than the combined weight of the four Vedas,74 a text which, rendering the
Vedas insignificant, claims to contain everything conceivable about all the four
ends of life: dharma (social order), artha (power and resources), kāma (material
pleasure) and mokṣa (salvation):
dharme cārthe ca kāme ca mokṣe ca bharatarṣabha/
yad ihāsti tad anyatra yan nehāsti na tat kvacit.75
Standing on this crossroads of ages, the Mahābhārata provides a new dharma, not
of varṇa duties or martial violence but of non-cruelty, empathy and consideration.
As the ṛṣi of the fifth Veda, Vyāsa proclaims,
mātāpitṛsahasrāṇi putradāraśatāni ca/
saṃsāreṣv anubhūtāni yānti yāsyanti cāpare//
harṣasthānasahasrāṇi bhayasthānaśatāni ca/
divase divase mūḍham āviśanti na paṇḍitam//
ūrdhvavāhur viraumy eṣa na ca kaś cic chṛṇoti me/
dharmād arthaś ca kāmaś ca sa kim arthaṃ na sevyate//
na jātu kāmān na bhayān na lobhād dharmaṃ tyajej jīvitasyāpi hetoḥ/
nityo dharmaḥ sukhaduḥkhe tv anitye jīvo nityo hetur asya tv anityaḥ//
Thousands of mothers and fathers, and hundreds of sons and wives, experiencing world
(or saṃsāra) have gone. And others will go. There are a thousand situations of joy and a
hundred situations of fear. They affect the ignorant daily, but not the wise. With uplifted
arms I cry this aloud, but no one hears me. Artha and kāma are from dharma. For
what purpose is it not served? For the sake of neither desire nor fear nor greed should one
ever abandon dharma, even for the sake of living. Dharma is eternal, but happiness and
suffering are not eternal; the soul is eternal but its cause is not eternal.76
This dharma that Vyāsa claims as the principal end of human life is rooted in the
new ideal of ānṛśaṃsya.
73 Vyāsa’s birth as the result of a premarital union between a brāhmaṇa and a dāsī would make his
social rank dubious. Possibly, he would be categorized as a dāsīputra brāhmaṇa, a controversial social
category in Vedic literature.
74 Vyāsa, I.1.208–9.
75 Ibid., I.56.33.
76 Vyāsa, XVIII.5.47–50.
Sinha 15
If we reflect upon the unstable world order we are living in, where the practice
of complete non-violence seems desirable but impracticable, we must also consider
if militant aggression is necessarily the only alternative. At a time when violent
aggressive nationalism, ruthless authoritarianism, majoritarianism and jingoism
are becoming dangerously popular all over the world, it is essential to remember
the Mahābhārata notion of ānṛśaṃsya which, despite accepting the occasions of
necessary violence in politics and practical life, speaks of the cardinal principle of
considerate empathy towards all beings, the ally and the opposition, friend and foe,
and fellow creatures and the natural environment. In a world too confused to decide
the ends of human life, what we need above all is probably the likes of Yudhiṣṭhira
who would remind us in the days of crisis: ānṛśaṃsyaṃ paro dharmaḥ.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship
and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author received no financial support for the research, authorship and/or publication of
this article.
