
Reading the Fifth Veda
Numen Book Series
Studies in the History of Religions
Texts and Sources in the
History of Religions
Series Editors
Steven Engler (Mount Royal University, Calgary, Canada)
Richard King (University of Glasgow, Scotland)
Kocku von Stuckrad (University of Groningen,
The Netherlands)
Gerard Wiegers (University of Amsterdam,
The Netherlands)
VOLUME 131
Reading the Fifth Veda
Studies on the Mahābhārata—
Essays by Alf Hiltebeitel, Volume 1
Edited by
Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee
LEIDEN • BOSTON
2011
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hiltebeitel, Alf.
Reading the fifth Veda : studies on the Mahabharata : essays / by Alf Hiltebeitel ;
edited by Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee.
p. cm. — (Numen book series ; v. 131)
“Volume 1.”
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-90-04-18566-1 (hardback : alk. paper) 1. Mahabharata—Criticism,
interpretation, etc. I. Adluri, Vishwa. II. Bagchee, Joydeep. III. Title.
BL1138.26.H44 2010
294.5’923046—dc22
2010044679
ISSN 0169-8834
ISBN 978 90 04 18566 1
Copyright 2011 by Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Koninklijke Brill NV incorporates the imprints Brill, Global Oriental, Hotei Publishing,
IDC Publishers, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers and VSP.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, translated, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written permission from the publisher.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use is granted by Koninklijke Brill NV
provided that the appropriate fees are paid directly to The Copyright Clearance Center,
222 Rosewood Drive, Suite 910, Danvers, MA 01923, USA.
Fees are subject to change.
Madeleine Biardeau

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
These two volumes would not have been possible without the support
of many. We would also like to acknowledge the encouragement we
received from many scholars, including Alf, of course, and Greg Bailey,
Ashok and Vidyut Aklujkar, Jan Houben, Saraju Rath, T. P. Mahadevan,
Graham Schweig and Satish Karandikar. Special thanks are due to Jeny
Ruelo and to Roman Palitsky for their technical assistance. We thank
Maarten Frieswijk for his tremendous support of this project and Saskia
van der Knaap for her work in laying out the volumes.
Thanks are also due to our dear parents Dr. and Mrs. Adluri, and
Sandeep and Dr. Aruna Bagchee. We also thank Dr. Madhava Agusala
for his great support. A special thanks to all those who sustained
us with their love: Joachim Eichner, Thomas Komarek, and Elena
Garcès. Finally, we would like to thank colleagues who supported our
work: Barbara Sproul, Arbogast Schmitt, Danielle Feller, and Simon
Brodbeck.

CONTENTS
Acknowledgements ......................................................................... vii
Introduction ..................................................................................... xi
Chronology of Works .................................................................... xxxvii
i. position pieces
Chapter One Weighting Orality and Writing in the Sanskrit
Epics ................................................................................................. 3
Chapter Two The Primary Process of the Hindu Epics ............. 31
Chapter Three More Rethinking the Mahābhārata: Toward a
Politics of Bhakti ............................................................................ 49
Chapter Four Why Itihāsa? New Possibilities and Limits in
Considering the Mahābhārata as History .................................. 73
Chapter Five The Archetypal Design of the Two Sanskrit
Epics ................................................................................................. 111
Chapter Six Not Without Subtales: Telling Laws and Truths
in the Sanskrit Epics ...................................................................... 131
ii. major position pieces
Chapter Seven The Nārāyaṇīya and Early Reading
Communities of the Mahābhārata .............................................. 187
Chapter Eight Among Friends: Marriage, Women, and
Some Little Birds ............................................................................ 221
Chapter Nine Epic Aśvamedhas .................................................... 259
Chapter Ten Authorial Paths Through the Two Sanskrit
Epics: Via the Rāmopākhyāna ...................................................... 279
Chapter Eleven Mapping Bhakti in the Sanskrit Epics:
Friendship, Hospitality, and Separation ...................................... 315
Chapter Twelve On Reading Fitzgerald’s Vyāsa .......................... 333
x contents
iii. recent/early companion pieces
Chapter Thirteen Bhīsṃ a’s Sources .............................................. 367
Chapter Fourteen Nahusạ in the Skies: A Human
King of Heaven ............................................................................... 387
Chapter Fifteen Krṣ ṇ ̣a in the Mahābhārata: The Death of
Karṇa ............................................................................................... 411
Chapter Sixteen Brothers, Friends, and Charioteers: Parallel
Episodes in the Irish and Indian Epics ........................................ 461
Chapter Seventeen The Two Krṣ ṇ ̣as on One Chariot:
Upanisạ dic Imagery and Epic Mythology .................................. 485
Chapter Eighteen Buddhism and the Mahābhārata: Boundary
Dynamics in Textual Practice ....................................................... 513
Chapter Nineteen Krṣ ṇ ̣a at Mathurā ............................................ 535
Chapter Twenty Empire, Invasion, and India’s
National Epics ................................................................................. 553
Chapter Twenty-One Role, Role Model, and Function:
The Sanskrit Epic Warrior in Comparison and Theory ............ 581
iv. apparatus
Bibliography ........................................................................................ 603
Index .................................................................................................... 629
INTRODUCTION
Alf Hiltebeitel’s publishing career has been extraordinarily prolific. Since
1976, the year he published his first book, The Ritual of Battle: Krishna
in the Mahābhāratra,1 a revised version of his doctoral dissertation, he
has averaged over a book a decade. His completed monographs include
a two-volume field study of the cult of Draupadī published in 19882 and
19913 and his two “Rethinking” books published in 19994 and 2001.5
And two books on dharma are now coming out in 20106 and 2011.7
Additionally, since 1972, the year he published his first article, he has
published 72 articles, 25 of them in the last decade alone.8 In narrowing
down the list of articles for re-publication in this edition, we as editors
adopted two basic principles to guide our selection. While Hiltebeitel’s
interests are unusually broad, one can identify two broad areas of
inquiry: the classical Sanskrit epics (principally the Mahābhārata
and, to a lesser degree, the Rāmāyaṇa), and the goddess, as his field-
work finds her in the south Indian cult of Draupadī and the related
cult of Kūttāṇtạ var/Aravān̠. We decided that the best way to present
Hiltebeitel’s long career of publishing was to create two volumes: one
on the Mahābhārata and the other on goddess cults. Even with this
decision, however, we still faced the difficult task of narrowing down
our selection from 35–30 articles each on the epic and on the goddess
1 Alf Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle: Krishna in the Mahābhārata (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1976; 2nd ed.: Albany: State University of New York Press, 1990).
2 Alf Hiltebeitel, The Cult of Draupadī, vol. 1: Mythologies: From Gingee to Kuruksẹtra
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988).
3 Alf Hiltebeitel, The Cult of Draupadī, vol. 2: On Hindu Ritual and the Goddess
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991).
4 Alf Hiltebeitel, Rethinking India’s Oral and Classical Epics: Draupadῑ among Rajputs,
Muslims, and Dalits (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999).
5 Alf Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education of
the Dharma King (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001).
6 Alf Hiltebeitel, Dharma, Asian Spiritualities Series, ed. Henry Rosemont (Honolulu:
University of Hawai’i Press, 2010).
7 Alf Hiltebeitel, Dharma: Its Early History in Law, Religion, and Narrative, South Asia
Research Series, ed. Patrick Olivelle (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011).
8 See the enclosed Chronology of Works for a list. Articles included in this volume
have been marked by an asterisk; those included in volume 2 by a double asterisk.
xii introduction
to 20 articles per volume. Anything more, and the two volumes would
have been unwieldy.
Once we had decided to group the articles into two volumes, each
centered around a different thematic area, it also became clear that each
volume would have to follow a slightly different organizing principle.
While Hiltebeitel’s scholarship on the epics has undergone a series of
clearly delineated stages, his goddess studies present a comparatively
homogeneous picture. This is not to suggest that one cannot discern a
comparable development in Hiltebeitel’s ideas in his work on the god-
dess, but there is a basic methodological difference between the two
groups of articles. Whereas Hiltebeitel’s work on the epic is primarily
concerned with theoretical issues (spanning, among others, literary
theory, theories of textual composition, textual dynamics, history, etc.),
his studies of the goddess adopt a primarily topical approach. There
are, of course, theoretical issues at stake here as well (as becomes espe-
cially clear in his article, “Śiva, the Goddess, and the Disguises of the
Pāṇḍavas,”9 one of the most significant of these for an appreciation of
the epic’s meaning and literary form). Moreover, there is an unavoidable
amount of overlap between the two groups of articles (the article just
cited, for example, could be considered to belong in volume 1 just as
much as in volume 2). All the same, the basic difference between the
more theoretical pieces (on the Mahābhārata) and the fieldwork-related
studies of the goddess holds. Consequently, volume 2, we decided,
should adopt a roughly chronological approach,10 since its ethnographic
thread remains as valid as ever today and, in fact, highlights Hiltebeitel’s
early advances in the field. Even the earliest of these, “The Indus Valley
Proto-Śiva” (originally published in 1978), is not “dated” in any sense
of the term, as it presents a view that continues to be influential in
contemporary scholarship.11
9 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Śiva, the Goddess, and the Disguises of the Pāṇḍavas and
Draupadī,” History of Religions 20 (1980): 147–74.
10 In practice, however, it was necessary to cross the chronological approach with
a thematic approach, organizing the articles around three thematic focii: Draupadī,
the cult of Kūttāṇtạ var/Aravān̠, and more general reflections in a third section titled
“Companion Studies.” The chronological order is nonetheless evident: the first section
features articles from 1981, 1980, 1980 (two articles), 1985, 1991, 1997, 1995, 1992,
2003, 2000 in that order; the second from 1995, 1998, 1999, and one new article writ-
ten for the volume; the third from 1978 (the oldest in the volume), 1999, 1999, 1999
(three articles), 2005, 1985, and 1992. (See the enclosed Chronology of Works for full
references; the articles are all marked by a double asterisk.)
11 An assessment that is borne out in Gregory Possehl’s recent citation of the article:
“An interesting and provocative paper has been published by A. Hiltebeitel, who drew
introduction xiii
Volume 1, in contrast, we felt, would be much more useful if it pro-
vided a prospective on the future direction of Hiltebeitel’s researches
into the Indian epic, rather than a retrospective of his previous work.
While there are continuities between Hiltebeitel’s early and late work
on the epic, there is a much clearer sense of development here. In
particular, Hiltebeitel’s work is articulated into two distinct stages by
what he has called his “literary turn” taken around the early 90s. In the
first stage, Hiltebeitel approaches the epic in keeping with dominant
theories about a common Indo-European epic tradition; in the second
“literary” stage, his thinking undergoes significant revision and becomes
increasingly critical of the dogmatism of established views. A chrono-
logical approach akin to that adopted in volume 2, it was clear, would
be of more use to the doxographers than those interested in thinking
(or perhaps, in rethinking) about the epic.
Volume 1 is thus unusual in that it does not provide an overview
of the thinker’s development (as such retrospective collections usually
do). Rather, it makes a cogent case for a certain view of the epic that
Hiltebeitel has been developing since 1991 and arguing for since the
mid-1990s: that the Mahābhārata is a “product of conscious literary
design” and must hence be read with a view to this conscious artistry
rather than being saddled with our scholarly expectations of what it
ought to look like.12 In practice, this has meant that of the twenty-one
heavily on the work of B. Volchok, one of the Russian scholars who worked on their
attempted decipherment of the Indus script [Hiltebeitel 1978]. Hiltebeitel’s critique is
much like Srinivasan’s, but he makes much of the fact that the horns on the central
figure are those of a buffalo. Indian tradition is rich in mythology and symbolism con-
cerning Mahisạ , the buffalo god. Water buffalo also seem to occur in various contexts
in the Indus Civilization. For example, there is seal 279 showing a man hurling a spear
at a buffalo [Mackay 1937–8]. ‘This has been regarded as depicting a mythic scene:
a prototype of Skanda killing Mahisasura, the “Buffalo Demon,” with a spear (sakti;
Mahābhārata 3:221, 66, Poona Critical Edition) or Valin killing the buffalo Dundubhi
(Ramayana, 4, 11, 7–39; Baroda Critical Edition), or the prototype of a Dravidian
style buffalo sacrifice.’ [Hiltebeitel 1978, 773–4] Turning to other iconography on seal
420, Hiltebeitel begins to deal with the surrounding animals: the elephant, rhinoceros,
tiger and buffalo. . . . [Hiltebeitel] tries to associate these animals with the ‘vehicles’
(vāhanas) of later Indian tradition, particularly those of the deities of the four quarters,
the dik- or lokapalakas], or ‘World Regents.’ This was first suggested by Marshall, but
relegated to a footnote he never pursued in his commentary [Marshall 1931e: 53 n.1].
This proposition between the anima iconography on the seal and vāhanas remains
interesting but not proved.” Gregory L. Possehl, The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary
Perspective (New Delhi: Vistaar Publications, fifth printing 2009; first pub. 2002 by
AltaMira Press), 142–3.
12 A view first advanced at the 1st Dubrovnik International Conference on the
Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas (DICSEP), although, as one might imagine, to a less than
entirely persuaded audience, and since recorded in the Proceedings of that conference:
xiv introduction
articles in volume 1, only four are older than 199813 and, of these, only
one is older than 1977.14 Of Hiltebeitel’s earlier “Indo-European epic
theory”-inspired work, only one article has been included: the article
“Brothers, Friends, and Charioteers” from 1982,15 included as it dem-
onstrates how, even in this early phase of his research, Hiltebeitel was
already seeking bridges between Indo-European epic theory and the
texts of the Indian tradition.
From theories of Indo-European epic to a “literary turn”
Hiltebeitel’s earliest work on the Mahābhārata clearly demonstrates
the influence of Dumézil and Wikander. His first published article,
“The Mahābhārata and Hindu Eschatology,”16 begins with an extended
discussion of Dumézil’s work on the parallels between the apocalyptic
scenario of the Scandinavian myth of Ragnarök and the Mahābhārata’s
own, equally apocalyptic, vision of the Kuruksẹ tra. His next two arti-
cles, “Dumézil and Indian Studies”17 and “Comparing Indo-European
‘Epics’ ” (a review of Dumézil’s Mythe et épopée, vols. 2 and 3),18 owe
even more to Dumézil. Nonetheless, a sense of dissatisfaction with the
Indo-European paradigm is already in evidence in these early essays.
“the largest inadequacy in Mahābhārata scholarship, including my own,” Hiltebeitel
writes, “is simply the failure to appreciate the epic as a work of literature. The west-
ern scholarly reception of this epic is straightforwardly built on and entrenched in the
premise, aired most magisterially by Moriz Winternitz and Hermann Oldenberg—that
the Mahābhārata is a ‘literary monster’.” Alf Hiltebeitel, “Reconsidering Bhrg̣ uization,”
in Composing a Tradition: Concepts, Techniques, and Relationships, ed. Mary Brockington
and Peter Schreiner (Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and the Arts, 1999), 156.
13 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Nahusạ in the Skies: A Human King of Heaven,” History of
Religions 16,4 (1977): 329–350; Hiltebeitel, “Brothers, Friends, and Charioteers: Parallel
Episodes in the Irish and Indian Epics,” Homage to Georges Dumézil, ed. Edgar Polomé,
Journal of Indo-European Studies, Monograph No. 3 (1982): 85–112; Hiltebeitel, “The
Two Kṛsṇ ̣as on One Chariot: Upanisạ dic Imagery and Epic Mythology,” History of
Religions 24 (1984): 1–26; “Kṛsṇ ̣a at Mathurā,” in Mathurā: The Cultural Heritage,
ed. Doris M. Srinivasan (New Delhi: American Institute of Indian Studies, 1989),
92–102.
14 I.e., the article “Nahusạ in the Skies: A Human King of Heaven”; see n. 13 above
for full citation.
15 See n. 13 above for full citation.
16 Alf Hiltebeitel, “The Mahābhārata and Hindu Eschatology,” History of Religions
12 (1972): 93–115.
17 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Dumézil and Indian Studies,” Journal of Asian Studies 34 (1974):
129–37.
18 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Comparing Indo-European ‘Epics’,” History of Religions 15
(1975): 90–100.
introduction xv
In his 1972 article, for example, he already voices “doubts” about some
of Dumézil’s “Indo-European comparisons,” while simultaneously
underscoring “the close connections between the epic crisis and the
ideology of the Brāhmaṇas.”19 In his 1974 article, the question of how
this Indo-European background relates to its Indian context once again
comes to the fore. While retaining the basic Dumézilian approach, he
concludes by noting the need to consider how this prototypical Indo-
European material would have been “reshaped by Indian reformula-
tions of traditional Indo-European concepts of kingship, and by such
specifically Indian themes as reincarnation, yoga, dharma, and bhakti.”20
The most decisive break with the Duméziliam paradigm, however,
can be correlated with his first visit to India in 1974–75. His review of
Dumézil’s Mythe et épopée concludes by calling into question the very
premise of Indo-European epic theory. Citing Wikander’s work, which
“demonstrates that certain narrative epic features of the Mahābhārata
may be very old,” Hiltebeitel asks: “How then can Dumézil speak of the
design of its authors as ‘de transposer en épopée aussi completement
que possible un ensemble mythologique et un seul’ (ME, 3:144)?” “The
Mahābhārata narrative,” he concludes, “is more than simply the result
of a transposition of a set of mythological types and one eschatological
drama.”21
Here one must mention the other major influence on Hiltebeitel’s
work and the person who perhaps more than any other played a role
in his distancing himself from the dominant ideology in Epenforschung:
Madeleine Biardeau. In Hiltebeitel’s 1972 article, Biardeau is already
a dominant influence, her “general distrust of the Indo-European
comparison” preceding and signaling Hiltebeitel’s own attempts to
distance himself from the Dumézilian paradigm. In many ways, one
can read Hiltebeitel’s early work as an attempt to reconcile Dumézil’s
method of approaching the Indian epic via an allegedly original Indo-
European epic tradition with Biardeau’s method of using the Purāṇas to
retrospectively illuminate the epic. While Biardeau has been frequently
criticized for her rejection of the German text-historical method, a
critical clarification of the underlying premises of 19th–20th century
German scholarship on the Indian epics brings to light major problems.
19 Hiltebeitel, “The Mahābhārata and Hindu Eschatology,” 133.
20 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Dumézil and Indian Studies,” 137.
21 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Comparing Indo-European ‘Epics’,” 100.
xvi introduction
Far from being an objective science of texts, as German Indologists like
to claim, German Orientalism plays into peculiarly Germany anxiet-
ies about religious, cultural, and ethnic identity.22 Indeed, one can
trace the origins of the Indo-European theory back to 19th century
Indogermanische Forschungen, which in turn originate in a character-
istically 19th century German anxiety with establishing authentic (i.e.,
Āryan) origins for Germans.23 Scholars such as Pollock and Figuiera
have already illuminated the complicity of German Indology in the
Rassenideologie of the National Socialist state,24 but what is surprising
is that this thinking continues to take on some of its old forms in con-
temporary German scholarship.25 Obviously, whether one approaches
22 C. Lassen (1837), for example, sought to reconstruct Indian ethnology and
prehistory on the basis of the epic, with the Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas being identified
with “white Aryans [weisse Arier]” and “black aborigines [schwarzen Urbewohner]”
respectively and the epic as a whole being interpreted as the record of a historical
conflict for white supremacy. His racial hypothesis lays the fundament for over two
centuries of German epic studies, beginning with Holtzmann, Sr. (1854), author of the
infamous “inversion hypothesis,” according to which, the Kauravas were the heroes
of the “original” epic and were later denigrated by scurrilous “Brahmanic” redac-
tors. Goldstücker (1879) sought to anchor Holtzmann’s thesis in the text through
distinguishing a Bhārata of 24,000 verses from the Mahābhārata of 100,000 verses.
Becker (1888) continues this strain of “Indo-Germanic” thinking, by setting up explicit
comparisons between the Mahābhārata and the Nibelungenlied (Dhritaraschtra =
Armenrich, Bhischma = Rüdiger, Karna = Siegferd, Arjuna = Iring, Krischna Kesava
and Krischna Draupadi = Kriemhilde, etc.). Finally, Holtzmann, Jr. (1892) saw in the
epic evidence of a “Brahmanic Counter-Reformation [Gegenreformation]” against a
supposed Buddhist Enlightenment, explicitly describing Aśoka as a mixture of Frederick
the Great and Lessing.
23 One must cite here Pascale Rabault-Feuerhahn’s remarkable disciplinary history
L’archive des origines: Sanskrit, philologie, anthropologie dans l’Allemagne du XIXe siècle
(Paris: Éditions du Cerf, 2008) for its nuanced overview of some of these issues.
24 Sheldon Pollock, “Deep Orientalism? Notes on Sanskrit and Power beyond the
Raj,” in Orientalism and the Post-Colonial Predicament, ed. Carol A. Breckenridge and
Peter van der Veer (Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1993); Dorothy
Figueira, Aryans, Jews, Brahmins: Theorizing Authority (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2002);
see also The Exotic: A Decadent Quest (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1994).
25 To cite but two recent instances, Malinar, in her recent book on the Bhagavad
Gītā, dismisses classical Indian philosophical commentaries on the Bhagavad Gītā as
well as “modern Hindu interpretations of the text” on the grounds that “each author
establishes his own hermeneutics on the basis of the religious or philosophical tradi-
tion he adheres to.” Angelika Malinar, The Bhagavadgītā: Doctrines and Contexts
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 17. Are we to understand by this
statement that German scholars have achieved perfect Standpunktfreiheit? Or are we to
understand by it that their hermeneutics are acceptable, while “Indian” hermeneutics
are not? Or that every single Indian author does so, ignoring the important differences
between different schools, traditions, periods, philosophies, and standpoints? Surely,
one of the contributions of the text-historical school has been its greater sensitivity to
historical and textual variation, not to mention the subtle differences between differ-
ent schools and traditions? Yet von Stietencron, a scholar known for his contribution
introduction xvii
the Mahābhārata as the detritus of a heroic archaic civilization (one to
which German scholars, merely in virtue of being German, would have
privileged access) or as a work of fundamental theological, cosmologi-
cal, and philosophical relevance, cannot any longer be considered a
neutral issue. Rather, it bears upon issues of identity, colonialism, and
race. While the present work does not allow us space for a consider-
ation of these issues, we would like to draw the reader’s attention to a
forthcoming work by the editors titled The Nay Science: A History of
German Indology, in which we raise some of these issues.
Biardeau also played a role in yet another decision that led to a
significant realignment in Hiltebeitel’s work: his decision to study the
reception and continued development of the epic tradition among
indigenous communities in India. As Hiltebeitel recounts, in 1974, after
finishing his first book on the Mahābhārata, he made his first trip to
India with a sense that the Indo-European connections he had argued
for in that book were getting less and less compelling. Hiltebeitel had a
hunch that he might find the Mahābhārata known better on the ground
there than in Western, or for that matter, Indian halls of academe. In
particular, he had begun to notice, while proposing his project on a sug-
gestion from Biardeau that he study the Tamil Draupadī cult, that there
was total bifurcation between knowledge of the Sanskrit Mahābhārata
and knowledge of Mahābhārata vernaculars. If Sanskritists owned the
text, vernacular Mahābhāratas, not to mention a Tamil Mahābhārata
of Śūdra farmers, were only to be belittled.
In effect, although Hiltebeitel perhaps could not have realized the full
implications at the time, his ethnographic work on the Draupadī cult
would lead to a significant break with two centuries of German scholar-
ship on the epic. Since Holtzmann and Oldenberg, German Orientalists
had distinguished between an “Indo-Germanic” or an “Āryan” Urepos
whose “homeland” (Heimat) would have been in the “Northwest,”26
to the dialogue between India and Germany, voices near-identical sentiments in his
foreword to Malinar’s 1996 book: “The analytic thinking of Western interpreters who
were schooled in historico-philological methods stands in contrast to the traditional
Indian commentators, who not only harmonized and freely downplayed all breaks in
the text [i.e. the Bhagavad Gītā], but, above all, sought to read their own philosophical-
theological concepts out of individual textual passages, in order to secure Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s divine
authority for them.” Angelika Malinar, Rājavidyā. Das königliche Wissen um Herrschaft
und Verzicht (Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1996), 1. For a recent review of Malinar’s
work, see Vishwa Adluri, Review of The Bhagavadgītā: Doctrines and Contexts, by
Angelika Malinar, History of Religions 50,1 (August 2010): 102–107.
26 Cf. Adolf Holtzmann, for whom, “Instead of the elegiac softness, the resignation,
being tired of life, [characteristic] of later Indian literature, the raw war-like air of the
xviii introduction
and the epic in its present form which they attributed variously to the
influence of Brahmin ideology, the “worshippers” (Verehrer) of Kṛsṇ ̣a
Vāsudeva, or to bhakti. Given their obsession with isolating this epic
“core” from the Mahābhārata, these scholars were less interested in the
Indian reception of the text. Hiltebeitel was not unaware of this gap in
research: in his 1979 bibliographic essay on Krṣ ṇ ̣a in the Mahābhārata,27
he writes, “startling as it may be, there had up to this point been no real
effort to place the Mahābhārata in the direct line of India’s own literate
religious tradition.”28 One can thus view his fieldwork on the Draupadī
cult as an attempt to rectify this state of affairs. It would also lead to
one of the most productive periods in his career, with approximately
26 articles published on the cults of Draupadī and Kūttāṇtạ var in the
two decades between 1980 and 2000. As most of these articles have
been published in volume 2 and are also reviewed there (see now the
introduction to vol. 2), we shall forego a longer discussion here.
Hiltebeitel’s researches into the reception of the epic within indig-
enous communities also led to the publication of a two-volume study
of the cult of Draupadī between 1988 and 1991. In these two books,
Hiltebeitel first mapped the distribution of approximately two thousand
Draupadī temples across Tamilnadu and neighboring states and identi-
fied the cult’s “core area.” Volume 1 treated the core area’s mythology,29
old Germanic north [altgermanischen Nordens] blows against us here.” Indeed, for him,
“the unreservedly warlike world-view [Weltanschauung] . . . “constitutes the genuine soul
of the old portions of the epic”; “If we were ever to succeed in determining the oldest
cultural phase of the Indian race accessible to research,” he writes, “and to dissolve
away as though by a chemical process all influences of the Brahmanism that is already
slowly developing . . . we would find conditions before us only a little different from those
described by Tacitus as unique to the ancient Germans. But even in its contemporary
ruined form the Mahābhārata often delivers us the best commentary on Germania [!]”
Das Mahābhārata und seine Theile (Kiel: C. F. Haessler, 1892), 45; editors’ translation.
Cf. also Hermann Oldenberg, who writes that “North India, which overwhelmingly
enters into consideration for antiquity as the homeland [Heimat] of Āryan culture, is
divided into two main areas: a western and an eastern . . . In the West live the tribes
[Volksstämme], of whom the oldest transmissions report: there arose the Vedas, there
the Vedic culture had its seat. The great epic belongs to the West.” Das Mahābhārata:
seine Enstehung, sein Inhalt, seine Form (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1922),
2; editors’ translation. Cf. also Oldenberg’s claim that “the Mahābhārata is the powerful
link between old and new India, the India of the Āryan [Indien des Ariers] and of the
Hindu [des Hindus]” (ibid., 1).
27 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Kṛsṇ ̣a in the Mahābhārata: A Bibliographical Essay,” Annals of
the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 60 (1979): 65-110.
28 Ibid., 94 (italics in original).
29 See n. 2 above for the full citation.
introduction xix
while volume 2 focused on its rituals.30 While adopting anthropologi-
cal modes of inquiry (indeed, a review in the Bulletin of the School of
Oriental and African Studies described Hiltebeitel as an “honorary
anthropologist”),31 his approach was also notable for its sensitivity to
local traditions of interpretation and reception. Unsurprisingly, the
reception was unanimously positive. In 1992, Hiltebeitel was invited to
Paris as Directeur d’ Études Invité to give a course on “Le Mahābhārata
dans les traditions populaires de l’Inde du Sud” at the École Pratiques
des Hautes Études, Vème Section, Section des Sciences Religieuses. And in
1994, he was invited to be coordinator and main lecturer for a five-week
Ford Foundation workshop on folk religion at the Folklore Research
Center, St. Xavier’s College, Palayamkottai, Tamilnadu.
One could, of course, say more of Hiltebeitel’s extraordinarily fruitful
engagement with Biardeau, whose presence can be felt even today in
his work. Her sense of the epic as a symbolic universe all its own—one
that can neither be reduced to some “Indo-European”/“Indo-Germanic”
Urepos nor adequately clarified through a theory of interference between
indigenous “Vedic” or “para-Vedic” traditions and an Indo-European
tradition—is perhaps the single most important factor in Hiltebeitel’s
attempting, since the early 1980s, to engage questions of the epic’s
meaning rather than historical origins. An article from 1984 (“The Two
Kṛsṇ ̣as in One Chariot: Upanisạ dic Imagery and Epic Mythology”;
originally published in History of Religions and reprinted as chapter
16 of this volume) illustrates perfectly the incipient conflict between
these two principles as it plays itself out in Hiltebeitel’s work in this
new phase of his thought:
Classical bhakti Hinduism [he writes], the nonsectarian Hinduism whose
social theory, cosmology, and theology are first fully articulated in the two
Hindu epics and the Harivaṃśa, developed in these mythological texts a
theological language of images that has ever since retained its power in
mainstream devotional Hinduism. This essay is an exploration of such
imagery as it is worked out through the narrative of the Mahābhārata,
the most fundamental of these texts, “le monument principal, et sans
doute le plus ancien, de la bhakti.” The point of departure for this study
is thus an assumption not widely shared but, nonetheless, compelling in
its widening application, that the Mahābhārata in its classical form is a
30 See n. 3 above for the full citation.
31 C. J. Fuller, Review of The Cult of Draupadī. 1: Mythologies: From Gingee to
Kuruksẹ tra, by Alf Hiltebeitel. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies
53 (1990): 165–66.
xx introduction
work of bhakti through and through. In other words, no matter what one
hypothesizes by way of sources for the story in earlier mythology, heroic
legend (I am still of the view that it presupposes an Indo-European and
Āryan heritage that distinguishes it from its companion texts) or possible
history, there are no passages or incidents which on their own permit the
reconstruction of either pre-bhakti stages of mythologization or a histori-
cal pre-“divinized” or premythological core. Indeed, it is more pointless to
look for original human-historical figures and elements than earlier forms
of the story since in the latter case there is at least something comparative
to go on. Rather than being a patchwork of myths, legends, and historical
reminiscences overlaid with bhakti, what the narrative builds up to and
works around are a series of what I would call “bhakti tableaux,” scenes
which present images that hold themselves before the hearer’s mind.
Ultimately, they present ways of seeing the divine through the stories that
are akin to the contemporaneous development of temple iconography,
and it is no accident that many of these epic bhakti tableaux continue to
find their places on mass market oleographs in India today.32
One can see how Biardeau’s approach to the epic of studying the way the
Purāṇas both emerge from and reciprocally illuminate the Mahābhārata
provides a major impetus for Hiltebeitel in this article to begin thinking
about the text in terms of itself. Crucially, his attention turned from
an engagement with scholarly theories on the epic to the epic itself:
what did it have to say to the reader? How was it able to provide a
vital framework of meaning (ethical, social, and political) for so many
centuries across such a wide area, while recognizably maintaining its
textual integrity? What were the literary strategies the epic made use
of in presenting itself?
Sometime in the early 1990s, Hiltebeitel recalls taking a “literary
turn” in his Mahābhārata studies. At its simplest, this means that he
increasingly came to think about the Mahābhārata as a work of litera-
ture as opposed to a palimpsest of textual and historical strata as was
the accepted scholarly convention. Although he claims to have aired
the idea first in 1994 during a talk on the epic at the Śiva-Visṇ ̣u temple
in Lanham, Maryland, it is clear from his writings that the idea had
been slowly maturing for a long time. Articles such as “The Folklore
of Draupadi: Sārīs and Hair” from 1991 already reveal a preoccupa-
tion with the literary qualities of the epic,33 as does the back and forth
32 Hiltebeitel, “The Two Kṛsṇ ̣as,” 1.
33 Alf Hiltebeitel, “The Folklore of Draupadi: Sārīs and Hair,” in Gender, Genre, and
Power in South Asian Expressive Traditions, ed. Arjun Appadurai, Frank J. Korom, and
introduction xxi
comparison between Bhatṭạ Nārāyaṇa’s Sanskrit drama Veṇīsaṃhāra
(“The Binding-Up of the Braid”) and the Mahābhārata in his 1981
article on Draupadī’s hair.34 The concern with literary aspects is even
more prominent in his 1995 article on the Rām, Rās, and Pāṇḍava
Līlā traditions of north India,35 and ultimately culminates in a virtuoso
analysis of the epic’s strategies of literary self-presentation through
its use of frame-narratives in the article “Conventions of the Naimisạ
Forest.”36 Both as a paper and, later, as a section of a central chapter in
his 2001 book, “Conventions” provides compelling evidence for rethink-
ing some of the more dogmatic historicist claims about the epic, such
as the thesis of an older, compact “Bhārata” that is later expanded to
form the “Mahā-” or “Great-” Bhārata. While scholars were not about
to give up positions on which they had built up entire careers (not to
speak of identities!), by moving the frame-narratives center-stage in
“Conventions,” Hiltebeitel had effectively turned the received theory of
“accretion of secondary materials to the central story” (van Buitenen)37
on its head. The Mahābhārata, he had shown, had to be read from the
outside inward, rather than being read from the inside outward. Perhaps
alone of the “Western savants” (Sukthankar),38 Hiltebeitel had dared
think what Western scholars had long been unwilling to concede: that
perhaps the epic had always been preserved, understood, and transmit-
ted in an exemplary manner in the Indian tradition, without the need for
Western “critical” surgeries. Indeed, if this approach was correct, then
the epic could no longer be seen as a “monstrous chaos” (Oldenberg)39
Margaret A. Mills (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, 1991), 395–427. (This
article has been reprinted in vol. 2 of this collection.)
34 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Draupadī’s Hair,” in Autour de la déesse hindoue, ed. Madeleine
Biardeau, Purushartha 5 (1981): 179–214. (This article has been reprinted in vol. 2 of
this collection.)
35 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Draupadī Cult Līlās,” in The Gods at Play: Līlā in South Asia,
ed. William Sax (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995), 204–24. (This article has
been reprinted in vol. 2 of this collection.)
36 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Conventions of the Naimisạ Forest,” Journal of Indian Philosophy
23 (1998): 69–79.
37 J. A. B. van Buitenen, trans. The Mahābhārata, vol. 1: The Book of the Beginning
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973), xix.
38 V. S. Sukthankar, On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata (Bombay: Asiatic Society,
1957), 29; cf. also p. 31 and 67. On p. 25, Sukthankar speaks, perhaps more accurately,
of “European savants.”
39 Hermann Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata, 1. In all, the term Ungeheuer and deriva-
tives occur 33 times in Oldenberg’s Mahābhārata, with the greatest concentration of
occurrences (7 in total) occurring between pages 80–82. The most frequent usage is
as a description of the epic, in the forms: “ungeheures Gedicht,” “ungeheures Werk”
xxii introduction
or as a “literary monster” (Winternitz),40 but had to be understood as
a product of conscious literary and artistic design.
One must appreciate the radicality of this suggestion, which basically
broke with two hundred years of Orientalist scholarship and pseudo-
critique on the epic. The Śūdras and the low-status Alis (transsexual
“brides” of Krṣ ṇ ̣a), Hiltebeitel was implicitly suggesting, had understood
(twice),” ungeheuren Umfang,” “ungeheures Schatzhaus,” “ungeheures Hauptstück,”
“ungeheuren Stoffmassen,” and “ungeheures Epos.” The term is also used twice of
the main battle (variously described as an “ungeheure Schlacht” or as an “ungeheure
Kampf ”), and a total of four times to describe various aspects of the epic: its transfor-
mation into a didactic poem (“ungeheurliche Verwandlung”), the didactic expansion
of the poem (“ungeheueren lehrhaften Erweiterungen”), and its expanses (“ungeheuren
Weiten”). But the most interesting occurrences for our analysis are those that serve
to characterize its aesthetic character: the events narrated in the epic spread out into
“monstrous dimensions” (“ungeheurliche Dimensionen”), it contains events that have
been enlarged into the “monstrous” (“das Ungeheure”), it conjures up or is the product
of “monstrous visions” (“ungeheueren Visionen”), it itself contains actual “monsters”
(“Ungeheuren”) and “monstrosities” (“Ungeheurlichkeiten”). To this we may add a final
class: those usages that serve to characterize the Indian aesthetic in the widest sense,
namely, its very outlook on becoming. Thus, the Indian aesthetic contemplates the life
of the universe as permeated by “monstrous tensions and discharges” (“ungeheueren
Spannungen und Entladungen”); contemplates, in the epic, an image of the “monstrosity
of natural- and divine existence” (“ungeheueren Natur- und Götterbegebenheit”); sees,
“in the whole of nature,” “a monstrous realm of life” (“ungeheueres Reich des Lebens”);
sees human and divine fate as being suffused with a “monstrous All-Life” (“ungeheuren
Allleben”); as merely a wave in the “monstrous stream of Saṃsāra” (“ungeheuren Strom
des Saṃsāra”); pushes narrative occurrences into the “most monstrous dimensions of
the event” (“ungeheursten Dimensionen des Geschehens”; note the superlative degree!)
or sees them steered along “monstrous paths” (“ungeheure Bahnen”); and fashions itself
out of “masses of material” drawn from an existence that is “monstrous, wonder-filled,
[and] terrifying” (“ungeheuren wunderfüllten furchtbaren”) at the same time. Crowning
this vast picture of uncontrolled, teeming becoming and its corresponding aesthetic,
as its symbol and archetype, is Śiva: the “supreme god” whose “monstrous agency”
(“ungeheure Tun”) Oldenberg dimly perceives to be at work in all this fantastic cos-
mological and narrative unfolding. (This note excerpted from the editors’ forthcoming
work The Nay Science: A History of German Indology.)
40 Moritz Winternitz, Geschichte der indischen Literatur, vol. 1 (Leipzig: Amelang,
1909), 272. The full citation reads: “For us, however, who contemplate the Mahābhārata
not as faithful [gläubige] Hindus, but as critical literary historians [kritische
Litterarhistoriker], it is nothing less than an artificial work [Kunstwerk]; and in no
case can we see in it the work of an author, indeed, not even of a capable collector
and arranger. The Mahābhārata is a literary monster [litterarisches Unding]. Never
had an artist’s hand attempted—and it would, indeed, hardly have been possible—to
unify the conflicting elements to a uniform poem. Only unpoetic theologians and
commentators and talentless hacks [Abschreiber] finally welded parts that are in truth
irreconcilable and date back to different centuries together into a disordered mass”
(editors’ translation).
introduction xxiii
the epic better than an array of German (and some other) “experts”
had ever succeeded in doing.41
It is thus unsurprising that when Hiltebeitel published his next two
books, they both included the word “Rethinking” in the title. In effect,
Hiltebeitel had spent the time since his first book in 1976 reappraising
the issue of what epic studies as such meant or ought to mean from the
ground up. The two intervening books, his studies of Draupadī from
1988 and 1991, marked important milestones in this process, while
themselves fuelling further bouts of “rethinking.” The two “Rethinking”
books (published in 199942 and 2001,43 respectively) signaled Hiltebeitel’s
“matured” view of the epic. Even an ardent critic of Hiltebeitel’s like
Fitzgerald was inclined to concede, “Alf Hiltebeitel has been the single
most open-minded and fearlessly imaginative Western reader the
authors and editors of the Sanskrit Mahābhārata (MBh) have ever had
for their masterpiece.”44
The two books are very different in style and substance. At 560 pages
plus a 15 page introduction, Hiltebeitel’s 1999 book was his longest
yet—and its subject appropriately ambitious: a comprehensive overview
of the regional martial oral epics of India and of the way they relate
to or “rethink” the classical epics. To that end, it demonstrated that,
if one were to consider the Sanskrit epic tradition as a whole rather
than addressing its disjecta membra as both traditional scholars of the
Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa and modern scholars of India’s vernacular
oral epics till then had done, the only approach capable of encompassing
this whole was literary hermeneutics. The following passage from the
41 As one might imagine, some responses were less than enthusiastic. A reviewer
of volume 3 of the Proceedings of the Dubrovnik International Conference on the
Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas lashed out at Hiltebeitel’s contribution (“Weighing
Orality and Writing in the Sanskrit Epics,” 2005; presented in 2002) accusing him of
“presenting his own opinion of the genesis of the Mahābhārata with great eloquence,
but to a great extent eschewing [the need for] scientific demonstration” and, not
content with this ad hominem attack, turned around and accused the “Peer-review-
system” of “breaking down” in this one case. Andreas Bigger, Review of Epics, Khilas,
and Purāṇas: Continuities and Ruptures, ed. by Petteri Koskikallio, Zeitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 158,2 (2008): 496. Yet another German
reviewer contented himself with repeating the accusation; cf. Thomas Oberlies, Review
of Epics, Khilas, and Purāṇas: Continuities and Ruptures, ed. by Petteri Koskikallio,
Orientalistische Literaturzeitung 104.3 (May–June 2009): 358–359.
42 See n. 4 above for the full citation.
43 See n. 5 above for the full citation.
44 James Fitzgerald, “The Many Voices of the Mahābhārata,” Journal of the American
Oriental Society 123,4 (Oct.–Dec., 2003): 803.
xxiv introduction
introduction is especially illuminative of how Hiltebeitel, since 1999,
has been thinking about the task of epic studies:
. . . rethinking India’s epics has meant thinking more about literature and
history than doing anthropology. No matter how important I continue
to think they are for the study of Hinduism and South Asian religions,
and indeed for the anthropological study of South Asia, India’s classical
epics are above all works of literature. This has meant recalling some
of the reasons I was once an English major for my first three years of
college, and giving some attention to recent studies in literature and
literature theory.45
Hiltebeitel’s next book, Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide
to the Education of the Dharma King, then sought to buttress this case
for a literary reading of the Mahābhārata by examining the way the
author of the epic, Vyāsa, and its main kingly protagonist, Yudhisṭḥ ira,
interact throughout the epic. In contrast to the reigning orthodoxy of
an oral Ksạ triya epic rewritten to legitimate a newly-instituted Brahmin
hierarchy, Hiltebeitel argues for seeing the Brahminic Vyāsa as a “narra-
tive fiction,” just as the references to orality are “literary tropes.” Thus,
rather than reducing Yudhisṭḥ ira or Vyāsa to historical personages and
interpreting their interaction as evidence of a historical conflict between
the Ksạ triya and Brahmin castes, Hiltebeitel argues for a complete
shift in perspective: the epic, he suggests, is from the very beginning
the product of Brahmins, who make use of tropes such as orality and
bardic transmission (in the many references to the sūta), in order to
articulate a comprehensive view of the proper dharma and of the way
a righteous king (such as the fictional Yudhisṭḥ ira) might be instructed
in maintaining this dharma. Oral epic theory, he suggests, is not only
of little use in a clarification of this philosophical and literary project;
it has actively distorted our perspective on the epic:
Western scholarly reception of the Mahābhārata is built squarely upon
the premise, aired most magisterially by Moritz Winternitz and Hermann
Oldenberg, that the Mahābhārata is a “literary unthing” (literarisches
Unding), a “monstrous chaos” (ungeheuerliches Chaos). Although our
time is now one in which “literary monstrosity” might imply a kind of
artistry (one thinks first of Henry James writing on the art of the novel as
“such large loose and baggy monsters”), the phrase is simply not adequate
to the critical task. Nonetheless, the premise of monstrosity has served a
purpose. It has allowed scholars of very different persuasions and interests
45 Hiltebeitel, Rethinking India’s Oral and Classical Epics, 7.
introduction xxv
to design a Mahābhārata of convenience through which to nurture—with
more bombast than debate, and with scarcely anything that could be called
cumulative results—their own contradictory notions of origins and their
equally contradictory developmental theories.46
Instead, Hiltebeitel “urges” that the Mahābhārata “must have been writ-
ten over a much shorter period than is usually advanced . . . by ‘committee’
(Kirste 1902, 7 and 9) or ‘team’ (Dumézil 1968, 238), and at most
through a couple of generations.”47 Indeed, as a sustained meditation
on the problem of Yudhisṭḥ ira’s education in the Mahābhārata shows,
the entire epic (including the so-called “narrative” and the “didactic”
portions) coheres around the Mahābhārata’s central problem: recon-
ciling the violence that is an inevitable aspect of pravṛttidharma with
the philosophical ideal of nivṛttidharma. “The svadharma of kings,” he
notes, “must include not only the means to violence, but the means to
its appeasement . . . One of the chief objects of the Mahābhārata is thus
to instruct kings and other Ksạ triyas in how to curb endless cycles of
violence, particularly as such cycles affect and implicate Brahmans.”48
In chapter 5, Hiltebeitel then proposes that the concept of ānṛśaṃsya
(which he translates as “noncruelty”) which is recommended to
Yudhisṭḥ ira as a kingly ideal represents the epic authors’ solution to
the problem of violence as both necessary and repugnant.
Besides rethinking Western positions on the Indian epic from the
ground up, Hiltebeitel has also continually sought to revise and expand
the narrow methodological canon of Indological studies. As a student
of Eliade’s, he already displayed a sophisticated understanding of sac-
rifice and ritual in his early oeuvre. He has since then incorporated a
number of interdisciplinary perspectives into his work, including the
work of the French post-structuralists Derrida and Foucault. In his
2001 book, for example, a discussion of Foucault’s question “what is
an author?” in chapter 2 gives way to a reflection on “author func-
tion” and, finally, to a philosophical engagement with the work of the
eminent phenomenologist and Heidegger scholar, J.L. Mehta. Other
work has sought to reconsider the epic in light of the work of A.K.
Ramanujan, Velcheru Narayana Rao, and even Freud. More recently,
Hiltebeitel has been interested in thinking through affinities between
46 Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 1; see now n. 39 and 40 above.
47 Ibid., 20.
48 Ibid., 118.
xxvi introduction
the Mahābhārata and Walter Benjamin’s Arcades Project. Hiltebeitel is
also currently co-proposing (with Vishwa Adluri) a volume titled The
Emergence of Hinduism (under consideration by Fortress Publishing),
in which he hopes to show why thinking about Hinduism in terms of
“emergences” rather than “origins” does more justice to it than the
historicist approach hitherto.49
Position pieces and interpretative pieces: Parts I and II of volume 1
Since completing his 2001 book, Hiltebeitel’s work has mainly focused
on working out the implications of such a literary reading for the epic.
As these articles constitute a coherent body of work no less significant
than his other published monographs for an understanding of his intel-
lectual trajectory, we were clear from the outset that, whatever the final
form of volume 1, it would include a majority of these articles.50 They
perhaps more than any other body of Hiltebeitel’s work constitute his
“matured” view of the epic and this volume, in bringing them together,
may be considered Hiltebeitel’s most comprehensive statement to date
on questions of approach, methodology, and interpretation looking
back at over 40 years of Mahābhārata scholarship.
But although we were clear from the outset that volume 1 ought
to provide an overview of Hiltebeitel’s evolving views on the epic, the
task of selecting which articles to include was not easy. One of the first
principles adopted was to include those articles which focused on car-
rying forward the argument of Hiltebeitel’s 2001 book. Unusually for
such an edition, this volume was planned from the very outset as a
49 The book’s idea of “emergences” will be advanced by Vishwa Adluri, based on
an attempt to articulate a philosophical rather than historical approach to Hinduism.
Adluri draws on the distinction between “origin” and “originary” found in his teacher
Reiner Schürmann’s work to deconstruct essentialist approaches based upon privileg-
ing historical origins such as the entire German rhetoric of “Āryan origins” for the
Mahābhārata (see n. 22 above). For a discussion of the distinction between “origin”
and “originary,” see Vishwa Adluri, Parmenides, Plato and Mortal Philosophy: Return
from Transcendence (London: Continuum Publishing, 2011).
50 Of the fifteen articles on approaches to the Mahābhārata published in this period,
volume 1 includes all but three: “India’s Epics: Writing, Orality, and Divinity,” in The
Study of Hinduism, ed. Arvind Sharma (Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina
Press, 2003), 114–38; “Aśvaghoṣa’s Buddhacarita: The First Known Close and Critical
Reading of the Brahmanical Sanskrit Epics,” Journal of Indian Philosophy 34 (2006):
229–86; and “Mapping Bhakti through Friendship in the Sanskrit Epics,” in Epic and
Argument in Sanskrit Literary History, Festschrift for Robert P. Goldman, ed. Sheldon
I. Pollock (Delhi: Manohar, 2010), 91–116. Note that this last article is not the same
as the chapter titled “Mapping Bhakti in the Sanskrit Epics: Friendship, Hospitality,
and Separation” in the present volume, which is new to this volume.
introduction xxvii
sort of “companion” volume to Hiltebeitel’s Rethinking book. Thus, we
opened with a selection of six articles in which Hiltebeitel argues for the
literary character of the Mahābhārata, and the benefits of interpreting
it as a work of literary art that holds together effectively. These include
positions on writing, reading, and orality (chapters 1 and 2; originally
published in 200551 and 2000,52 respectively); textual representation of the
author and the politics of devotion, or having gods be part of the story
(chapter 3; 2004);53 the epic’s primary self-identification of its genre as
itihāsa or “history” (chapter 4, new article);54 the Mahābhārata’s Critical
Edition and the epic’s archetypal design (chapter 5, new article);55 and
on the epic’s inclusion of substories (chapter 6; 2005).56 Four of these
articles had been previously published, while two were new “position
pieces” written especially for the volume. Of these four, the aptly titled
“Rethinking the Mahābhārata: Toward a Politics of Bhakti” (chapter 3),
constituted Hiltebeitel’s response to the critics of his 2001 book. Part I thus
includes all of what might be called Hiltebeitel’s “position pieces” to date,
i.e., those in which Hiltebeitel has taken a stance on issues of the epic’s
genre, form, literary content, redactorial history, and interpretation.
In Part II, under the heading “Interpretive Pieces,” we then chose to
feature a set of six essays that follow from the positions developed in
Part I. These are, in effect, applications of the positions taken in Part I to
specific sections or themes in the epics. One of Hiltebeitel’s main aims
in these longer studies was to show that readers’ knowledge of the text
appreciates from working things out through the positions articulated
in Part I. Part II opens with a discussion of the “Nārāyaṇīya and the
51 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Weighting Orality and Writing in the Sanskrit Epics,” in Epics,
Khilas, and Purāṇas: Continuities and Ruptures. Proceedings of the 3rd Dubrovnik
International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas, Sept. 2002, ed. Petteri
Koskikallio (Zagreb: Croatian Acedemy of Sciences and Arts, 2005), 81–111.
52 Alf Hiltebeitel, “The Primary Process of the Hindu Epics,” International Journal
of Hindu Studies 4.3 (2000): 269–88.
53 Alf Hiltebeitel, “More Rethinking the Mahābhārata: Toward a Politics of Bhakti.”
Indo-Iranian Journal 47 (2004): 203–27.
54 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Why Itihāsa? New Possibilities and Limits in Considering the
Mahābhārata as History.” In spite of the resemblance in the titles, this is not the
same article as the more preliminary “Why Itihāsa? New Possibilities in Considering
the Mahābhārata’s Intention as ‘History’,” in Ways and Reasons for Thinking about
the Mahābhārata as a Whole, ed. Vishwa Adluri (Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, forthcoming).
55 Alf Hiltebeitel, “The Archetypal Design of the Two Sanskrit Epics.” This chapter will
also appear by agreement as an article in Proceedings of the 5th Dubrovnik International
Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas, ed. Petteri Koskikallio (Zagreb: Croatian
Academy of Sciences and Arts, forthcoming).
56 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Not Without Subtales: Telling Laws and Truths in the Sanskrit
Epics,” Journal of Indian Philosophy 33 (2005): 455–511.
xxviii introduction
Early Reading Communities of the Mahābhārata” (chapter 7; 2006),57
an article that touches upon almost all of the positions taken in Part I.
Subsequent pieces in Part II then address, in turn, bhakti (chapter 8;
2007),58 the Aśvamedha sacrifice in both Sanskrit epics (chapter 9; new
article),59 and the narrative progression of the respective heroines of
the two epics (chapter 10; 2010),60 before returning once again to the
theme of bhakti in “Mapping Bhakti in the Sanskrit Epics: Friendship,
Hospitality, and Separation” (chapter 11; new article). The final chapter
in this section (chapter 12; 2005)61 then re-prints an extended-length
review of Fitzgerald’s translation of the Śāntiparvan. Unlike Part I,
where there is a strong sense of chronological continuity and chrono-
logical development, the articles in Part II were intended more as self-
standing pieces and hence do not follow a chronological order.
Recent/Early Companion Pieces: Part III
Part III, under the heading “Recent/Early Companion Pieces,” then
concludes volume 1 with a mix of recent pieces and earlier ones that
display work on overlapping topics. Here, the positions and interpreta-
tive implications worked out in Parts I and II continue to find appli-
cations, but now in articles where one can see Hiltebeitel addressing
topics both before and after his literary turn.
Chapters 13–14 both discuss ways the epic brings in cosmological
considerations. “Bhīsṃ a’s Sources” (chapter 13; 2001),62 the first “recent”
57 Alf Hiltebeitel, “The Nārāyaṇīya and the Early Reading Communities of the
Mahābhārata,” in Between the Empires: Society in India 300 BCE to 400 CE, ed. Patrick
Olivelle (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006), 227–55.
58 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Among Friends: Marriage, Women, and Some Little Birds,”
in Gender and Narrative in the Mahābhārata, ed. Simon Brodbeck and Brian Black
(London: Routledge, 2007), 110–43.
59 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Epic Aśvamedhas.” In spite of the resemblance in the titles, this
is not the same article as “Epic Aśvamedhas,” in Papers from the Fourth International
Vedic Workshop: The Vedas in Culture and History, ed. Joel Brereton (Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, forthcoming).
60 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Authorial Paths through the Two Sanskrit Epics: Via the
Rāmopākhyāna,” in Epic Undertakings: Papers of the 12th World Sanskrit Conference,
vol. 2, ed. Muneo Tokunaga and Robert P. Goldman (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
2009), 169–214.
61 Alf Hiltebeitel, “On Reading Fitzgerald’s Vyāsa,” review of The Mahābhārata,
vol. 7, trans. by James L. Fitzgerald. Journal of the American Oriental Society 125,2
(2005): 241–61.
62 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Bhīsṃ a’s Sources,” in Vidyārṇavavandanam: Essays in Honor of
introduction xxix
piece, deals with how the great patriarch Bhīsṃ a comes to know what
he knows in the Śāntiparvan. The next piece, “Nahusạ in the Skies,”
the oldest of the articles included in this volume (first published 1977),63
was selected as providing an interesting comparison to the more recent
“Bhīsṃ a’s Sources.” As in the 2001 article, Hiltebeitel’s starting point is
the question of how epic narrative introduces questions that are only
solved through turning to cosmological considerations, but the treat-
ment is quite different, invoking, for example, a significant amount
of Vedic material. Nonetheless, one can note a remarkable continuity
between the two articles, in that both are concerned with demonstrat-
ing the intrinsic connection between the epic’s so-called “narrative”
and “didactic” portions.
The two cosmological chapters then give way to a triad of “charioteer”-
themed articles. The first, “Kṛsṇ ̣a in the Mahābhārata: The Death of
Karṇa” (chapter 15; 200764), is a “recent” piece that examines the role
of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s actions in bringing about the death of Karṇa. The next two
chapters, written in 198265 and 198466 respectively, may be seen as
early “precursors” of chapter 15 in that they, too, focus on the pivotal
confrontation between Arjuna and Karṇa. Chapter 16 focuses on Indo-
European parallels to Irish epic, reflecting Hiltebeitel’s early Dumézilian
framework; but the next article, cited earlier for its paragraph on
“bhakti tableaux”67 and written just two years later, already displays a
remarkable development away from this paradigm. Here, rather than
the Indo-European connections, it is the Upanisạ dic background to the
two Kṛsṇ ̣as on one chariot that is foregrounded.
Chapters 18–19 are about Buddhism and the Mahābhārata. The
first of these, “Buddhism and the Mahābhārata: Boundary Dynamics
in Textual Practice” (chapter 18; 2005),68 is a “recent” piece dedicated
to a discussion of the work of scholars who have advanced the idea
that Buddhism is one of the background forces that shapes the epic.
Asko Parpola, ed. Klaus Karttunen and Petteri Koskikallio (Helsinki: Finnish Oriental
Society, 2001), 261–78.
63 See n. 13 above for the full citation.
64 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Kṛsṇ ̣a in the Mahābhārata: The Death of Karṇa,” in Krishna: A
Sourcebook, ed. Edwin F. Bryant (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), 23–76.
65 See n. 13 above for the full citation.
66 See n. 13 above for the full citation.
67 See n. 32 above.
68 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Buddhism and the Mahābhārata,” in Boundaries, Dynamics,
and the Construction of Traditions in South Asia, ed. Federico Squarcini (Florence:
University of Florence Press, 2005), 107–31.
xxx introduction
While Biardeau, Sutton, and Fitzgerald have made points in this regard
favoring a post-Aśokan dating, Hiltebeitel was the first to advance a
new discussion along these lines in his 1991 article “Krṣ ṇ ̣a at Mathura,”
included as the next piece (chapter 19)69 in this section.
Finally, chapters 20–21, “Empire, Invasion, and India’s National
Epics” and “Role, Role Model, and Function: The Sanskrit Epic Warrior
in Comparison and Theory,” treat the epic’s portrayals of warriors and
kings. Published in 199870 and 2004,71 respectively, but both written in
1997 as spin-offs of the writing of Rethinking the Mahābhārata, these
last two articles address questions about the nature of epic in Indian
national culture and different images of the warrior in classical, medi-
eval, and modern India.
In its three parts, this volume is thus intended to carry the reader
forward through a series of articles highlighting and defending posi-
tions taken in Hiltebeitel’s Rethinking the Mahābhārata; in particular,
his claim that the Mahābhārata was composed by a committee of “out
of sorts Brahmins”72 over a short period of time of no longer than two
generations between the middle of the second century BCE and the
turn of the millennium.73 Many of these adduce additional evidence
based on a closer study of the text; chapter 3, for example, offers fur-
ther thinking about the epic’s hints at what Hiltebeitel posits to be its
two-generation committee in relation to the centrality of Vyāsa as “the
author,” while chapter 6 argues that the epic’s “subtales” cannot be
later than the archetype that includes them. Post quem and ante quem
intertextual considerations are also raised in chapter 4 with respect
to the seldom-studied Yuga Purāṇa; 9, 10, and 11 with respect to the
Rāmāyaṇa; and in chapter 13 with regard to the Mahābhārata’s own
manner of citing “sources.” Chapter 4 also draws on collaborative
projects undertaken along with other scholars74 whose work supports
Hiltebeitel’s claim. Indeed, five of the six chapters that comprise the
69 See n. 13 above for the full citation.
70 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Empire, Invasion, and India’s National Epics,” International
Journal of Hindu Studies 2,3 (1998): 387–421.
71 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Role, Role Model, and Function: The Sanskrit Epic Warrior in
Comparison and Theory,” in Playing for Real: Hindu Role Models, Religion, and Gender,
ed. Jacqueline Suthren Hirst and Lynn Thomas (New Delhi: Oxford University Press,
2004), 27–50.
72 Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 19.
73 Ibid., 18–32.
74 See Ways and Means for Thinking about the Mahābhārata as a Whole, ed. Vishwa
Adluri (Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, forthcoming), a volume that
introduction xxxi
“Position Papers” in Part I (the exception is chapter 2) contribute to
this discussion in one way or another. As Hiltebeitel’s claim favoring a
relatively brief period of composition constitutes the crux of the debate
between Hiltebeitel and his critics, we turn next to a discussion of some
aspects of this debate.
Vyāsa’s atelier
Let us begin with a recent criticism of Hiltebeitel’s view of the
Mahābhārta’s composition. Fitzgerald, a defender of oral epic theory,75
has been adamantine in his opposition to the idea that the epic, roughly
as we have it in the Pune Critical Edition, may have been ab initio a
work of conscious composition. But why is Fitzgerald so opposed to
the idea, and what is at stake in this debate? Consider Fitzgerald’s
characterization of Hiltebeitel’s position, as articulated in a recent book
on “epic and history”:
One major scholar of the MBh, Alf Hiltebeitel, has argued that an atelier
of epic poets working under the guidance of a chief architect for a period
of a few years (two generations at most, he says) created the MBh in a
single literary effort. Arguing like intelligent design theorists in another
anti-evolutionary arena, Hiltebeitel denies there was ever an oral Bhārata
epic. He charges that oral epic theory is a large house of cards in relation
to the MBh, and he claims that the few references we have in adjacent
Sanskrit literature to a “Bhārata” as opposed to a “Great Bhārata” are of
no significance. What Hiltebeitel gains by viewing the MBh in this way
is a completely synchronous artistic creation (or one that is nearly so; he
admits the possibility of a few additions to the text after its composition)
that is the product of some kind of unified authorial vision. Hiltebeitel
says that the archetypal text recovered in the Pune edition was produced
in writing between “the mid-second century BCE and the year zero”
(Hiltebeitel 2001: 18). Hiltebeitel’s argument that the text was created
includes contributions from T. P. Mahadevan and the editors based on papers originally
presented as part of a panel at the 14th World Sanskrit Conference in Kyoto, Japan.
75 Fitzgerald’s enthusiasm for 19th century German epic theory also extends to
Holtzmann, Sr.’s hypothesis of an original Indo-Germanic saga of heroic deeds and
knightly chivalry akin to the Nibelungenlied and to his nephew, Holtzmann, Jr.’s “inver-
sion hypothesis,” according to which the Kauravas were the original heroes of the old
epic and were only later maligned through a Brahmanic revision that introduced the
Pāṇḍavas as the ideal of Brahmanic kingship. Of Holtzmann’s “inversion hypothesis,”
Sukthankar already remarked, “These wild aberrations of Holtzmann, which hardly
deserve the name of a theory . . . have now little more than antiquarian interest.”
Sukthankar, On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata, 15.
xxxii introduction
in a single synchronous creative effort is, in my judgment, completely
unsupportable, even paradoxical, but it has a helpful, clarifying effect
on thinking about the Mahābhārata’s development. On the other hand,
I have no trouble imagining such an atelier producing a written Great
Bhārata on and around some older oral Bhārata.76
Equating Hiltebeitel’s idea with “intelligent design theorists” may be
rhetorically effective, but what is the substantial criticism behind it? If,
as Hiltebeitel has compellingly shown in his 2001 book, there are traces
of “intelligent design” throughout the Mahābhārata (in its use of frame
narratives, in its making the author of the work also the progenitor of
the principal characters, in its sophisticated hermeneutic strategies),
does that make Hiltebeitel an “intelligent design theorist” or does it
make the Mahābhārata a work of literature? Is Hiltebeitel taking up an
argument in an “anti-evolutionary arena” or is he, rather, suggesting
that evolutionary models are of limited use in thinking about conscious
poetic creations? And although Hiltebeitel does deny that there is any
basis for thinking there was ever “some older oral Bhārata”—that is, an
ancient oral Bhārata tribal epic—he does not deny that the Mahābhārata
poets could have drawn on oral legendary and didactic sources.
Clearly, Hiltebeitel anticipated such challenges from those positing
an ancient bardic oral core in Rethinking the Mahābhārata.77 But one
senses that he felt that the more important debate would continue over
notions of what was “added” to the Mahābhārata, for he already noted
in his 2001 book that, “The real challenges will continue to come from
those who find one or another reason to argue that some portion or
passage within the Critical Edition is late, such as the highly devotional
Nārāyaṇīya portion of the Śāntiparvan, or the entire Anuśāsana Parvan.”
Acknowledging the possibility, Hiltebeitel nonetheless notes with char-
acteristic precision that, “since no one is close to proving anything, let
us be all the more cautious about what we try to disprove.” He “would
only argue that even these axiomatically late portions must be looked
at with an eye fresh to the possibility that they are not any later—or at
least much later: hours, weeks, or months rather than centuries—than
76 Fitzgerald, “No Contest,” 110. It is to be noted that Fitzgerald gives no citations
for what he calls “references we have in adjacent Sanskrit literature to a ‘Bhārata’ as
opposed to a ‘Great Bhārata’,” nor does he discuss what significance might be imputed
to them independent of what the Mahābhārata says itself. See chapter 6 of this volume
for Hiltebeitel’s discussion of these terms in the epic.
77 See Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 8, 19 and n. 74.
introduction xxxiii
the rest, once the rest, and its principles of composition and design,
are better understood.”78
At the time Hiltebeitel wrote this about the Nārāyaṇīya in his
Rethinking book, he could not have anticipated the support for his
argument that would come from researching the text fully and from
Thennilapuram Mahadevan’s researches into the Southern Recension.
In a monograph published in 2008, although shared earlier with
Hiltebeitel, Mahadevan compared the manuscripts of the Southern
Recension against each other and against the CE text and correlated
their variation with what he was discovering about Brahmin migra-
tions to the south.79 Using this data, he was able to date a bifurca-
tion of Southern Recension manuscipts to the Kalạ bhra interregnum
(ca. 350–550 CE)80 and demonstrate that changes made in the baseline
archetype, including the Nārāyaṇīya, would have had to have been
made before that date.
In addition to this evidence, Hiltebeitel has also been able to show
in two recent studies81 that the Southern Recension redactor or “S”
undertook a major revision of the Critical Edition’s “baseline” arche-
typal text before the Kalạ bhra interregnum and that the Malayālam
manuscripts of the Nārāyaṇīya modified this S Recension archetype
rather than the baseline text itself (which S had already modified).
Indeed, if Hiltebeitel’s analysis here is correct, then this argumentation
would also have to apply to S’s nearly complete revision of a segment
of the Anuśāsana Parvan known as the Umā-Maheśvara Saṃvāda
(13.126–34), and thus to the Anuśāsana Parvan itself. One may then
conclude that S had a baseline Mahābhārata already available to him
78 Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 29–30.
79 Thennilapuram Mahadevan, “On the Southern Recension of the Mahābhārata,
Brahman Migrations, and the Brāhmī Paleography,” Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies
15.2 (2008): 43–147.
80 Hiltebeitel is now able to revise this date down from the 400–700 CE date offered
in previous discussions thanks to a new dating made by the epigraphist Iravatham
Mahadevan, as communicated orally to Thennilappuram Mahadevan (August 2010).
See Alf Hiltebeitel, “On Sukthankar’s “S” and Some Shortsighted Assessments and Uses
of the Pune Critical Edition (CE),” Journal of Vaishnava Studies 19,2 (Spring 2011):
89–128 and Hiltebeitel, Dharma: Its Early History in Law, Religion, and Narrative.
81 Alf Hiltebeitel, “The Southern Recension Reading of the Śakuntalā Story as Its
First Reading: What It Can Tell Us about the Original and the Second Reading by
Kālidāsa,” in Revisiting Kālidāsa’s Abhijñāna-śākuntalam: Land, Love, Languages: Forms
of Exchange in Ancient India, ed. Deepika Tandon and Saswati Sengupta (New Delhi:
Orient Blackswan, forthcoming); Hiltebeitel, “On Sukthankar’s ‘S’.”
xxxiv introduction
to modify, which suggests a much older date for the epic as a whole
in line with Hiltebeitel’s thinking on the topic.82 If one considers the
evidence above along with Hiltebeitel’s continued exploration of post
quem and ante quem considerations,83 it is clear that, in spite of certain
critics’ dismissal of Hiltebeitel’s chronological argumentation, there are
indeed good reasons for thinking that the “Great-Bhārata” epic, which
also called itself the Bhārata, was composed within a much shorter
period of time than previously thought. As Hiltebeitel argues above,
it puts the onus on those who argue for extensive “interpolation” over
an extended period of time to provide more convincing evidence for
their view.
Second, if this evidence further strengthens Hiltebeitel’s stand-
ing argumentation, why does it matter? The importance of the
Mahābhārata’s dates cannot, of course, lie in the mere fact of dating,
but must lie in what it tells us about the Mahābhārata text itself. Indeed,
as Hiltebeitel suggests in his discussion of some “new possibilities
and limits in considering” the Mahābhārata as itihāsa (“history”) in
chapter 4 of this volume, the evidence in favor of a shorter period of
composition must lead us to rethink what the Mahābhārata means
by its primary genre-identification of itihāsa. Why itihāsa? Why does
the epic use this term, if it can no longer be understood in the sense
that we use the term “history”? In raising these questions, Hiltebeitel
82 Indeed, one of the central intentions of Hiltebeitel’s forthcoming “On Sukthankar’s
‘S’ ” is precisely to demonstrate this.
83 Chapter 4 also considers post quem and ante quem and possibly contemporary
intertexts; see also above following n. 72. To consider all the paths down which
Hiltebeitel has been pursuing clarification on post and ante quem matters, see his
groundbreaking study of Aśvaghosạ ’s Buddhacarita (“Aśvaghosạ ’s Buddhacarita: The
First Known Close and Critical Reading of the Brahmanical Sanskrit Epics,” Journal
of Indian Philosophy 34 [2006]: 229–86), which elaborates on the Mahābhārata’s
intertextual position to demonstrate that Aśvaghosạ , in the first or second century CE,
knew already a Mahābhārata with features that many have thought “late” or “Gupta,”
including Vyāsa’s precedent as a poet-author, the episode of the killing of Jarāsaṃdha,
and some kind of Moksạ dharma Parvan—the latter, a point that Hiltebeitel returns
to in another new essay (“Moksạ and Dharma in the Moksạ dharma”). The longer of
his two new books on dharma (2011; see n. 7 above for citation), which updates the
Buddhacarita article in its chapter 13, also takes these intertextual explorations further
around evidence in the Buddhacarita and the Yuga Purāṇa (on which see chapter 4
of this book) that the Harivaṃśa would be integral to the Mahābhārata project as
conceived and considerably earlier than is usually posited (see also Alf Hiltebeitel,
“Between History and Divine Plan: The Mahābhārata’s Royal Patriline in Context,”
papers from the international workshop on History of Genealogy, Cardiff University,
ed. Simon Brodbeck and James Hegarty, Religions of South Asia [forthcoming]).
introduction xxxv
for the first time84 begins to offer some answers as to why and how
the Mahābhārata uniquely makes “history” its identifying genre term.
Hiltebeitel looks at the major contexts in which the Mahābhārata uses
the term itihāsa to construct what might be called an alternate Vedic
history of the people of a total land.85
Conclusion
Hiltebeitel’s approach is thus literary in realistic and pragmatic ways
that other approaches, to date at least, are not. But it also takes in
the historical implications of the epic’s monumental grandeur and
design. As we have shown above, Hiltebeitel has continued to spend
much energy disputing what have been called diachronic or analytic
approaches that imagine older “Bhāratas” or pre-“normative recension”
strata in the Mahābhārata, plus layerings that would continue to have
been made up to its reaching its present archetypal amplitude and which
can supposedly be mined with the tools of “higher criticism” based on
the axiom that it continued to undergo “fluid” composition into the
fourth to sixth or seventh century CE. Scholars who advance these
lines of research to remove such inconveniences as yugas, bhakti, or
the authorship of the author, are simply underestimating the text they
are dealing with. But Hiltebeitel’s studies have probably even greater
implications for those who carry forward what has usually been called
a synchronic or synthetic approach. Some who try to sustain or at least
credit both approaches concede that a synchronic approach is necessary
insofar as it is indeed necessary to see the text as at some point becom-
ing a whole, such as the Critical Edition archetype reveals. For several
such scholars, it could have reached this form any time from the 4th
to 7th centuries CE or, for a smaller number, even during the earlier
dates that Hiltebeitel proposes. Yet most of these scholars still allow for
the unrealistic view that the Critical Edition gives us a text that could
be the free-fall of numerous centuries rather than the monumental
historically-situated work of genius and rapid textual dissemination and
reception that we can now see that it would have to have been. For such
84 And still more recently in “Between History and Divine Plan” and in Hiltebeitel’s
larger book on dharma (see n. 7 above).
85 See also Hiltebeitel, “The Southern Recension Reading of the Śakuntalā Story”
(cited in n. 81).
xxxvi introduction
scholars, the synchronic text is purely theoretical: a kind of convenient
ahistorical literary artifact suitable for either diachronic analysis or a
kind of stream of consciousness analysis, or both.86
On the contrary, for Hiltebeitel, the envisioning of the Mahābhārata
archetype must have been carried forward by both the hard and enjoy-
able work of joint composition. As he says in chapter 3, it must mean
something where the Mahābhārata says, “For three years the Muni
Krṣ ṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana always got up making the superb Mahābhārata story”
(Mahābhārata 1.56.32).87 And it would also mean that its composition
reflected plans for its rapid and universal dissemination, which would
have soon enough included transmission to the south, where its cus-
todians would have retailored it quite early for it to be appreciated by
new audiences. Hiltebeitel’s thesis is important for scholars and other
readers today, who would simply be missing the boat if they dismissed
the generative historical grandeur of this archetypal text as it was
designed, composed, transmitted, and first received in the centuries
around the turn of the first millennium.
86 While they agree on much else, Hiltebeitel is most opposed to Brodbeck’s views
(The Mahābhārata Patriline: Gender, Culture, and the Royal Hereditary [Aldershot:
Ashgate Publishing], 7–8) on this matter of positing a more or less ahistorical and
what Hiltebeitel calls virtually a stream of consciousness text (personal communication)
for structural analysis. But these comments also apply to the ways Fitzgerald (“Many
Voices”) and others have used the terms synchronic and synthetic to define the limits
of what they allow for in such an approach, and to critique Hiltebeitel’s own approach.
Hiltebeitel does not view his own approach to the Mahābhārata as either synchronic
or synthetic; see Hiltebeitel, “On Sukthankar’s ‘S’.”
87 See now also Hiltebeitel, “The Southern Recension Reading of the Śakuntalā
Story.”
CHRONOLOGY OF WORKS*
1. Books
1976 The Ritual of Battle: Krishna in the Mahābhārata. Symbol Myth
Ritual Series. Ed. Victor Turner. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press. Reprint ed., Albany: State University of New York Press,
1990; Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications, 1991.
1988 The Cult of Draupadī, vol. 1. Mythologies: From Gingee to
Kuruksẹ tra. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Reprint ed.,
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1992.
1991 The Cult of Draupadī, vol. 2. On Hindu Ritual and the Goddess.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1999 Rethinking India’s Oral and Classical Epics: Draupadī among
Rajputs, Muslims, and Dalits. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. Reprint ed., Delhi: Oxford, 2001.
2001 Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to the Educa-
tion of the Dharma King. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Reprint ed., Delhi: Oxford, 2002.
2010 Dharma. South Asian Spirituality Series, Henry Rosemont ed.
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
2011 Dharma: Its Early History in Law, Religion, and Narrative.
South Asia Research Series. Ed. Patrick Olivelle. New York:
Oxford University Press.
2. Edited books
1989 Criminal Gods and Demon Devotees: Essays on the Guardians
of Popular Hinduism. Albany: State University of New York
Press.
* Except for a few articles that were newly written, the articles in these two volumes
represent material previously published elsewhere. The editors would like to take the
opportunity here to thank the many publishers & journals for granting us permission
to reuse this material. Below we also explicitly acknowledge the original source of each
of these contributions.
xxxviii chronology of works
1998 Hair: Its Meaning and Power in Asian Cultures. Co-edited with
Barbara D. Miller. Albany: State University of New York Press.
2000 Is the Goddess a Feminist? The Politics of South Asian God-
desses. Co-edited with Kathleen M. Erndl. New York and Lon-
don: New York University Press and Sheffield.
3. Translations ( from French)
1969 Georges Dumézil, The Destiny of the Warrior. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
1973 Georges Dumézil, The Destiny of a King. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. Paperback reprint ed., 1988.
1985 Mircea Eliade, A History of Religious Ideas, vol. 3: From
Muhammad to the Age of Reforms. Co-translated with Diane
Apostolos-Cappadona. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
2004 Madeleine Biardeau, Stories about Posts: Vedic Variations on the
Hindu Goddess. Co-translator with James Walker and Marie-
Louise Reiniche; co-edited with Reiniche. Chicago: University
Chicago Press.
4. Selected Articles, Including Long Review Articles
[Articles included in this volume are denoted either with an asterisk
(if in volume 1) or a double asterisk (if in volume 2)]
1972 “The Mahābhārata and Hindu Eschatology.” History of Religions
12: 93–115.
1974 “Dumézil and Indian Studies.” Journal of Asian Studies 34:
129–37.
1975 “Comparing Indo-European ‘Epics’,” review of Mythe et
epopee, vols. 2 and 3, by Georges Dumézil. History of Religions
15: 90–100.
1976 “The Burning of the Forest Myth.” Hinduism: New Essays in
the History of Religions. Ed. Bardwell L. Smith. Leiden: Brill.
208–24.
1977* “Nahusạ in the Skies: A Human King of Heaven.” History of
Religions 16: 329–50.
1977 Review of Das Mahābhārata: Das Geschehen und seine Bedeu-
tung, by Heino Gehrts. Erasmus 29, columns 86–92.
chronology of works xxxix
1978** “The Indus Valley ‘Proto-Śiva’: Reexamined through Reflec-
tions on the Goddess, the Buffalo, and the Symbolism of
vāhanas.” Anthropos 73: 767–97.
1979 “Kṛsṇ ̣a in the Mahābhārata: A Bibliographical Essay.”
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 60:
66–110.
1979 “Hindu Mythology and its Evils,” review of The Origins of
Evil in Hindu Mythology, by Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty.
History of Religions 19: 269–75.
1980 “Rāma and Gilgamesh: The Sacrifices of the Water Buffalo
and the Bull of Heaven.” History of Religions 19: 197–223.
1980** “Draupadī’s Garments.” Indo-Iranian Journal 22: 97–112.
1980** “Śiva, the Goddess, and the Disguises of the Pāṇḍavas and
Draupadī.” History of Religions, Twentieth Anniversary
Issue 20: 147–74.
1980–81 “Sītā vibhūsị̄tā: The Jewels for Her Journey.” Indologica
Taurinensia, Ludwik Sternbach Commemoration Volume
8–9: 193–200.
1981** “Draupadī’s Hair.” Autour de la déesse hindoue. Ed. Mad-
eleine Biardeau. Purusạ̄ rtha 5: 179–214.
1982 “Sexuality and Sacrifice: Convergent Subcurrents in the
Firewalking Cult of Draupadi.” In Images of Man: Religion
and Historical Process in South Asia. Ed. Fred W. Clothey.
72–111. Madras: New Era Publications, 1982.
1982* “Brothers, Friends, and Charioteers: Parallel Episodes in
the Irish and Indian Epics.” Homage to Georges Dumézil.
Ed. Edgar C. Polomé. Journal of Indo-European Studies
Monograph, no. 13: 85–112.
1982 “Firewalking through the Mahābhārata: The Cult of
Draupadī and the Great Indian Epic.” The India Magazine
2,4: 18–27.
1983 “Toward a Coherent Study of Hinduism,” review article on
the studies of Madeleine Biardeau. Religious Studies Review
9: 206–12.
1983 “Die Glühende Axt: Symbolik, Struktur und Dynamik in
Chāndogya Upanisạ d 6.” Trans. M. K. Ramaswamy. In
Sehnsucht nach dem Ursprung: Zu Mircea Eliade. Ed. Hans
Peter Duerr. 394–405. Frankfurt am Main: Syndikat, 1983.
1984 “Two South Indian Oral Epics.” History of Religions 24:
164–73.
xl chronology of works
1984* “The Two Kṛsṇ ̣as on One Chariot: Upanisạ dic Imagery and
Epic Mythology.” History of Religions 24: 1–26.
1985 “Two Kṛsṇ ̣as, Three Kṛsṇ ̣as, Four Kṛsṇ ̣as, More Kṛsṇ ̣as: Dark
Interactions in the Mahābhārata.” Essays in the Mahābhārata.
Ed. Arvind Sharma. Journal of South Asian Literature 20:
71–77. Reprinted in Essays on the Mahābhārata. Ed. Arvind
Sharma. Brill’s Indological Library, vol. 1. 101–9. Leiden:
E. J. Brill, 1991.
1985** “Purity and Auspiciousness in the Sanskrit Epics.” Papers
from 1980 Conference on Religion in South India on Purity
and Auspiciousness. Ed. Frédérique Apffel Marglin and John
Carman. Journal of Developing Societies 1: 41–54.
1985** “On the Handling of the Meat, and Related Matters, in Two
South Indian Buffalo Sacrifices.” Divisione delle Carne: Dina-
mica Sociale e Organizzazione del Cosmo. Ed. Christiano
Grottanelli. L’Uomo 9: 171–99.
1988* “Kṛsṇ ̣a at Mathura.” In Mathura: A Cultural Heritage. Ed.
Doris Srinivasan. 93–102. New Delhi: Manohar and Ameri-
can Institute of Indian Studies.
1988 “South Indian Gardens of Adonis Revisited.” In Essais sur
le rituel, vol. 1. Ed. Kristofer Schipper and A. M. Blondeau.
Colloque du Centenaire de la Section des Sciences Religieuses
de l’Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Bibliothèque de l’EPHE
Sciences Religieuses, vol. 92. 65–91. Louvain and Paris:
Peeters.
1988 “The South Indian Draupadi Cult.” Journal of Asian Studies
(Madras) 6,1: 31–37.
1989 “Introduction,” “Draupadī’s Two Guardians: the Buffalo
King and the Muslim Devotee,” and “Selected Bibliography.”
In Criminal Gods and Demon Devotees: Essays on the Guard-
ians of Popular Hinduism. Ed. Alf Hiltebeitel. 1–18, 339–71,
463–72. Albany: State Unniversity of New York Press.
1991 “Of Camphor and Coconuts.” The Wilson Quarterly 15,3:
26–28.
1991** “The Folklore of Draupadi: Sārīs and Hair.” In Gender, Genre,
and Power in South Asian Expressive Traditions. Ed. Arjun
Appadurai, Frank J. Korom, and Margaret A. Mills. South
Asia Seminar Series. 395–427. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania.
chronology of works xli
1991–92 “South Indian Mahābhārata Folk Cults.” In Conférence de
M. Alfred Hiltebeitel, Directeur d’études associé. Annuaire:
Résumé des conférences et travaux. 135–39. Paris: École Pra-
tique des Hautes Études, Section des Sciences Religieuses.
1992** “Colonialist Lenses on the South Indian Draupadī Cult.” In
Ritual, State and History. Festschrift for Jan C. Heesterman.
Ed. A. W. van den Hoek, D. H. A. Kolff, and L. M. S. Oort.
507–31. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
1992** “Transmitting Mahābhāratas: Another Look at Peter
Brook.” The Drama Review 36,3: 131–59.
1994 “Epic Studies: Classical Hinduism in the Mahābhārata and
the Rāmāyaṇa.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute 74: 1–62.
1994 “Are Mantras Meaningful?,” review of Understanding Man-
tras, edited by Harvey P. Alper. Journal of Ritual Studies 8:
125–30.
1995** “Draupadī Cult Līlās.” In The Gods at Play: Lila in South
Asia. Ed. William Sax. 204–24. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
1995 “Religious Studies and Indian Epic Texts.” Religious Studies
Review 21,1: 26–32.
1995** “Dying Before the Mahābhārata War: Martial and Trans-
sexual Body-Building for Arvān̠.” Journal of Asian Studies
54,2: 447–73.
1995 “Folk Religion and the Human Sciences in South India: A
Summer Workshop.” Human Sciences Review 2: 2–5.
1997** “Orders of Diffusion in Two Tamil Mahābhārata Folk
Cults.” South Asian Folklorist 1: 9–36.
1998 “Introduction: Hair Tropes,” and **“Hair Like Snakes and
Mustached Brides: Crossed Gender in an Indian Folk Cult.”
In Hair: Its Meaning and Power in Asian Cultures. Ed. Alf
Hiltebeitel and Barbara D. Miller. 1–9, 143–76. Albany:
State University of New York Press.
1998* “Empire, Invasion, and India’s National Epics.” Interna-
tional Journal of Hindu Studies 2,3: 387–421.
1998 “Conventions of the Naimisạ Forest.” Journal of Indian Phi-
losophy 23: 69–79.
1999** “Kūttāṇtạ var: The Divine Lives of a Severed Head.” In
Ways of Dying: Death and its Meaning in South Asia. Ed.
Elizabeth Schömbucher and Claus Peter Zoller. 276–310. +
Plates 9–14.2. Delhi: Manohar.
xlii chronology of works
1999** “Fathers of the Bride, Fathers of Satī: Myths, Rites, and Schol-
arly Practices.” Thamyris: Mythmaking from Past to Present
6,1: 65–94.
1999 “Reconsidering Bhrg̣ uization.” In Composing a Tradition:
Concepts, Techniques and Relationships. Proceedings of the 1st
Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and
Purāṇas (DISCEP). Ed. Mary Brockington and Peter Schreiner.
155–68. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts.
1999** “Two Ways to Tell a Story: Ālhā in the Bhavisỵ a Purāṇa.” In
The Resources of History: Tradition, Narration, and Nation
in South Asia. Ed. Jackie Assayag. Institut Française de Pon-
dicherry. Etudes thématiques, 8. 96–112. Pondicherry: Ecole
Française d’Extrême Orient.
2000 “Introduction” (co-authored), and **“Draupadī’s Question.”
In Is the Goddess a Feminist? Ed. Kathleen Erndl and Alf
Hiltebeitel. 11–23, 113–22. London: Sheffield.
2000 Review of The Sanskrit Epics, by John Brockington. Indo-
Iranian Journal 43: 161–69.
2001* “Bhīsṃ a’s Sources.” In Vidyārṇavavandanam: Essays in Honor
of Asko Parpola. Ed. Klaus Karttunen and Petteri Koskikallio.
Studia Orientalia, No. 94. 261–78. Helsinki: Finnish Oriental
Society.
2002 “Allusion and Explication in the Gītā’s Epic World.” Journal
of Vaishnava Studies. Issue in honor of Dennis Hudson. 11,1:
131–40.
2000* “The Primary Process of the Hindu Epics.” International
Journal of Hindu Studies 4,3: 269–88.
2003 “India’s Epics: Writing, Orality, and Divinity.” In The Study
of Hinduism. Ed. Arvind Sharma. 114–38. Columbia, SC:
University of South Carolina Press.
2003** Review of Landscapes of Urban Memory; the Sacred and the
Civic in India’s High-Tech City, by Smriti Srinivas.” Journal
of Asian Studies 62,1: 319–22.
2004* “More Rethinking the Mahābhārata: Toward a Politics of
Bhakti.” Indo-Iranian Journal 47: 203—27.
2004* “Role, Role Model, and Function: The Sanskrit Epic Warrior
in Comparison and Theory.” In Playing for Real: Hindu Role
Models, Religion, and Gender. Ed. Jacqueline Suthren Hirst and
Lynn Thomas. 27–50. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
chronology of works xliii
2004 “Kāla” [= “Time”].” Co-authored with Randy Kloetzli. In The
Hindu World. Ed. Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby. 553–86.
London: Routledge.
2004 “Some Preliminary Notes on Women Worshiping Draupadī.”
Festschrift for Dr. S. D. Lourdu. South Asian Folklorist 7:
145–56.
2005* “Buddhism and the Mahābhārata.” In Boundaries, Dynam-
ics, and the Construction of Traditions in South Asia. Ed.
Federico Squarcini. 107–31. Florence: University of Florence
Press.
2005* “On Reading Fitzgerald’s Vyāsa,” review of The Mahābhārata,
vol. 7, trans. by James L. Fitzgerald. Journal of the American
Oriental Society 125,2: 241–61.
2005* “Not Without Subtales: Telling Laws and Truths in the San-
skrit Epics.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 33: 455–511.
2005 Review of Dancing the Self, by William S. Sax. Journal of Rit-
ual Studies 19,1: 138–40.
2005* “Weighting Orality and Writing in the Sanskrit Epics.” In
Epics, Khilas, and Purāṇas: Continuities and Ruptures. Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd Dubrovnik International Conference on
the Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas, Sept. 2002. Ed. Petteri Kosk-
ikallio. 81–111. Zagreb: Croatian Acedemy of Sciences and
Arts.
2005** “Boar and Twins; Comparing the Tulu Kōtị—Cennaya
Pāḍdana and the Tamil Elder Brothers Story.” In In the Com-
pany of Gods: Essays in Memory of Gunther Dietz Sontheimer.
Ed. A. Malik, A Feldhaus, and H. Brückner. 141–75. Delhi;
IGNCA and Manohar.
2006 “Aśvaghosạ ’s Buddhacarita: The First Known Close and Crit-
ical Reading of the Brahmanical Sanskrit Epics.” Journal of
Indian Philosophy 34: 229–86.
2006* “The Nārāyaṇīya and the Early Reading Communities of the
Mahābhārata.” In Between the Empires: Society in India 300
BCE to 400 CE 227–55. Ed. Patrick Olivelle. 257–86. New
York: Oxford University Press.
2006 “Looking for the Kaurava Widows.” In Incompatible Visions:
South Asian Religions in History and Culture. Essays in Honor
of David M. Knipe. Ed. James Blumenthal. 205–16. Madison,
WI: University of Wisconsin-Madison, South Asia Center.
xliv chronology of works
2007* “Kṛsṇ ̣a in the Mahābhārata: The Death of Karṇa.” In Krishna:
A Sourcebook. Ed. Edwin F. Bryant. 23–76. New York: Oxford
University Press.
2007* “Among Friends: Marriage, Women, and Some Little Birds.”
In Gender and Narrative in the Mahābhārata. Ed. Simon
Brodbeck and Brian Black. 110–43. London: Routledge.
2007 Review of The Self-Possessed: Deity and Spirit Possession
in South Asian Literatures and Civilization, by Frederick
M. Smith. Journal of the American Oriental Society 127,3:
631–34.
2009 “Recontextualizing Satire of Dharmaśāstra in the Aggañña
Sutta.” Religions of South Asia 3.1: 77–92.
2010* “Authorial Paths through the Two Sanskrit Epics: Via the
Rāmopākhyāna.” In Epic Undertakings: Papers of the 12th World
Sanskrit Conference, vol. 2. 169–214. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
2010 “Mapping Bhakti through Friendship in the Sanskrit Epics.”
In Epic and Argument in Sanskrit Literary History. Festschrift
for Robert P. Goldman. Ed. Sheldon I. Pollock. 91–116. Delhi:
Manohar.
2011 “On Sukthankar’s ‘S’ and Some Shortsighted Assessments and
Uses of the Pune Critical Edition (CE).” Journal of Vaishnava
Studies 19,2 (Spring): 87–126.
2011 “Just My Imagination? Puzzling through a Duryodhana Fes-
tival near Dharmapuri, Tamilnadu.” In Hinduism in Practice.
Ed. Hilary Rodriguez. 87–103. London: Routledge.
2011 “ ‘You Have to Read the Whole Thing’: Some Reflections on
Madeleine Biardeau’s Mahābhārata.” Du texte au terrain, du
terrain au texte: dialogues disciplinaires autour de l’œuvre de
Madeleine Biardeau, Journée du Centre d’Étude de l’Inde et de
l’Asie du Sud. To appear on the website of the Centre d’études
de l’Inde et de l’Asie du sud; http://ceias.ehess.fr/.
5. Interviews and Profiles
1992 “Mahābhārata,” interview by Steven J. Rosen. In Vaishnavism.
Contemporary Scholars Discuss the Gaudiya Tradi tion. Ed.
Steven J. Rosen. 49–59. New York: Folk Books.
2001 “What I Wanted to Avoid Was an Easy Equation . . .,” inter-
view by Venu. Folklife: A Quarterly Newsletter from National
Folklore Support Centre (Chennai), 1,1 (July): 5–8.
2007 “Professor Profile.” The Asian Connection. 2 (Fall 2007): 4.
chronology of works xlv
6. In Press
N.d. “Dialogue and Apostrophe: A Move by Valmīkī?” In Dialogue
in South Asian Religious Texts. Ed. Brian Black and Laurie
Patton. London: Ashgate.
N.d.* “Mapping Bhakti through Hospitality and Friendship in the
Sanskrit Epics.” In Battles, Bards, Brāhmans: Papers from the
Epics Section of the 13th World Sanskrit Conference, vol. 2. Ed.
John Brockington. 113–38. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
N.d.* “Epic Aśvamedhas.” In Papers from the Fourth International
Vedic Workshop: The Vedas in Culture and History. Ed. Joel
Brereton. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
N.d. “Ritual as Dharma: The Narrowing and Widening of a Key
Term.” In Festschrift for Fred Clothey. Ed. Linda Penkower
and Tracy Pintchman.
N.d.* “The Archetypal Design of the Two Sanskrit Epics.” In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th Dubrovnik International Conference on the
Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas. Ed. Petteri Koskikallio. Zagreb:
Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts.
N.d. “Why Itihāsa? New Possibilities and Limits in Considering the
Mahābhārata as History.” In Ways and Reasons for Thinking
about the Mahābhārata as a Whole. Ed. Vishwa Adluri. Pune:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.
N.d. “The Southern Recension Reading of the Śakuntalā Story as Its
First Reading: What It Can Tell Us about the Original and the
Second Reading by Kālidāsa.” In Revisiting Kālidāsa’s Abhijñā-
naśākuntalam: Land, Love, Languages: Forms of Exchange in
Ancient India. Ed. Deepika Tandon and Saswati Sengupta.
New Delhi: Orient Blackswan.
N.d. “Just My Imagination? Puzzling through a Duryodhana Fes-
tival near Dharmapuri, Tamilnadu.” In Hinduism in Practice.
Ed. Hillary Rodrigues. London: Routledge.
N.d. “Moksạ and Dharma in the Moksạ dharma.” Paper presented
at the Brown University Conference on Early Indian Philos-
ophy in the Mahābhārata, Providence RI, April 9, 2010. In
preparation for a conference volume. Ed. James L. Fitzgerald.
N.d. “Between History and Divine Plan: The Mahābhārata’s Royal
Patriline in Context.” Paper presented at the Cardiff Univer-
sity Workshop: Genealogy in South Asia, May 26–28, 2010. In
preparation for a conference volume. Ed. Simon Brodbeck and
James Hegarty.
xlvi chronology of works
7. Book Reviews
1969 “Dumézil: Epic in the Balance,” review of Mythe et épopée,
vol. 1, by Georges Dumézil. History of Religions: 90–93.
1975 “On Reading van Buitenen’s Vyāsa,” review of The
Mahābhārata, vol. 1, trans. by J. A. B. van Buiten en. His-
tory of Religions 15: 230–232.
1978 Review of The Bhṛgus and the Mahābhārata: Gods, Priests,
and Warriors, by Robert P. Goldman. American Academy
of Religion Journal 46: 76–78.
1980 “Indo-European Marriages,” review of Mariages indo-
européens, by Georges Dumézil. History of Religions 19,4:
837–38.
1981 Review of Les dieux et les hommes: Etude des cultes d’un vil-
lage du Tirunelveli Inde du Sud, by Marie-Louise Reiniche.
Journal of Asian Studies 40,4: 184–85.
1984 Review of Les Fêtes dans le monde hindoue, ed. by Gérard Tof-
fin. Special issue of L’Homme: Revue française d’anthropolo-
gie 22,3. Reprinted in History of Religions 24 (1984): 89.
1986 Review of Discourses on Śiva, ed. by Michael W. Meister.
Religious Studies Review 12,2: 184–85.
1986–87 Review of Wives of the God-King, by Frédérique Apffel
Marglin and Devi and the Spouse Goddess, by Lynn Gatt-
wood. Pacific Affairs 59,4: 713–15.
1987 “Folklore and Hinduism,” review of Another Harmony:
Essays on the Folklore of India, ed. by Stuart H. Blackburn
and A. K. Ramanujan. History of Religions 27,2: 216–18.
1987 Review of L’Espace du temple II: Les Sanctuaires dans le
royaume, ed. by Jean-Claude Galey. Religious Studies Review
13,4: 364.
1987 Review of Hindu Goddesses: Visions of the Divine Feminine
in the Hindu Religious Tradition, by David Kinsley. Pacific
Affairs 60,2: 350-51.
1990 Review of Mitra-Varuna: An Essay on Two Indo-European
Representations of Sovereignty, by Georges Dumézil, trans.
by Derek Coltman. Journal of Religion 70,2: 295–96.
1990 Review of Oral Epics of India, ed. by Peter J. Claus, Stu-
art H. Blackburn, Joyce B. Flueckinger, and Susan Wadley.
Folklore Newsletter 7,2: 3–4.
1990 Review of The Theatre of the Mahābhārata: Terukkuttu Per-
formances in South India, by Richard A. Frasca. Reli gious
Studies Review 17,3: 280.
chronology of works xlvii
1990 Review of Visions of God: Narratives of Theophany in the
Mahābhārata, by James W. Laine. Religious Studies Review
17,4: 374.
1990 Review of The Mahābhārata: A Play Based upon the Classical
Indian Epic, trans. by Jean-Claude Carrière with Peter Brook.
Religious Studies Review 17,4: 280.
1991 Review of Encountering the Goddess: A Translation of the
Devī-Māhātmya and a Study of its Interpret ation, by Thomas
B. Coburn. Religious Studies Review 18,2: 164.
1991 Review of The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki: An Epic of Ancient India,
Volume III, Āraṇyakāṇḍa, trans. by Sheldon I. Pollock. in Reli-
gious Studies Review 18,2: 164.
1991 Review of Mountain Goddess: Gender and Politics in a Hima-
layan Pilgrimage, by William S. Sax. Committee on Women in
Asian Studies (CWAS) Newsletter: 11,1.
1991 Review of Many Rāmāyaṇas: The Diversity of a Narrative Tra-
dition in South Asia, ed. by Paula Richman. Religious Studies
Review 18,4: 355.
1992 Review of Rāmāyaṇa and Rāmāyaṇas, by Monika Thiel-Horst-
mann. Religious Studies Review 19,4: 373.
1993 Review of Purāṇa Perennis: Reciprocity and Transformation
in Hindu and Jaina Texts, ed. by Wendy Doniger. Journal of
Asian Studies 53,2: 587–89.
1994 Review of Mythologies du XXe siècle (Dumézil, Lévi-Strauss, Eli-
ade), by Daniel Dubuisson. Journal of Asian Studies 54,2: 494–96.
1995 Review of From the Margins of Hindu Marriage, ed. by Lind-
sey Harlan and Paul Courtright. Religious Studies Review 22,3:
265–66.
1998 Review of Cooking the World: Ritual and Thought in Ancient
India, by Charles Malamoud. Religious Studies Review 24,4: 445.
1998 Review of Conversions and Shifting Identities: Ramdev Pir and
the Ismailis in Rajasthan, by Dominque-Sila Khan. Religious
Studies Review 24,4: 446.
1998 Review of Gods and Temples in South India, by Winand M.
Callewaert. Religious Studies Review 24,4: 446–47.
2003 Review of Religious Doctrines in the Mahābhārata, by Nicholas
Sutton. in Journal of Asian Studies 63,2: 243–45.
2003 Review of Questioning Rāmāyaṇas: A South Asian Tradition,
ed. by Paula Richmond. Religion 34: 88–92.
2004 Review of Destiny and Human Initiative in the Mahābhārata,
by Julian Woods. Journal of the American Oriental Society
124,1: 184–86.
xlviii chronology of works
8. Encyclopedia and Dictionary Articles and Editing
1982 “Mahābhārata” and ten short entries on Mahābhārata charac-
ters. In Abingdon Dictionary of World Religions. Ed. Larry D.
Shinn et al. Nashville: Abingdon.
1987 “Hinduism,” “Gambling,” “Mahābhārata,” “Kurukshetra,”
“Arjuna,” and “Indus Valley Religion” (co-authored with
Thomas Hopkins). In The Encyclopedia of Religion. Ed. Mircea
Eliade et al. New York: Macmillan Free Press.
1995 Area Editor. Religions of India. In The Harper Collins Diction-
ary of Religion. Ed. Jonathan Z. Smith. San Francisco: Harper-
San Francisco.
1995 “Hinduism,” “Sacrifice, Hinduism,” and about ten other short
entries. In The Harper Collins Dictionary of Religion. Ed. Jonathan
Z. Smith. 424–40, 949–51. San Francisco: Harper-San Francisco.
2001 Board of Editorial Consultants. South Asian Folklore: An Ency-
clopedia. Ed. Margaret A. Mills, Peter J. Claus, and Sarah Dia-
mond. New York and London: Routledge.
2001 “Aravān̠,” “Draupadī,” “Gods and Goddesses,” “Sacrifice,”
“Śamī (tree).” In South Asian Folklore: An Encyclopedia. Ed.
Margaret A. Mills, Peter J. Claus, and Sarah Diamond. 21–22,
165–66, 262–65, 529–30, 536–37. New York and London:
Routledge.
2006 “Mahābhārata” and “Rāmāyaṇa.” In Encyclopedia of India,
vol. 3. Ed. Stanley Wolpert. 82–93; 390–99. Detroit: Thomson
Gale.
2009 “Draupadī and Sītā.” Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism. Ed. Knut
A. Jacobsen, Angelika Malinar, Helene Basu, and Vasudha
Narayanan. Leiden: Brill. 517–33.
9. Work in Progress
N.d. Conversations with Murugan: The Mahābhārata World of a
Priest of Draupadī and Duryodhana. University of Chicago
Press. Co-author with Perundevi Srinivasan.
N.d. Translator, Śalya and Sauptika Parvans. The University of Chi-
cago Press Translation of The Mahābhārata. Gen. ed. James L.
Fitzgerald. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
i. position pieces

CHAPTER ONE
WEIGHTING ORALITY AND WRITING IN THE
SANSKRIT EPICS
Once the divine seers foregathered, and on one scale they hung the
four Vedas in the balance, and on the other scale The Bhārata; and both
in size and weight it was heavier. Therefore, because of its size and its
weight, it is called The Mahābhārata—he who knows this etymology is
freed from all sins.1
In delivering a paper at the First DICSEP Conference in August 1997,
I felt that I could detect sympathy for my views only from a small
number of participants. When I began to prepare that essay for what
was to become the DICSEP Vol. 1 (1999), I decided to preface it with
a brief introduction to try to explain one of the unstated—yet basic—
underlying ideas (see now Hiltebeitel 1999b: 155–157). I feel it is worth
briefly quoting from it as a bridge to this essay: “I believe that the larg-
est inadequacy of Mahābhārata scholarship, including my own up to
1 MBh. 1,1.208; van Buitenen: MBh, 1, p. 31 (this chapter reluctantly accedes to the
editorial preference for the potentially misleading ‘MBh’ over ‘Mbh’ in the volume in
which it appeared). I thank Christopher Minkowski and Yaroslav Vassilkov for their
generous readings of this essay in accordance with that volume’s editorial review policy:
Vassilkov in a five-page single-spaced commentary cited as Vassilkov 2004; Minkowski
in a smaller note and in the margins of a draft. Let me note, however, that in the case
of Vassilkov—long an advocate of archaic oral epic behind the Mahābhārata—I will
not be able to speak to all his reservations and indeed disagreements. But since this is
meant to be a dialogical piece, I respond to his views from time to time. For starters,
he finds my suggestion that this epigram ‘could suggest a written book’ to be ‘highly
doubtful’: “. . . But if so, the same may be suggested for the four Vedas. Were they also
a written book? And if they were, then in what historical period? In the time of the
MBh (I would say—of the late MBh) it was considered that ‘those who write the Vedas,
these surely go to hell’ (MBh 13,24.70, as quoted [later in this essay]). Now the only
choice we have is: 1, to admit that the phrase about scale and ‘weighting’ has no literal
meaning, or 2, to admit that the text of the 1st chapter in the Ādiparvan is much later
than the text of the Anuśāsanaparvan (which is considered to be itself one of the latest
parts of the MBh). I wonder which of the two possibilities the author would prefer”
(Vassilkov 2004: 2). I do not accept the dichotomous reasoning. For a metaphor to
work, it would be perfectly possible to imagine both sides of the scale bearing written
texts even if only one of the texts might at that point have actually been written. Fur-
ther, the cascade of ‘laters’ upon ‘latests’ has never had solid grounding or acceptable
chronological scaffolding (see below, position 12, and Hiltebeitel 2004c).
4 chapter one
1991, is simply the failure to appreciate the epic as a work of literature”
(Hiltebeitel 1999b: 156).
While expressing the reservation that this new prologue did not have
much to do with the piece’s titled topic, the editors graciously found
it pertinent enough to let me add it. In summer 2002, I was pleased to
learn from Aditya Adarkar, author of a recent dissertation on Karnạ
(Adarkar 2001), that he had found that introduction reminiscent of
the development of his own ideas. As his dissertation indicates, he
agreed with my recommendation that ‘all Mahābhārata scholars mark
the turn in Biblical scholarship achieved by Robert Alter’s The Art of
Biblical Narrative’, and was especially unnerved to find me describing
something similar to his own experience in this footnote: “I first read
Alter’s books in September 1997 only to find that the wheel I was
designing to approach the Mahābhārata was in many respects rein-
vented” (Hiltebeitel 1999b: 156–157, n. 9).
I find that there is a lot of convergent work on the Mahābhārata
these days. It is, of course, not for us to decide whether we have been
caught by a Zeitgeist2 or are independently arriving at some valid
insights.
Adarkar’s dissertation also includes an emphasis on the Mahābhārata’s
writtenness, as does another dissertation on Karṇa by Patricia Meredith
Greer (2002). On the other hand, a third recent dissertation on Karṇa
by Kevin McGrath (2001) of Harvard, the fount and still, it seems, the
bastion of oral theory, makes oral formulaic verse one of the tools he
uses to look for what he finds to be ‘archaic’ and Indo-European in
Karnạ as his titular ‘Sanskrit hero’. I mention these recent works to sug-
gest that the playing field seems to be evening out, and to call attention
to work on Karṇa, on whom I will make some points in the third and
final part of this paper.
2 See Egan 2000, similarly critiquing the application of oral formulaic theory to
classical Chinese ‘music bureau’ poems—a reference for which I thank my colleague
Jonathan Chaves.
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 5
A. Cards on the Table, or Shadows on the Sundial3
My cards have thus been on the DICSEP table at least since that intro-
duction revealed the hand I was holding behind the delivery of my
1997 paper, and they are now declared all the more so since my more
recent book, Rethinking the Mahābhārata (Hiltebeitel 2001a), makes
further arguments in favor of writing. But I am not the only one whose
cards are on the table over this issue, and there are many who have not
yet attended DICSEP conferences, such as Adarkar, who have already
played a hand or two. One such scholar just at her first DICSEP meet-
ing in 2002, was Tamar Reich, who likewise favors an emphasis on
writing, and offers an image of the Mahābhārata as a ‘battlefield of
a text’ (Reich 1998), which we might extend likewise to a battlefield
of the scholarly texts it has generated. But for a more irenic image,
I would propose a twenty-four hour clock—an image I borrow with
modification from Baba Ram Das, a.k.a. Richard Alper, the one-time
Harvard associate of Timothy Leary. Ram Das’ clock works as follows
(I recall this allegory from his hilarious talk at The George Washington
University some time in the late 1970s). Everyone is at some moment
of this day. There are 5 a.m. people, 11:59 and 59 seconds p.m. people,
and so on. Midnight is enlightenment. The thing that our two clocks
have in common would be that everyone could find a unique place
on the dial.
Like Salman Rushdie, let us date our current scholarly day back
to August 15, 1947, the midnight moment that marks the indepen-
dence of India and the end of British imperialism there. In terms of
the politics of epic scholarship, this date marks the demise, after several
decades of lingering decline, of a scholarly yesterday geared, among
other things, to the question of the relation between epic and empire.4
And it marks the dawn of a new scholarly interest geared, initially
and above all—and this should surprise no one, since it provided new
ways to reground and even extend Western interests in India—to a
3 I thank Minkowski for this alternative heading and add it (even though it doesn’t
work for the twenty-four hour clock soon to be described) for the parallelism it allows,
and also for its suggestiveness, especially as a reminder that scholarship must seek to
advance even in the dark.
4 In taking up this topic in Hiltebeitel 1998a and 2001a: 5–10, I was not aware of
Aurobindo Ghosh’s fascinating and astute discussion of national epic and empire,
covering both Sanskrit epics, in Ghosh 1991: 19–32 (written in 1901, according to the
unnamed editor [p. 177]).
6 chapter one
r etheorization of Indo-European mythology5 that soon had to share the
lead with theory on orality and oral epic,6 the latter loosely assumed by
some to bear a loose relation to Vedic orality.7 Sometimes these two
approaches have been compounded by arguments for Indo-European
continuities in both myth and metrics,8 but for the most part they have
been little reconciled.
Now, a word about how this clock works. On the one hand, at
least judging from the length of its yesterday, it seems that a scholarly
twenty-four hour day is roughly equal to a century. It includes a night
and day of apparently equal duration. Although I would prefer to asso-
ciate the position of writing with the night, I must reluctantly associate
it with the day, since it is the only one of the two choices for which
the Mahābhārata provides any visible evidence. All oral theory on the
two Sanskrit epics relies on analogy in seeking behind the written the
traces of the oral. From this standpoint, it operates in the dark, quests
for origins, and catches as catch can. But the problem is that those who
live within a scholarly day experience its night and day only in terms
of everyday nights and days in which they find their communication
with colleagues on these matters mixed with dawns and twilights and
countless shades of gray. Positions are not so clear. There are inevita-
bly mixed positions.
The question of the weighting of orality and writing is thus a new
one, with increasing theory and sophistication about both topics.
Before 1947, orality and writing were discussed in Mahābhārata stud-
ies, but naively. For instance, E. W. Hopkins admitted that there is
‘no evidence of an epic before 400 B.C.’ (1901: 397), but ‘imagine[d]’
‘lays’ and the beginnings of an ‘original Bhāratī Kathā’ in a ‘circling
5 See Wikander 1948, and Dumézil 1948 for this Indo-Europeanist project’s start.
6 Advocacy for bringing oral theory to the Sanskrit epics begins, as I now see it thanks
to Vassilkov (2004), with Emeneau 1958, R. K. Sharma 1964, and Sen 1966, and then
continues with M. C. Smith 1972 (and now 1992); P. A. Grintser (as summarized by de
Jong 1975); J. D. Smith 1980, 1987; Ingalls & Ingalls 1991; Vassilkov 1995, 1999, 2002
(and in two early 1970s papers summarized by de Jong 1975); Brockington as early as
1969 and now in his 1998, 1999a, 1999b, and 2000: 339–352; and Söhnen-Thieme 1999.
I thank Vassilkov for improving my account of this chronology and lineage. I have fol-
lowed his suggestion that the list ‘in fact should start with the name of M. B. Emeneau
and with his article on oral poetry of the Todas, published, as it seems, in the late 1950s,
since both Sharma and Sen ‘developed [his] ideas’. But therein lies the difficulty that,
while Emeneau does briefly discuss the oral features of the Sanskrit epics, I am not
convinced that Toda oral poetry can inform us about them.
7 See for example Brockington 1999a: 121; 1999b: 136; Vassilkov 2002: 26.
8 See most notably Watkins 1995.
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 7
narration’ that ‘may lie as far back as 700 B.C. or 1700 B.C., for ought
we know’ (p. 386). Sukthankar (1933: cii) spoke loosely of oral fluidity,
and Edgerton (1944: xxxvi–xxxvii) took him to task for it, favoring a
written archetype. C. V. Vaidya, on the other hand, assumed Vyāsa,
Vaiśampāyana, and Ugraśravas were all writers (Vaidya 1907: 21,
38–40, 69, 220–221, 266). Now we have sophisticated theory at each
end of a spectrum that runs from Albert Lord to Jacques Derrida.
It is thus a complex question, and people who favor one approach or
the other are not certain to agree on that much else, while people who
disagree might otherwise agree about much else. Once one opens the
box, all kinds of things fly out. Writing and orality cannot be reduced
to a simple opposition, a dividing binary.9 Yet the more one looks, the
more one sees that the issue touches (or can touch, if one chooses to
puzzle over it) virtually anything in the Mahābhārata—indeed, in both
Sanskrit epics—that one wishes to discuss. I submit that if we defined
this clock’s hours and minutes by the issues that intersect with those
of writing and orality and assign them numbers—10 a.m. for surface
and 10 p.m. for depth; 11 a.m. for notions of what is historical and
11 p.m. for notions of what is archaic; noon for multiple authorship
versus midnight for single authorship; 1 p.m. for a short period of
composition versus 1 a.m. for a long one; 3 p.m. for pros of the Criti-
cal Edition and 3 a.m. for its cons; 4 p.m. for literary conventions and
4 a.m. for oral formulae and themes; 5 p.m. for Brahmans and 5 a.m. for
Ksạ triyas and bards; dawn for parts and dusk for the whole . . . etc.—our
current scholarly day, with not only hours but minutes and moments,
would have singular nuanced positions for all DICSEP conferees, as
well as for our friends and colleagues elsewhere, at every tick.
Let me illustrate, however, by the recent disagreement I find myself
(and perhaps also Charles Malamoud)10 in with Madeleine Biardeau:
a scholar who has not ceased to inspire me since 1967, and one with
whom I continue to be classified along with Georges Dumézil as
‘structuralist’ and/or ‘symbolist’ whenever scholars lately survey the
9 For a discussion recognizing this complexity and weighting the balance more
toward orality, see Brockington: HdO [1998], pp. 115–116.
10 See Malamoud 2002: 127–146 (‘Noirceur de l’écriture’), especially 132 and
166–167, nn. 21–22. Biardeau (2002, I: 748, n. 2) cites an earlier 1997 article version
of this chapter, leaving it uncertain whether she perceives Malamoud to disagree with
her views mentioned below.
8 chapter one
history of Mahābhārata studies.11 The ‘structuralist’/’symbolist’ label is
of course meant to date this so-called approach and provide a conve-
nient means to kill three birds with one stone, usually at the expense of
attending to ways in which the three scholars in question differ,12 and
more seriously, at the expense of recognizing that scholars revise and
change their views over time, and often take up new tacks, including
historical interests. That has certainly been the case with Biardeau’s
recent dating of both epics in relation to the reign of Aśoka, next to
which she considers the problem of orality and writing ‘secondary’
and ‘highly improbable’ as an anachronism of the ‘machine age’.13
Nonetheless, recognizing that ‘Today, certain specialists think that it
is materially impossible to regard [the MBh] as an oral composition
because of its dimensions’, she weighs in for orality in the name of
Brahmans’ memories, the possibility that they could conceive a work
on this scale,14 and their habitation of a Vedic ‘universe of sounds’
(Biardeau 2002, II: 747–749). But what is the status of secondary
problems? Is there not a difference between ‘conceiving’ the scale and
dimensions of the Mahābhārata and producing it, not to mention
remembering and reproducing it orally? Granted we must understand
the epic poets to value the word in a world of Vedic sound. And let us
also appreciate that Biardeau does not subordinate their creativity to
a prior bardic oral tradition that they would have stolen, or appropri-
ated. But I do not think one can so easily treat a rapport between the
conversion of Aśoka and the composition of the Mahābhārata by leav-
ing writing as a secondary problem imposed by the machine age. As
with the Homeric epics, the question has been around for a long time,
and we must admit it. It makes a difference. That, in any case, is the
burden of this essay, for, as even my dearest friends are prone to ask
me, does it really matter? Two remarks by A.K. Ramanujan provide a
good point of departure: ‘In India . . ., no one ever reads the Rāmāyaṇa
or the Mahābhārata for the first time’ (1991b: 46); and again, ‘No
Hindu ever reads the Mahābhārata for the first time’ (1991a: 419).
11 See, e.g., Reich 1998: 285 Brockington: HdO [1998], pp. 65–75; Inden 2000: 98,
n. 40; Sutton 2000: xv, 461; Greer 2002: 34–38.
12 I would consider myself a post-structuralist structuralist in still eschewing noc-
turnal quests for origins, but not as a ‘symbolist’, which is a bit too problematic a label
for a post-structuralist.
13 See Hiltebeitel 2005b for a more detailed discussion of Biardeau’s discussion of
writing and orality and her hypothesis on Buddhism.
14 ‘. . . concevoir une oeuvre à cette échelle’ (Biardeau 2002, II: 748).
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 9
My underlying argument and indeed conclusion is that, whatever pre-
ceded the Mahābhārata orally, cultically, or in other unknown forms,
the Poona Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata shows that for about
two millennia the work that has moved people is a book, and that in
that sense one must speak of all its audiences—oral ones included—as
readers. Indeed, the text created a ‘reading community’.15 One can-
not posit a pre-written Mahābhārata simply on the analogy of other
oral epics.16 Nowhere has oral epic been found to have emerged in a
literary vacuum, such as is now posited for Vedic India and, by and
large, for pre-classical Hinduism. Medieval and later South Asian oral
epics, such as we can find them, all presuppose not only surrounding
literary worlds, but contemporaneous oral versions of the Rāmāyaṇa
and Mahābhārata themselves as part of the primary cultural work of
‘reading’ that they carry forward (see Hiltebeitel 1999a: 8). They are
not convincing evidence of preliterate versions of the Sanskrit epics.
In favor of such an approach, let me now turn to the second part of
this essay on positions, fancies, and evidence.
B. Positions,17 Fancies, Evidence
Here I will try to set forth an orderly statement of the ideas about writ-
ing and orality that run through my recent work in the two ‘rethinking’
books on Indian oral and classical epics (Hiltebeitel 1999a; 2001a), but
especially the second one on the Mahābhārata, and some more recent
essays. I will mention the Rāmāyaṇa, or ‘the two epics’, where clarity
requires, but the main focus is on the Mahābhārata. I will try to divide
15 See now Hiltebeitel 2003d, where I begin to adapt this terminology, so richly
developed for the Maṇimēkalai by Anne Monius (2001: 9–10, 35–36 and passim), to
the Mahābhārata.
16 Here, I am not persuaded by Vassilkov’s reconstruction of a formative phase of
archaic oral Mahābhārata out of parallels in the use of similes in the Karṇaparvan
(Vassilkov 2002); see below, section C.
17 Originally, my term here was ‘arguments’, but 1 bow to Minkowski’s counsel to
call them something else (suggesting ‘principles, assertions, or assumptions’) since, as
he puts it, ‘nothing is argued in any individual one of them’. I have preferred ‘positions’,
even after the thoughtful e-mail advice of T. P. Mahadevan (May 2004) to call them
‘19 theses, nailed with a wooden nail on the udumbara pole at Naimisạ yāgaśāla’—as
‘storming the orthodoxy’ (presumably he means modern scholarly orthodoxy). Beyond
the ‘evidence’ offered later in this section, back-up arguments can in most cases also
be found in Hiltebeitel 1999a and 2001a, and additional arguments in my more recent
essays footnoted below.
10 chapter one
these ideas and their treatment into positions, fancies, and evidence,
recognizing, of course, that evidence can at best be only cumulative
and circumstantial, and that, as with ‘facts’ and notions of ‘daylight’,
authors can have idiosyncratic ideas and a penchant to deceive them-
selves. I treat these matters briefly, skeletally, and telegraphically. The
edifice is provisional, though I hope not a house of cards.
Nineteen positions
1. There is no 800–1000 year post-Upanisạ dic ‘epic period’ up to and
including the Guptas during which the epic developed or accreted
into being.
2. It is not necessary to posit royal patronage for the epic’s produc-
tion. Nor can a convincing case be made for any particular king
as patron.
3. The epic need not reflect the experience of one king or dynasty, either
at the beginning, in the case of the Aśoka and/or the Mauryas or
Pusỵ amitra and/or the Śuṅgas, or at its completion, in the case of
the Guptas.
4. Rather, it is more plausible to regard the composers of the epic as
reflecting upon a long and from their perspective dismal period of
history.
5. Th ere are ample reasons to consider the Mahābhārata and the
Rāmāyaṇa as ‘epics’ despite the fact that there is no common Indian
term to designate them as such. This means we have an historical
problem in explaining the introduction of this new genre.
6. This problem can be addressed by positing, as does David Quint
(1993), a link between empire and the epic genre.18
7. Th is means that one must consider the possibility of Greek influ-
ence. Alternately, India’s experiences of empire both outside and in
18 I have not wanted to be pinned down to defining ‘epic’ as a genre other than to
invoke Quint’s genric discussion of Western epics and their relation to empire as a use-
ful comparison. But I am not persuaded by Vassilkov’s use of the terms like ‘pre-epic’
and ‘proto-epic genres’ to aid the quest for archaic oral elements of the Mahābhārata
(Vassilkov 2002: 25–26). In working toward a genric definition, however, I find Masaki
Mori’s attempt, itself based on an East-West comparison, quite congenial: ‘a work can
be called “epical” when it deals seriously with the question of death, involves the fate
of a large group of people, and explores a vast spatial and temporal expanse’ (Mori
1997: x), to which is appended ‘a grand systematicity’ (p. xi). It is interesting to see
Vanstiphout introduce ‘the world’s first written epics’ along similar lines (Vanstiphout
2003: 4–6, 9–11).
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 11
its own history could have been a sufficient catalyst to the develop-
ment of the epic genre.
8. Th e epics (and particularly the MBh) make numerous concealed
and knowing references to the heterodoxies and subsume the het-
erodox movements, including Buddhism, vaguely under the rubric
of nāstikya, heresy. If Buddhism has pride of place here as the
chief thorn in the poets’ side, as seems more and more likely,19 it
is denied it by the non-specificity of the nāstikya category.
9. A history, traced back to the origins of the universe, is thus created
that excludes the heterodoxies: ‘Whatever is here may be found
elsewhere; what is not here does not exist anywhere’ (MBh 1,56.33;
18,5.38) is not an encyclopedic slogan but an ontological claim
about what counts as real, as the heterodoxies do not.20 The terms
itihāsa (perhaps implying cumulative if not consecutive tradition)
and purāṇa (‘stories of old’) are probably equally important in
understanding how this history is constructed.
10. O ne can also posit knowledge of other peoples’ histories, and that
such other peoples could be known not only by contact, proxim-
ity, or invasion (as in the case of epic references to Greeks and
Śakas), but by their histories, as in the case of the epics’ mention
of Cīnas, Hūṇas, Antioch, and Rome.
11. The Mahābhārata, and probably both epics, would thus have
likely been composed (or produced) during a period that reflected
such conditions. These are best met between 150 B.C. and the year
Zero—a time that could plausibly mark the early development of
Sanskrit writing toward this end.21
12. I argue that a short period of one or two generations is sufficient
to account for this composition or production and, more impor-
tant, necessary to account for the epic’s artistry and design.22 If
19 See now Hiltebeitel 2005b.
20 The term nāstikya’s semantic force is too philosophically precise to benefit from
Vassilkov’s preference for an analogy with ‘a typical epic use’ of ‘pagans’ with reference
‘not only to heathens, but also to Muslims and even to Christians of other denomina-
tions’ (Vassilkov 2004: 3).
21 Cf. Brockington 1999b: 136–137, noting that ‘the Dīpavaṃsa records that the Bud-
dhist canon was committed to writing at a date toward the end of the first century B.C.
This is a little earlier than the period of the 1st century A.D.’ favored by Brockington
for the transition to writing of the Sanskrit epics, but still a date that ‘possibly suggests
a general trend towards writing of texts around then’.
22 See now Hiltebeitel 2004c for extensive discussion on these interrelated matters
of design and timespan of composition.
12 chapter one
we detect 5 interpolations or raw joins in the text of the Critical
Edition, we are entitled to ask the question, ‘How late is late?’
An interpolation or loose join is not evidence of the haphazard
work of centuries. Within a two generation span, specific joins
could be the result of a week’s work and waiting, or a month’s,
or a decade’s. . . .23 A corollary is that the Mahābhārata is neither
monstrous (see Hiltebeitel 2001a: 1) nor fluid.
13. S uch production is best imagined as a work of composite authorship:24
by a committee, group, équipe, syndicate, symposium, sanġ am,
sattra, or whatever one wants to call it. Indeed, following a con-
versation with Michael Witzel at the 2002 DICSEP conference, I
would now propose that the best term might be ‘atelier’, on the
analogy with the workshops of the Italian Renaissance painters:
what is done under the master’s name would follow his overall
guidance, inspiration and design, and have no more than his occa-
sional and final touches.25 I also argue that such composite author-
ship has been represented in the text: particularly in its three
frames.26
14. As represented in this triple recitation, orality in the Mahābhārata
is thus a literary trope. It is likewise a literary trope in the
23 Finding himself ‘astonished most of all’ at my position on a short period of com-
position, Vassilkov (2004: 4) says, ‘With full certainty I can say that it is absolutely
impossible’. He cites John Brockington’s discussion (1999a: 134) of Vassilkov’s contrast
between adjacent Strīparvan adhyāyas at a workshop on epic orality at the 1997 DICSEP
1 meeting: MBh 11,16 reveals late ideas and is ‘unequivocally a later interpolation’,
while 11,17 shows archaic ideas and represents ‘the legacy of oral tradition’. Vassilkov
now summarizes his contribution further: MBh 11,17 makes use ‘of epic formulaic style
(not the clichés, but flexible improvised formulaic expressions based on traditional pat-
terns)’ along with ‘typical epic vocabulary . . . [to] express archaic mythological concepts’,
whereas 11,16 has ‘a style similar to that of kāvya poetry . . . [and] words from Classical
Sanskrit vocabulary as well as religious notions and symbols totally opposite in their
meaning to the archaic world-view’ (Vassilkov 2004: 4). But dating portions of a text
by one’s own history of ideas is not reliable. Vassilkov is joined by von Simson (1990:
44–45) in permitting ‘kāvya-like syntax’ to assign lateness, but here too the origins of
kāvya in and outside the Mahābhārata are unresolved. For instance, there has been
little resistance to dating Vālmīki’s Ādikāvya to quite early periods, even before the
Mahābhārata.
24 See now Hiltebeitel 2004c for further treatment.
25 I note that von Simson (1990: 45) precedes me in speaking similarly of ‘the
workshop of the later Mahābhārata authors’, who generate passages that show ‘kāvya
influence’ (p. 45 and passim)—but only once one has made ‘the transition from oral
to written composition’.
26 See Hiltebeitel 2006a.
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 13
Rāmāyaṇa’s portrayal of the relation between Vālmīki and Kuśa
and Lava.
15. F urther, in both epics, bards are conduits between texts that origi-
nate with Brahmans—both in the stories themselves, and in the
actual production and transmission that would have occurred.
16. Accordingly, Mahābhārata composition would have occurred along
the lines that Velcheru Narayana Rao (1993) attributes to purāṇa
composition, producing a kind of ‘oral literacy’ or ‘literate orality’,
with the composition done by ‘scholars . . . proud of their knowledge
of grammar and their ability to possess a written text of what they
perform orally’. The text would promote itself through oral dissem-
ination, thereby producing a text by which ‘professional literati’
could engage and create ‘literate audiences’ even among ‘illiterates’
through oral performance.27 A ‘written dynamism’ (M. M. Mehta
1971: 97), however, best explains this epic’s composition both in its
inception and in its northern and southern redactorial variations.
17. S uch authors would have been up to a mastery of varied meters,
and would have been well able to use them to stylistic ends, such
as juxtaposition above all, but also archaism and Vedic imitation
and/or overtones.
18. O ne of the two most important things to keep in mind in interpret-
ing the relation between Veda and epic is allusion. The Mahābhārata
is saturated with Vedic allusions; applying Eric Auerbach’s memo-
rable phrase for the Bible, it is ‘fraught with [Vedic] background’
(Auerbach 1968: 15; cf. Hiltebeitel 2001a: 137, n. 20).28 Something
similar can be said of the Rāmāyaṇa if one recognizes that the
27 See above at footnote 15, and below, evidence item 9.
28 Vassilkov (2004: 4) feels that ‘ “Vedic allusions” cannot be used as an argument
for its [the MBh’s] “writtenness” or for its “Brahmanic” origin, because “Vedic” allu-
sions (most of them merely archaic mythological motifs, common for Veda and Epic)
penetrated of [all?] spheres of an Aryan’s life. In the early Epic there are also many
unmistakable allusions to non-Vedic archaic culture (pre-classical, according to Jan
Heesterman).’ I believe Vassilkov underestimates the specificity, complexity, and diver-
sity of Vedic allusions in the Mahābhārata and the investment of its Brahman authors
in keeping them vibrant and relevant, especially in the domain of ritual and sacrifice
that ranges far beyond ‘merely archaic mythological motifs’. Even if such allusiveness
would only be circumstantial evidence for writing, it is clearly evidence of ‘ “Brahmanic”
origin’. I would further argue that many allusions to ‘non-Vedic archaic culture’ (e.g.,
the Pāṇḍavas’ polyandry; their hiding their weapons with their grandmother’s corpse
in the śamī tree) are presented from this allusive ‘Vedic’ angle.
14 chapter one
allusions in the latter are less enigmatic and less given to ironic
distancing.29
19. Second, I continue to be persuaded by Biardeau’s argument that
the Mahābhārata undertakes a thoroughgoing bhakti rereading
of the Vedic revelation. Notions of the divinization of such fig-
ures as Rāma and Kṛsṇ ̣a, of ‘inept mythification’,30 and axiomatic
readings of bhakti figures or passages as ‘late’ interpolations have
been sustained only by pseudo-histories and hermeneutics alien
to these texts.
Two fancies
1. I am intrigued by the prominence that the epic poets give to the
practice of uñchavṛtti Brahmans, Brahmans reduced to poverty
who live a married life and feed their guests and family by ‘glean-
ing’ grain. The ‘strict’ (śisṭ ạ ) practice is described to Yudhisṭḥ ira
at several dramatic moments, and may, I suggest, be emblematic
of the self-image of the epic poets, living at a time when not only
Brahmans would be out of sorts, but when kings of a Brahmani-
cal bent might be not much in evidence, not much in power, not
much in position to grandly patronize poets, and not much in the
way of being legitimate Ksạ triyas.31
2. I propose that the story of Śuka, Vyāsa’s son, is an allegory of
writing, describing the scene under which Vyāsa imparts the
Mahābhārata as fifth Veda not only to the four Brahman disciples
who include Vaiśampāyana, but to the son he has before his three
other sons Dhṛtarāsṭṛa, Pāṇḍu, and Vidura. That is, he imparts
the Mahābhārata to Śuka and the other four disciples before it
could have happened. This would be a sign of fiction. One of the
images that suggests an allegory of writing is the churning of the
firesticks that gives birth to Śuka, which I interpret as a metaphor
for churning out semen (and with it, the production of instant
character) as analogous to the churning out of text. I propose that
29 Cf. Biardeau 1997: 87: ‘Personally, I was struck, as I have made clear, that the
links with Vedic literature were looser in the R than in the MBh, though both epics
have some connection with it.’
30 See Vassilkov 2000: 13, here in agreement.
31 On this latter point, see Hiltebeitel 1999a: 442–462; 2001a: 112–113, 181–192;
2004a: 27–36.
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 15
a second hint at writing comes with the impartation of this fifth
Veda on the ‘back of the mountain’,32 which seems to be where
Vyāsa has his mysterious Himalayan hermitage, from which Śuka
parts for moksạ . I propose that ‘the back of the mountain’ is an
image for the mise en scène of writing.
Fifteen types of evidence
1. Epic vocabularies for empire
Although Biardeau (2002, I: 299, 845; II: 771) argues that the epics
do not mean empire by the term saṃrājya, it would seem she would
have to concede that they use the term to talk about it if she considers
Jarāsaṃdha a cryptic figure for Aśoka.33 In any case, as Witzel has
demonstrated, with the eastward movement of Vedic culture, the ‘word
mahārājya—“reign of a great king”—occurs for the first time in Vedic’
in one of the ‘later parts’ of the Aitareyabrāhmaṇa (7.18), indicating
that ‘the concept of imperial overlordship, based on the aśvamedha
sacrifice, has gained great importance and will lead, not too late after
the Brāhmaṇa period, to the first large empire of Magadha’ (Witzel
1987: 187). Śatapathabrāhmaṇa 13.5.4.1–22 further describes fourteen
kings (several overlapping with those mentioned in the Mahābhārata’s
‘Sixteen Kings Story’, plus Janamejaya Pāriksịta) who gained sway by
aśvamedhas. The epic would seem to revisit this Vedic material in the
light of Magadha history.
2. Writing by the 3rd century B.C.
Current scholarship seems to hold that at least by the 3rd century
B.C., Brahmans in ‘the heartland of India’ were literate (Salomon 1995:
279). But the only script in evidence at that time is Brāhmī, which was
perhaps developed for the Aśokan inscriptions (Falk 1993: 177–239,
339; Salomon 1995: 273, 276; 1998, 28, 56). According to Harry Falk, ‘a
thorough reorganization of the northern Brāhmī happened around the
turn of the millennium (der Zeitenwende), when an increasing number
of authors used this new script for Sanskrit. Then in a few decades the
system was so perfected that it survives almost unchanged in many
32 I discuss this particular convention further in Hiltebeitel 2004c.
33 Biardeau 2002, 1: 219–220; II: 278–279, n. 10 and passim. See also Hiltebeitel
2005b.
16 chapter one
different scripts based on the same system’ (Falk 1993: 339). F ollowing
Dani (1963: 52), Falk relates these innovations to the introduction of
the broad pen and ink (Falk 1993: 317–318), which Salomon (1998:
31–34) finds being used slightly earlier in the 1st century B.C. The
Mahābhārata could have been one of the texts composed within such
a culturally productive flurry (see footnote 21 above).
3. The Critical Edition as textual archetype
Some scholars, myself included,34 have reached the conclusion that the
Critical Edition is evidence of an archetype, and that this archetype
must have been written. With this, there is some tendency to agree
that such an archetype must define a synchronic moment.35
4. Nothing of epic before what we have in writing
The name Kṛsṇ ̣a Devakīputra occurs in Chāndogya Upanisạ d 3.17.6.
As with numerous other epic names that appear in Vedic texts, they
provide an anchor for the epic poets in the Vedic revelation (Biardeau
2002, II: 319). But they miss providing us with the epic’s main
characters,36 and they give no indication of an epic in Vedic times.
Not until Pāṇini—probably from the mid-4th century B.C.—is there
mention of distinctive Mahābhārata names, with citations of Arjuna
and Vāsudeva (Asṭ ạ̄ dhyāyī 4.3.98), “Mahābhārata” itself (6.2.38), and
Yudhisṭḥ ira (83.95) to exemplify various grammatical rules. If Pāṇini
knows a Mahābhārata story in some genre and a cult for Arjuna and
Vāsudeva, one cannot infer that he knew of a pre-2nd-century epic,
much less an oral one. The Rāmāyaṇa supplies our most immediate
analogy here, for if we know anything of a pre-Vālmīki Rāma story,
34 See Hiltebeitel 2001a: 24 for a list. For further discussion, see Hiltebeitel 2004c
and 2006a.
35 With, however, varied views on the historical dimensions of this moment: see
Hiltebeitel 2001a: 24, and further discussion in Hiltebeitel 2004c, where I attempt to
clarify my view that it would have taken ‘somewhere between . . . three years and [a]
couple of generations’. The three years comes from MBh 1,56.32: ‘For three years the
Muni Kṛsṇ ̣a. Dvaipāyana always got up making this superb Mahābhārata story’ (see
Hiltebeitel 2001a: 169, n. 13). I believe John Brockington (1999b: 137) is not right to
link this three-year span with time it might take to recite the epic in full.
36 I cannot agree with Vassilkov that the ‘mystic name’ Arjuna/Phālguna for Indra
‘even in some old Vedic texts, like Śatapathabrāhmaṇa 2.1.2.11’ refers to the Arjuna
of the Mahābhārata, and thus that ‘Arjuna’s mythological connection and, in a sense,
identity to Indra in the early layer of the MBh’s content is indisputable’ (Vassilkov
2002: 18–19). Rather, I take the epic naming of Arjuna ‘Phālguna’ as a case of probable
allusion, at least in part, to this Vedic passage.
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 17
e.g., from Buddhist sources or from the Mahābhārata, it is that what
we know is not epic.37 Vassilkov (2004: 5) wonders what other genre
than ‘an epic story’ could be behind Pāṇini’s references.38 Indeed,
Pāṇini’s references provide the most troubling counter-evidence to
my argument, since they suggest something prior to the date I favor,
and almost certainly something oral. But I believe there are other pos-
sibilities more likely than oral epic. As with the Rāmakathā material
just mentioned, there could be praise narratives, golden age vignettes,
folk-tales, cult legends, etc.39—as in ‘the matter of Britain’ that would
have preceded Mallory. Alternately, though it is not my preferred type
of explanation, one cannot rule out that these references in Pāṇini
might have been interpolated.
5. Writing mentioned in the epics
As has long been known, the Mahābhārata does know and use terms
for writing.40 Recently, Malamoud has noted that among the rare
passages where writing is mentioned, two refer explicitly to ‘accoun-
tants and scribes’ (gaṇakalekhkāḥ): MBh 2,5.62, where Nārada asks
Yudhisṭḥ ira whether he has such requisites in his royal court; and
15,20.71, where Yudhisṭḥ ira relies on the very same to record the gifts
he makes to Brahmans at the śrāddha death ceremonies he performs
for Bhīsṃ a, Droṇa, Somadatta, Bāhlīka, and Duryodhana and the other
Kauravas!41 Malamoud also cites the well known passage where Bhīsṃ a
tells Yudhisṭḥ ira, ‘Sellers of the Vedas, corrupters of the Vedas, and
those who write the Vedas, these surely go to hell’,42 asking whether we
37 See Hopkins 1930, especially p. 90: ‘the original mythological Rāma’, whom
Hopkins posits on the basis of Rāma’s portrayals in the Mahābhārata’s ‘Sixteen Kings
Narratives’, is a ‘golden age’ paragon whose model features ‘were taken over by the
epic writers . . . [who] added to these traits of Nārada’s Rāma the whole story of Rāvaṇa,
Laṅkā, and Hanumat . . . [and] Sītā’.
38 Minkowski also comments on the margins of my earlier draft that I seem to be
‘question-begging’ here: how can we have these characters but not ‘epic’.
39 cf. Brockington 1999b: 136.
40 Dalhmann 1895: 186–188; Falk 1993: 268–269, 304; Brockington: HdO [1990],
p. 229.
41 Malamoud 2002: 132, 166–167, translating the compound as ‘comptables et scribes’
and citing these verses in the ‘Vulgate’. cf. van Buitenen: MBh, II, p. 42: ‘tellers and
recorders’; Ganguli 1970, XII: 212: ‘tellers and scribes’. Allowing for mental accounts-
keeping, I forego the first meaning for ‘comptable’ in Harrap’s Mini Dictionnaire:
‘bookkeeper’.
42 vedavikrayinaś caiva vedānāṃ caiva dūsakaḥ/vedānaṃ lekhakāś caiva te vai
nirayagāminaḥ//(MBh 13,24.70). See footnote 1 above.
18 chapter one
must include it ‘parmi les parties récentes’ like the clearly interpolated
Gaṇeśa-as-scribe passage (Malamoud 2002: 166–167, n. 21). Per-
haps without quite saying so, this passage reflects a subtle distinction
between the maintenance of oral Veda and the composition of a new
‘fifth Veda’. Similarly, when the demons Madhu and Kaitạ bha steal the
Vedas from Brahmā at the time of creation, hide in the Rasā current
of the great ocean, bind the Vedas together and throw them into Hell
(the Rasātala), whence they are orally rescued by Visṇ ̣u-Nārāyaṇa in
his form of Hayaśiras, the Horse’s Head (MBh 12,335.21–26), it is not
hard to appreciate that while the Vedas are oral in the horse’s mouth,
they are manuscripts—indeed, books—in the hands of demons.43
Again, when Ugraśravas tells us (in this article’s opening epigram)
that the Mahābhārata weighs more on a scale than the four Vedas, we
must choose whether to take this weight metaphorically or to allow
that it could suggest a written book, at least for the Mahābhārata. In
any case, the Mahābhārata knows a whole vocabulary of texts that
suggest books. When the Naimisạ Forest sages request Ugraśravas to
recite, they say,
We wish to hear that wonderworker Vyāsa’s collection (saṃhitā) of
the Bhārata, the history (itihāsa), that most excellent communication
(ākhyānavarisṭḥ a), diversified in quarter-lines and sections (vicitrapadapar-
van), with subtle meanings combined with logic (sūksṃ ārthanyāyayukta)
and adorned with Vedic meanings (vedārthair bhūsịta), which the Ṛsị
Vaiśampāyana properly recited with delight at the sattra of Janamejaya
by Dvaipāyana’s command—holy, connected with the meanings of books
(granthārthasaṃyuta), furnished with refinement (saṃskāropagata),
sacred, supported by various Śāstras (nānāśastropabṛṃhita), equalled
by the four Vedas, productive of virtue, and dispelling of the fear of sin
(MBh 1,1.16–19).
Even while acknowledging such a bookish lexicon, this ‘fifth Veda’
wants to appear oral.44
43 See Hiltebeitel 2005b.
44 Noting that this evidence ties in with position 14 above, Vassilkov (2004) asks,
‘But what could be the reason for the tendency in the late Epic to describe its transmis-
sion in the past as oral transmission? The only possible answer seems to be that the
transmission of the Epic in the past really was oral, and that such was the image of the
Epic’s transmission in the past preserved by the people’s memory’. I believe, rather,
that ‘the people’ could hardly be the source of these tropes, ‘late’ or otherwise, but
rather that they had their epic memories constructed for them by the text’s Brahman
authors from the ground up. ‘The people’ are not further clarified, but they seem to be
invoked repeatedly in an interactive dynamic that Vassilkov (2002: 16) imparts to ‘the
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 19
6. Joins, divisions, juxtapositions, fits
Writing is suggested by the divisions of the epic texts: the parvans
(‘joins’) and adhyāyas (‘readings’)45 of the Mahābhārata; the kāṇḍas
(‘joints’ as of a reed or cane)46 and sargas (‘streams’, ‘cantos’) of
the Rāmāyaṇa. In their juxtapositions, fits, beginnings and endings
they often show artistry and careful design. I have yet to see a good
a rgument from those who propose prior orality that such divisions
are artificial and late. Regarding the different number and points of
division in the Rāmopakhyāna (the Rāma story in the Mahābhārata)
and the Rāmāyaṇa, I regard this simply as the work and artistry of
two different written compositions, and not as grounds to argue for
the artificiality of such divisions, or for the priority of one text over
the other.47
7. Fruits of hearing
Among the most noticeable rough joins, and the most awkward to
modern literary tastes, is the phalaśruti: the short passage, often com-
ing at the end of an adhyāya, describing the highly variable ‘fruits of
hearing’ that accrue to those who have heard the foregoing epic seg-
ment.48 For textual excavators and surgeons,49 phalaśruti passages axi-
omatically reveal that what precedes them is an interpolation, late, and
often a sign of special pleading by the presumed inserters. If, however,
bard’s audience’: p. 18 (‘the Pāṇḍavas had been perceived by the epic singers and their
audience to be children of the gods’); p. 20 (a ‘sudden awareness by the audience’ is
preceded by what ‘comes to the bard’s mind’); p. 22 (the bard/narrator’s recollection’);
p. 24 (‘at that moment the epic bard recollects and keeps in mind’); p. 26 (‘then the
bard starts to prepare the audience for a revelation’). Once again: the only audience
of the bard in question—i.e., Ugraśravas—is that of the Brahman Ṛsịs of the Naimisạ
Forest. And in the Rāmāyaṇa, Kuśa and Lava sing the Rāmāyaṇa to Rāma and other
members of the establishment at Rāma’s aśvamedha, that king of rites.
45 I am aware that adhyāya has the older meaning of ‘memorizing and reproducing
a text by heart’ (Vassilkov 2004: 5).
46 Although Vassilkov (2004: 5) makes the interesting suggestion that ‘such terms
as parvans and kāṇḍas (both meaning ‘joints’ of a reed or cane) suggest rather a mne-
monic use of a reed or cane by an oral performer—the hand could grasp one part of
a reed after another to mark what particular units of a song had already been sung
(a use similar to that of beads for counting prayers)’, I think the ‘textual’ explanation
more likely.
47 For a different view on these matters, see Brockington 2000a: 289: ‘However, it
may be remarked that the ends of the [18] adhyāyas of the Rāmopakhyāna do not cor-
respond at all closely to the division of the Rāmāyaṇa into [7] kāṇḍas, which implies
that one or both divisions are later than the composition of the Rāmopakhyāna.’
48 The closing sentence of the opening epigram is an implied phalaśruti.
49 For this distinction among textual ‘analysts’, See Hiltebeitel 2004c.
20 chapter one
the Mahābhārata is a work of collaborative authorship, such a view is
in need of considerable adjustment. Phalaśruti passages would then
be inserted but not necessarily late, or at least very late. But more
important, their function is to call attention to the varied benefits of
belonging to the epic’s textual audience, its community of readers.
8. Mahābhārata reading communities
Turning for a moment to ethnographic evidence, here is a revealing
vignette on the formation of a modern Mahābhārata reading com-
munity’ among ‘illiterates’50 through the ‘fruits of hearing’. It is from a
Dalit woman’s story of how she named a daughter after Draupadī:
Every year I manage to go and listen to this story which I love so
much. . . . When the sun sets, I put my bundle of sticks back on my head
and go back to the cēri [the Paraiyars’ quarters] to do the evening’s work
at home. Wherever I am, whatever sort of work I’m doing, I never fail to
go and listen for a bit: I drop everything. I really like going into Madhava
Reddi’s field, the one next to the wall of Draupadi’s temple [in the ūr, the
village]. I can hear the Iyer [see n. 51] reading the Bharatam from there
and at the same time I can’t be seen. Apparently it’s very good for you
to listen, it absolves you of your sins. But that only happens in the ur.
No one will ever agree to read for us, we’re too unclean for that. . . . But
again, who knows? In this kaliyugam, money’s what matters. Perhaps if
you paid a good price, a better price than people from the ur, you’d find
a priest who’d agree. But that hasn’t happened up till now. So I’ll tell you
how its done in the cēri. We all clubbed together to buy a big book of
the Bharatam, where everything is marked. Our men who know how to
read take this book, go and sit down near the kulam [tank] and, while the
temple narrator reads and explains the Bharatam, our lads, who are intel-
ligent and smart, write clown all the details on the book: here’s the palace
of wax, here’s the descent into the fire, and so on. In the cēri, on days
when there’s no work, four or five of them sit on a tinnai [veranda] and
start reading in front of about ten men. Hearing their stories we women
go and listen as well. That’s how I got to know Draupadi. (Viramma &
Racine 1997: 81.)
And how had the men learned to read?
[They] all learned to read from theatre books, there, on the ground in the
square. [One] drew the letters for them on the sand. They understood by
adding the letters together, little by little they started to read and one fine
50 ‘It lasts eighteen days, when the Bharatam is read and everyone listens—those
who understand its meaning and power for us, the illiterates, to atone for our sins’
(Viramma & Racine 1997: 229). cf. position 16 above.
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 21
day they knew how to read fluently. They formed the cēri troupe. Yes, in
the past we had a theatre troupe here in the cēri. My husband acted for
a long time, but now he’s too old for it. He played Karṇa, the husband
of Anjalai played Bhima. . . . My husband . . . could act all night and go to
work the next day. In those days I’d go into the corner and admire him,
my man! He didn’t just act the part of the five Pandava brothers. He could
play Kattavarayan, Vira Pandya and lots of others as well. He knew all
the stories. (Viramma & Racine 1997: 120)
Although Viramma’s one surviving son also acted, the cēri troupe no
longer performs: according to Viramma because the younger genera-
tion now favors videos, which she laments (pp. 119–120); but prob-
ably more for economic reasons. No ūr Draupadī temples would
contract for them, as they would for Van̠n̠iyar troupes.51 As is well
known, Vyāsa cleared the way for his Brahman disciples to transmit
the Mahābhārata to all castes: a process that must always have had
its hurdles. For Viramma, the cross-caste community generated by
Draupadī festivals is clearly a bhakti community,52 quite in harmony
with what I believe the Mahābhārata author(s) intended.53
9. ‘Author function’
Although Vedic hymns have ‘family books’ and named poets, about
whom legends have in many cases formed, and although certain
names take on a representative quasi-authorial function for teachings
and texts within different oral branches of Vedic learning, for Indian
literature the epics mark the invention of a new type of ‘author func-
tion’ (Foucault 1979). The ‘individualization’ (Foucault 1979: 141) of
authors—divine, fictional, or otherwise (p. 147)—first takes on literary
proportions in early post- and para-Vedic smṛti texts, of which the
two Sanskrit epics tackle the project of ‘author-construction’ (p. 150)
most daringly. Vyāsa and Vālmīki are new authors and characters
51 Whose peccadillos regarding the cēri Viramma describes (Viramma & Racine
1997: 120). Viramma’s translator-editors say that she mistook the Pāratiyār for an
Iyer (Brahman) but that he was actually a Reddi (p. 291, n. 6); but she could have
generalized from hearing other Iyer Pāratiyārs. See Hiltebeitel 1988: 138–139 on caste
variation among drama troupes (including Untouchable troupes’ restrictions to their
own communities) and Pāratiyārs; pp. 153–164 on use by troupes of written manu-
scripts and chapbooks.
52 Cf. the firewalking pit, she says: ‘It’s like a field of red hibiscus. The bhakti of that
Mother is what makes this possible’ (Viramma & Racine 1997: 231), Indeed, it is the
goddess ‘who shares’.
53 See especially Hiltebeitel 2006a.
22 chapter one
in their own texts. They insinuate themselves into other characters’
minds, prompt them, and define the terms of the dissemination of
their works.
10. Overlap between author and deity
The Mahābhārata, as J.L. Mehta puts it, gives a ‘hint’ of a ‘mysteri-
ous relationship, like a deep and powerful undercurrent’, between the
author of the text and the supreme deity as cosmic author (J.L. Mehta
1990: 111). The Mahābhārata poets construct Vyāsa’s author function
in relation to author functions of the deity. For instance, it is only
these two who give other characters the ‘divine eye’.
11. Shared conventions
The production of the two epics generated numerous poetic conven-
tions, among them, color conventions, in particular bhakti color con-
ventions like the ‘dark’ names Kṛsṇ ̣a and Rāma applied to multiple
characters, often along with their skintones; a correlation between
intervals of rites and gaps in stories; moments, winks, and twinkles
(nimesạ s) as suggestive of narrative turns; backs of mountains and
waterfalls as images for scenes of composition and inspiration; the
frame convention; the setting of the Naimisạ Forest as a scene of
epic transmission in both epics. The vitality and comprehension of
such conventions does not last forever; their meanings have to be
reconstructed.54
12. Fiction, literary ‘reality effects’, literary experimentation
For Mehta, and I concur, Vyāsa gives presence to authorial claims,
processes, and literary experiments in the text. So does Vālmīki. With
such authors we must thus raise the matter of fiction as distinct from
myth (Kermode 1967: 39). The Mahābhārata poets have provided us
not only with a fictional omniscient author, but two ‘unreliable nar-
rators’ (Booth 1983: 158–159, 271–274, 295–296) as its main oral per-
formers, two narrators (Saṃjaya and Bhīsṃ a) given the ‘divine eye’ to
handle two immense stretches of text, and various other authoritative
sources, mainly Ṛsịs.
54 See Hiltebeitel 2001a: 29, n. 120. I return to this point and develop it further in
Hiltebeitel 2004c.
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 23
13. Citation of sources
A curious feature of the Mahābhārata, noticeable especially in con-
nection with Bhīsṃ a (for whom the divine eye is thus not enough),
is its interest in working out an apparatus of sources—in Bhīsṃ a’s
case, all the while holding in reserve the question of where he would
have encountered all the celestial sources—gods, Ṛsịs—whom he cites.
Bhīsṃ a’s citation apparatus is certainly not typical of a Parry-Lordian
oral epic, for which Albert Lord posits authorly anonymity and ‘the
tradition’ itself as author (Lord 1960: 147). Bhīsṃ a makes his citations
mainly in the Śāntiparvan, which, as James L. Fitzgerald (1980) has
argued at least for the Moksạ dharmaparvan, seems to draw on some
kind of library. But Bhīsṃ a also draws on celestial sources at other
important moments: laid low on his bed of arrows, as he reconciles
with Karṇa, he tells him: ‘You are a son of Kuntī, not of Rādhā. It
is known to me from Nārada and Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana and Keśava, no
doubt about it.’55 This is an interest not so much in bibliography but in
being able to make authoritative citations (see Hiltebeitel 2001b). We
are dealing here not with ‘the birth of historical science’, which, accord-
ing to Paul Veyne, ‘was made possible [in Greece] by the distinction
between sources and reality, between historians and historical facts’
(Veyne 1988: 108; cf. pp. 2, 12). Rather, it is a use of sources that fuses
them in reality. Nonetheless, this intertwining of sources and reality is
indicative of an intertextual situation that suggests a new kind of ‘con-
stitutive imagination’56 concerned with the complexities of attribution.
To be sure, one can still insist that such an imagination could still be
reconstituting itself orally. But it is more likely that Bhīsṃ a’s manner
of fixing attribution reflects written textuality. I also believe that the
Mahābhārata plays with this constitution of sources, connecting its
didactic and narrative portions by leaving it implied that Bhīsṃ a can
cite such celestial sources from the time during his youth that he has
spent with his mother, the celestial Gaṅgā (Hiltebeitel 2001b).
14. Character
As already indicated, the epic poets take interest in character, not least
in the characters of their authors. In some cases it is not difficult to
55 Kaunteyas tvaṃ na rādheyo vidito nāradān mama/krṣṇ ̣advaipāyanāc caiva keśavāc
ca na saṃśayah//(MBh 6.117.9).
56 A term in Veyne’s title (1988).
24 chapter one
trace character development: notably, as I do in my most recent book,
with the character of Yudhisṭḥ ira, around his education. But as Aditya
Adarkar and Patricia Meredith Greer have recognized, probably the
best character in the Mahābhārata is Karṇa, who is in many ways
Yudhisṭḥ ira’s point-counterpoint antithesis. Before turning to Karṇa
in closing, I note that one of the ways that the character develop-
ment of Yudhisṭḥ ira and Karṇa is sustained antithetically is by a kind
of pacing.
15. Pacing
In cumulatively entangling Karṇa in the scenes that make his death
inevitable, his multiple fatalities reveal ever deeper levels of the con-
flicted traits that make him such an endearing, troubling, and com-
pelling hero. Unlike Yudhisṭḥ ira and Arjuna, who as winning heroes
are the subject of consecutive narrative, Karṇa is the subject of a frag-
mented countertext, a loser’s epic of resistance57 that the poets leave
readers to piece together from segments where he is part of the main
story and patches where he is the subject of selective memories, includ-
ing his own.
C. The Book on Karṇa
It is the portrayal of Karṇa that has provided various authors with
what has seemed to them some of the most congenial evidence for
archaic oral features in the Mahābhārata. For Mary Carroll Smith, the
Karṇaparvan gives evidence of archaic orality by its relative statistical
prominence of metrically irregular pre-classical trisṭ ụ bh verses, which
for her have oral Vedic parallels.58 McGrath (2001), as cited earlier,
finds Karṇa—less polished than his Pāṇḍava adversaries—to be the
archaic ‘Sanskrit Hero’. In an article exploring Indo-European themes
and written for a Georges Dumézil Festschrift, I myself favored archaic
probabilities in connection with what I still take to be remarkable and
57 See Hiltebeitel 2007b, drawing on Quint 1993: 11: ‘episodic dismemberment of
narrative’ in stories with no place to go; ‘deliberately disconnected and aimless’ stories,
over and against the ‘master narratives’ (p. 15) of ‘epic triumphalism’ (p. 41).
58 See M. C. Smith 1972; 1992. Most of the epic (about ninety per cent) is in śloka
verses of two sixteen-syllable lines, while most of the rest is in trisṭụ bh verses, regularly
of four eleven-syllable lines. Smith (1972: 65) has argued that trisṭụ bhs form the epic’s
‘core’ and irregular trisṭụ bhs its ‘nucleus’.
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 25
unexplained parallels between the chief chariot duel narratives of the
Indian and Irish epics: Arjuna with Kṛsṇ ̣a versus Karṇa with Śalya;
Cúchulainn with Laeg versus Fer Diad with his charioteer (Hiltebeitel
1982a). And Vassilkov argues that the close of the Karṇaparvan recalls
a ‘basic myth’—the Indra-Vṛtra myth—behind its use of similes59 and
that, with the help of a distinction between ‘evocative’ and ‘identify-
ing’ similes that resonate with this ‘basic myth’, and ‘idealizing’ and
‘artistic’ similes that reflect ‘later’ developments,60 one can hark back
to the archaic oral character of this segment of the epic.
Elsewhere, I have translated the close of the Karṇaparvan for a book
of sources on Kṛsṇ ̣a (Hiltebeitel 2007b), stressing its literary features:
its careful construction; its framing devices; its play of tropes, especially
irony; its juxtaposition of Vedic and purāṇic allusions; the swirl of
affinities between heroes and deities;61 its orchestration of epithets; its
pacing in relation to Karṇa’s portrayal in the larger text and the epic’s
wider representations of authorship, audience, and character. Indeed,
59 Vassilkov, having noted (2002: 15) that his earliest Mahābhārata similes can-
not be compared with those in Homer, admits, ‘It is very difficult to find any formal
analogies to the MBh’s “identifying” (“evocative”) similes in other epics’ (p. 27). Yet
he tries to reconstruct ‘the line of historical development which might have led to this
specific type of hero-god relationship’ (p. 25) in order to show parallels between archaic
similes in the Karṇaparvan and examples from what he calls ‘pre-epic’ and ‘proto-epic
genres’: a Siberian tale about a man who is like the moon god and a examples from
the Todas (see footnote 6 above) and Polynesia (pp. 24–27). I would ask whether the
Indra/Vṛtra myth is ‘basic’ in the Karṇaparvan as an archaic oral survival to which all
other mythical combats are ‘merely’ (this word occurs repeatedly) reducible, or as the
Vedic focal point of an erudite literary construal familiar with such Vedic complexi-
ties of the Indra cycle as Indra’s combats with other demons, notably Namuci, and
his friendship with Visṇ ̣u (see now Hiltebeitel 2004b; 2007b). The ‘basic myth’ notion
is too readily explanatory when we read that the ‘Nara-Nārāyaṇa myth is merely
a Vaisṇ ̣ava version of the “basic” myth’ (Vassilkov 2002: 21; cf. similarly p. 29, on
Garuḍa versus the Snakes).
60 Among ‘idealizing’ and ‘artistic’ similes are those that refer to the pralaya, which,
Vassilkov argues, are from a later (although still bardic) stage that ‘gave a particularly
sinister colouring to the [earlier, archaic] picture, which was in perfect harmony with
the fatalistic worldview typical of the “heroic age” (Vassilkov 2002: 28). For a critique
of the ‘heroic age’ as an historical concept, see Hiltebeitel 1976: 48–59, and, in the
same vein, 2001a: 10 and n. 43, and position 1 above, on the concept of ‘epic period’.
For me, such an argument is a case of the theory driving the results. cf. Ruth Katz’s
similar selective treatment of pralaya imagery as ‘late’ (Katz 1989; 1991), as discussed
in Hiltebeitel 2003a: 120.
61 Karṇa is like Rudra (MBh 8,65.36), but so is Arjuna, who must be reminded of
the ways he is like Rudra, Kṛsṇ ̣a, and Indra (65.18–20). Arjuna is like Indra (65.37),
but then so is Karṇa, fallen and beheaded, ‘one whose acts equalled those of the god
of a thousand eyes’ (i.e., Indra; 67.37).
26 chapter one
as Yudhisṭḥ ira tells Kṛsṇ ̣a in bringing the scene to closure, all Kṛsṇ ̣a
had to do to make things turn out right was to act in character:
Then the thrilled Yudhisṭḥ ira paid homage to Dāśārha;62 he said, ‘Luckily
luckily’, O Indra among kings, and he gladly said this: ‘It is not strange
in you, great-armed son of Devakī, that, with you as his charioteer,
Pārtha would now do what is manly.’ And the law-supporting Pārtha,
best of Kurus, having grasped his braceleted right arm, spoke to both
Keśava and Arjuna, ‘Nārada has told that you are the two gods Nara
and Nārāyaṇa, the two ancient best of men, joined in the establishment
of dharma. The wise great-armed lord Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana has also told
me this divine story repeatedly. By your power, Kṛsṇ ̣a, Dhanaṃjaya with
Gāṇḍiva conquered the foes who faced him and never faced away. Our
victory was firm. Defeat was not to be ours when you undertook Pārtha’s
charioteering in battle.’
Having thus spoken, that great chariot-warrior, having mounted that
gold-decked chariot then came to see the battlefield of many tidings.
Conversing with the two heroes Mādhava and Phālguna, he saw the bull
among men Karṇa lying on the battlefield broken in pieces everywhere
by arrows sped from Gāṇḍiva. Having seen Karṇa and his sons slain, king
Yudhisṭḥ ira praised both Mādhava and the Pāṇḍava, those tigers among
men, saying, ‘Today, Govinda, with my brothers I am king of the earth,
protected on every side by you, our lord, hero, and sage. Having seen the
death of the proud tiger among men Rādheya,63 that wicked-souled son
of Dhrṭ arāsṭra will be hopeless about life and kingdom now that the great
chariot-warrior Karṇa is slain. By your grace, bull among men, our goals
are met. Delighter of the Yadus, you and the wielder of the Gāṇḍiva bow
are victorious. Luckily you triumph, Govinda. Luckily Karṇa is fallen.’
So, O Indra among kings, the much delighted Dharmarāja Yudhisṭḥ ira
praised Janārdana and Arjuna. (MBh 8,69.19–34.)
By this time in the war, Yudhisṭḥ ira knows almost (see footnote 63) as
much about Kṛsṇ ̣a’s doings as the reader.
In weighting orality and writing, bhakti-laced passages like these
are simply set aside as late by orality advocates.64 Indeed, in this case
they could point out that the whole adhyāya of which this passage is
62 Kṛsṇ ̣a as ‘worthy of respect’ (see Biardeau 2002, I: 105, n. 23).
63 Note the recurring irony of the naming of Karṇa ‘Rādheya’, Yudhisṭḥ ira being
yet to know that Karṇa is a son of Kuntī.
64 E.g., Vassilkov (2002: 24 and n. 24) comments that, once Karṇa’s tejas enters the
disc of the sun (8,67.27), ‘As if that were not enough’, there follows what ‘is surely a
late bhakti reinterpretation’: Sūrya’s show of compassion toward Karṇa as one of his
bhaktas by touching his body with his solar rays (68.38). But Karṇa’s bhakti to Sūrya
is a finely developed theme; see § 4.b.i and footnote 79 below, and, for fuller discus-
sion, Hiltebeitel 2007b.
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 27
a part has a variant text in its entirety (8,1224*), mostly in the South-
ern Recension. But not so fast. The mainly Southern variant is much
thicker in Yudhisṭḥ ira’s paean to Kṛsṇ ̣a.-‘Govinda’s’ grace. It lacks the
ironies of the Northern passage. And most interestingly, it leaves out
a key opening that Vassilkov (2002: 19–21) cites as evidence of his
‘basic archaic myth’:
Saṃjaya said, After Karṇa had thus fallen and your army had fled, joy-
fully embracing Pārtha, Dāśārha said this word, ‘Vṛtra was slain by the
destroyer of Bala; Karṇa by you, Dhanaṃjaya. People will tell the death of
Vrṭra and Karṇa as a doublet (vadham vai karṇavrṭrābhyāṃ kathayisỵ anti
mānavāḥ).65 Vrṭra was slain in battle by the many-splendored possessor of
the thunderbolt. Karṇa was slain by you with the bow and sharp arrows.
Let the two of us, Kaunteya, report this prowess spread in the world and
bearing your fame to the intelligent Dharmarāja.’ (MBh 8,69.1–5.)
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s mysterious evocation of an identity between these combats—
and thus between Karṇa and not only Vṛtra but, before this, with
Namuci (8,65.19)—provides an allusive Vedic ‘deepening’ of Karṇa’s
demonic rapport with the Asura Naraka by possession (MBh 3,240.19,
32). The Vedic Indra conquers Vṛtra and Namuci thanks to his ‘friend’
Visṇ ̣u, and in Namuci’s case, by a violation of friendship. In the epic, in
a story told by Śalya to Yudhisṭḥ ira that stands behind Śalya’s eventual
betrayal of Karṇa as his charioteer, the theme is extended to Indra’s
conquest of Vṛtra, too, by a violation of friendship (5,10.19, 23). The
epic seems to reemplot this thematic set into the web of true and false
friendships surrounding Karṇa.66 Yet Vassilkov disagrees with this
interpretation via friendship: ‘However, I am inclined to think that
the “mystical and secret” “divine” knowledge revealed in these words
is the mystical identity of Arjuna with Indra, the identity of his heroic
feat with the primaeval deed of the Asura-slayer’ (Vassilkov 2002;
20–21): If so, Kṛsṇ ̣a takes this occasion just to state the obvious, rely-
ing on Arjuna and the reader to forget the references67 to Namuci and
65 Or, as I translated it in 1976: 253: ‘Men shall talk of just one death for Karṇa and
Vṛtra.’ cf. Vassilkov 2002: 20: ‘[From now on] people will relate, indeed, the [story of
just one] Karṇa-Vṛtra murder!’
66 See Hiltebeitel 1976: 255–266; 1982a: 93–107.
67 There are four references to Namuci in the Northern recension ‘Vulgate’ of the
Karṇaparvan (Hiltebeitel 1976: 262).
28 chapter one
to ignore the complex narrative context—indeed, the multiple friend-
ship contexts68—in which Kṛsṇ ̣a is speaking.
I would thus continue to maintain that when it comes to close read-
ing, the Karṇaparvan’s evidence for writing tips the scale over that
for prior orality, above all because we need the wider text to interpret
the supposed evidence for orality. Indeed, not unlike the evidence for
the U.S. invasion of Iraq, evidence for orality seems to be constantly
shifting and, as regards its most staple criterion, receding. Thus John
Brockington points to a ‘fairly general agreement that the study of oral
epics has moved on from the emphasis on formulaic diction’ (Brock-
ington 1999a: 121). After exploring formulaic expressions through the
five stages that he ascribes to the two Sanskrit epics’ development, he
acknowledges, ‘This material raises the question of how far we should
treat the presence of formulaic material as an index of orality’ (1999a:
129). Holding ‘that the two epics were originally independent of each
other, though sharing a common background’ (p. 127; a ‘common tra-
ditional stock’ of formulae [p. 126]), he admits that ‘for me the most
problematic’ cases are a few Mahābhārata formulae that occur rarely
in the Rāmāyaṇa yet even in its first stage (p. 127). Surprisingly, he
concludes that ‘the greater frequency of formulaic pādas in the later
parts of both epics does not seem to be an index of orality but rather
a sign of the decay of the genuine oral tradition’ (p. 129)—this, after
showing that among late-strata formula, ‘the majority have a broadly
religious significance’, of which ‘a number are specifically Vaisṇ ̣ava but
there are several which reflect general religious, ethical or cosmologi-
cal concerns, while links with the Purāṇas are becoming more obvious’
(p. 128; cf. Brockington 1999b: 135, 137). As regards this assessment of
the generally religious, most of which I would bring under the head-
ing of bhakti, I see it as another case of the theory driving the results.69
With such a relativization of formulae, the most staple of Lord’s three
main indicators of orality—formula, theme, and enjambment (Lord
1960: 131)—becomes increasingly unreliable, leaving only the impos-
sibly general indicator of theme and the technically daunting quest for
68 Karṇa is of course pivotal here. Indeed, he is eventually revealed to be a friend
of Kṛsṇ ̣a. See Hiltebeitel 2004b.
69 Cf. footnote 60: not surprisingly, the results are similar, except that Vassilkov
thinks the ‘late’ bhakti similes are still ‘bardic’.
weighting orality and writing in the sanskrit epics 29
oral-specific types of enjambment.70 More reliable indicators of orality
are now said to include framing,71 simile,72 and especially—assessed
‘as likely to be better indicators of oral c omposition and transmission’
than formulae (Brockington 1999b: 137)—ring composition and rep-
etition (p. 133). Not only is repetition ‘of a phrase or passage . . . within
a short space of its first occurrence on the whole a mark of the epic’s
oral character’ (Brockington 1999a: 122); so are thematic repetitions
by fore-shadowing and recapturing, as explored by Ramanujan (Brock-
ington 1999b: 133).73 Like theme, however, this kind of repetition, at
least, is too general to serve as a differential from writing,74 and ring
composition, like framing, is susceptible to literary uses.75
70 On enjambment, see Brockington 1999b: 131, discussing Vassilkov’s contribu-
tion to the DICSEP I workshop on orality; on theme, still viable for Brockington, see
p. 135—‘theme of the horse-sacrifice’.
71 See Brockington 1999b: 136. I do not find Brockington applying this to the
Mahābhārata’s frame stories, which most people, including Vassilkov (2004: 4, and
above, footnote 1), regard as not only ‘late’ but very late (see Hiltebeitel 2001a: 25,
n. 2007b.
72 See Brockington 1999a: 125; Vassilkov 2002, as discussed above.
73 Cf. Brockington: HdO [1998], p. 115, taking all this, and Ramanujan’s further
examples, to suggest a ‘unity of structure [that] would presumably belong to the original
oral epic’. But when Ramanujan writes, ‘Not only are there repetitive phrases, similes,
and formulaic descriptions that the students of oral poetics (Parry, Lord, et al.) have
taught us to recognize, but incidents, scenes, settings, and especially relationships are
repeated’ (cited by Brockington), it is not so clear that he attributes orality to what
follows the ‘but’. Where Ramanujan adds: ‘Such repetitive elements foreshadow later
events and recapture earlier ones’ (p. 424), I would now recommend ‘backshadow’
and ‘sideshadow’ as preferable. to ‘recapture’ (see Morson 1994; Hiltebeitel 2001a:
37–38).
74 See Vanstiphout 2003: 11.
75 The remainder of the original essay, comprising Hiltebeitel 2005c, 103–7, is omit-
ted, since that segment summarizes material presented in chapter 15 below.

CHAPTER TWO
THE PRIMARY PROCESS OF THE HINDU EPICS
A.K. Ramanujan once said, ‘No Hindu ever reads the Mahābhārata
for the first time’ (1991a: 419). He also said, ‘In India, . . . no one ever
reads the Rāmāyaṇa or the Mahābhārata for the first time’ (1991b: 46).
Continuing the first statement, which opens an essay on ‘Repetition
in the Mahābhārata’ that dates back to a 1968 paper presented to
Victor Turner’s Seminar on Comparative Epic at the University of
Chicago, Ramanujan provides a sense of why he says ‘reads for the
first time’ rather than ‘hears for the first time’ (which is the way I
misremembered these passages, and their oral tellings at conferences,
until I relocated them). Recounting his own youthful ‘native’ experi-
ences of the epic, Ramanujan begins with a hearing, but one from
a text-c onversant paṇḍita who recounted Mahābhārata stories in a
tailor shop. So the hearing implies a prior reading, even though the
reading is not Ramanujan’s. Moreover, the reading and hearing are
multilingual and intertextual. The paṇḍita alternated between the
Mahābhārata and ‘large sections of a sixteenth-century Kannada text.’
Last recalled are
the professional bards who ‘did the Harikathā Kālaksẹ pam,’ redeeming
time the with holy tales (and not always holy ones). They were invited
into a neighborhood by a group or a wealthy man, and they would
recite, sing and tell the Mahābhārata in sections night after night, usu-
ally under a temporary canopy (pandal) lit by petromax lanterns, with a
floating audience. . . . They sang songs in several languages, told folktales,
sometimes danced, quoted Sanskrit tags as well as the daily newspaper,
and made the Mahābhārata entertaining, didactic and relevant to the
listener’s present (1991a: 419).
Here we have something akin, although at a different social level, to
what goes on at South Indian Tamil Draupadī festivals.1 In between,
Ramanujan mentions his family’s Brahmin cook, an older boy who told
1 On kathākalaksẹ pam (Sanskrit ‘passing time through story’) and Draupadī cult
pārata piracaṅkam, ‘Mahābhārata recitation,’ as a ‘little tradition’ counterpart, see
Frasca (1990: 53–54); Hiltebeitel (1988: 136–37).
32 chapter two
Mahābhārata stories after cricket under a margoga tree, and the ‘some-
what bored algebra teacher who switched from the binomial theorem
to the problems of Draupadī and her five husbands’ (1991a: 419).
Ramanujan goes on to observe that ‘the main, complex, many-sto-
ried plot of this enormous epic is remembered and recalled in great
detail.’ He argues that
such recall is possible because it is a structured work. In a largely oral tra-
dition, one learns one’s major literary works as one learns a language—in
bits and pieces that fit together and make a whole in the learner’s mind,
because they are parts that reflect an underlying structure (Ramanujan
1991a: 420–21; emphasis in original).
Here we have further clarification that he is considering how one can
absorb a literary work that cannot be ‘read for the first time.’ Remark-
ing that Western interpolation theories ‘belie and deny the native’s
sense’ of the Mahābhārata’s ‘unity, its well-plotted network of rela-
tions,’ he attempts ‘to explicate a “native intuition” ’ of the ‘intricate
sense of structure and unity in this ten-mile monster of a work,’ an
intuition in the linguist’s sense ‘that every native speaker has of the
grammar of his mother tongue’ (Ramanujan 1991a: 421).
Ramanujan goes on to ‘suggest that the central structuring principle
of the epic is a certain kind of repetition’ (1991a: 421): one that includes
textual circularities and concentricities, from nested relations among
episodes and among episodes and ‘inset’ stories like ‘Nala’ to ‘the
local texture of significant passages’; thematic narrative and symbolic
weaves; foreshadowings and recursivities; ‘autonomous complexes’
of action that recur in different personages; recurrent ethical reflec-
tion on the nature and outcome of such action complexes, including
both mental and physical acts; and multiply interlinked relationship
patterns (422–41), most notably the ‘double espousal and the double
parentage of the major characters,’ doublings that do not call forth a
theory of development from death to divinization,2 even though they
are mostly human-divine ones (422–23). Ramanujan sees similar pat-
terns of ‘rhythmic recurrence’ in the Rāmāyaṇa (1991b: 40).
2 As argued by Blackburn (1985, 1988, 1989). I critique this relentlessly euhemer-
izing ‘developmental model’ in Hiltebeitel 1995 and 1999a (29–37) with attention to
numerous Indian oral epic examples (see below).
the primary process of the hindu epics 33
Right and Bad Metaphors
To be sure, not every Hindu had Ramanujan’s childhood. But Ramanu-
jan is saying something that he continued to say over the years and
continued to try to puzzle out whenever he said it. Clearly, to evoke
an experience that no Hindu or Indian misses is to speak figuratively,
paradoxically. One of the key tasks that he sets himself is to find the
right metaphors for this native intuition, both as it works receptively,
interiorizing the grammar, and generatively, producing new ‘tellings’
(Ramanujan 1991b: 24–25). He has found two such metaphors, both
superb: the crystal and the pool of signifiers. The crystal metaphor came
to mind when he was ‘contemplating the form of the Mahābhārata’
and ‘happened to browse in the section on crystallography in the
Encyclopedia Britannica’ (Ramanujan 1991a: 441). Crystals replicate
their order; they dissolve in ways that are consistent with the sym-
metry of their solvents, like the Mahābhārata in vernacular languages;
they grow from their imperfections (Ramanujan 1991a: 441–42). The
‘pool of signifiers’ metaphor, on the other hand, draws together his
reflections on multiple Rāmāyaṇas. Yet it also extends the linguistic
analogies he poses in discussing the Mahābhārata. In his ‘thoughts on
translation’ of the Rāmāyaṇa (Ramanujan 1991b: 44–46), he breaks
the signifiers down into a Peircean triad of the iconic (‘faithful’ trans-
lation retaining formal structural relations), the indexical (referring
within the translation to local or vernacular detail), and the symbolic
(saying new things through oppositions and subversions). All three
occur to varying degrees in any translation, but wherever the symbolic
is possible culturally such as where ‘the Rāma story has become almost
a second language of the whole culture area’ (Ramanujan 1991b: 45),
one may say that such an area
has a pool of signifiers (like a gene pool), signifiers that include plots,
characters, names, geography, incidents, and relationships. Oral, written,
and performance traditions, phrases, proverbs, and even sneers carry allu-
sions to the Rāma story. . . . And to these must be added marriage songs,
narrative poems, place legends, temple myths, paintings, sculpture, and
the many performing arts. (46)
It is here that Ramanujan joins his metaphors:
These various texts not only relate to prior texts directly, to borrow or
refute, but they relate to each other through this common code or com-
mon pool. Every author, if one may hazard a metaphor, dips into and
brings out a unique crystallization. (1991b: 46)
34 chapter two
It is also here that the fused metaphors unite his discussions of the two
epics: ‘In India. . ., no one ever reads the Rāmāyaṇa or the Mahābhārata
for the first time. The stories are there, “always already” ’ (Ramanujan
1991b: 46).
Metaphoric Lenses
I would like to make a small jump from Ramanujan’s concern to
one of my own in writing The Cult of Draupadī (1988, 1991a) and
two books (1999a, 2001a) concerned with ‘rethinking’ India’s San-
skrit epics and regional oral epics. Regional oral epics linked with the
Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa are no less crystallizations from such
pools of signifiers than proverbs and sneers, not to mention narra-
tive poems, place legends, and so on. As oral literature, they have no
doubt been composed and transmitted by Hindus who had never read
the Mahābhārata or the Rāmāyaṇa for the first time but had ‘native
intuitions’ about them. More specifically, they are translations from
regions saturated with Mahābhārata and/or Rāmāyaṇa traditions, no
matter whether such traditions are folk or classical.3 Abounding in
local ‘indexical’ references, they clearly also tend more to the ‘sym-
bolic’ end of the spectrum than the ‘iconic,’ being full of inversions
and probably even subversions.
Yet although Ramanujan’s metaphors can be ‘translated’ into regional
epic terms, that is not their purpose. They are designed to address the
intricacies of the relationship among varied tellings of the Mahābhārata
and the Rāmāyaṇa. He has addressed his thoughts on language and
translation to the Draupadī cult Mahābhārata (Ramanujan 1991a:
420) but not, for example, to such regional oral folk epics as the Tamil
Aṇṇan̠mār Katai or the Telugu Palnāḍu. Those who have considered
the relationship between classical and such regional epics have come
up with other metaphors. The ‘celestial garbage’ metaphor can be duly
noted (J. D. Smith 1989: 176); like Rudyard Kipling’s (1986) descrip-
3 Ramanujan’s remarks on ‘symbolic’ oppositions and areas where knowledge of
one of the epics is like a ‘second language’ help to clarify the inference that a folk ver-
sion of the Mahābhārata that differs markedly from the classical epic is evidence for
discounting classical-folk epic connections and local ignorance of the classical tradition
(Blackburn and Flueckiger 1989: 8–9n22, citing John Smith’s personal communication
1982). We need to know more about the time and place of epic saturation in which
such opposition is generated.
the primary process of the hindu epics 35
tion of the K.M. Ganguli translation of the Mahābhārata as a ‘whale
stranded by an ebbing tide,’ it calls attention to a ‘dumping’ process.
For Kipling, the Sanskrit epics are waste products of the tides of his-
tory, surviving at best as ‘local ditties.’ For John Smith, the ideological
detritus of Sanskritization is dumped onto the poor, unsuspecting folk.
These are simply bad metaphors.4 Several authors also speak of the
inevitable ‘cores’ and ‘kernels,’ leaving room for such favored ‘extras’
as ‘growth,’ ‘accretion,’ ‘grafting,’ and ‘exaggeration.’ These terms are
rhetorically equivalent to the text-historical strategies of interpola-
tion and ‘corruption’ that one finds in Protestant scholarship on early
Christianity.5 Even the term ‘metaphor’ has been used to support a
‘loose ends’ explanation. According to J. Smith (1991: 83–84, 91–94),
what he calls ‘doubtful’ aspects of the Rajasthani Pābūjī’s connections
with the Rāmāyaṇa are dismissed as ‘metaphoric’ or non-’literal’ for-
mulae, as accretative interpolations that do not help in finding the
historical Pābūjī, who is sought to exemplify Blackburn’ s model of
‘death and divinization.’ More usefully, Stuart Blackburn and Joyce
Flueckiger (1989: 11) speak of ‘pathways’ from regional to pan-Indian
epics, and Kamal Kothari (1989: 102) of a concern for the untimely
dead that ‘feeds’ the regional epics of Rajasthan.
In my initial attempt to say something on these matters, I first ven-
tured the adjectival metaphor of ‘an underground folk Mahābhārata’:
But it cannot be monolithic. It has no prototype outside the Sanskrit text
(which can never be assumed to have fallen out of the ‘folk epic’ frame
of reference). If such a folk Mahābhārata exists, however, it would seem
to be centered on images of the goddess and the control of land. Its
lines of transmission and adaptation are too vast to ever trace fully. But
those lines that do emerge suggest the crossing of many geographical
and linguistic boundaries, and symbols and motifs that recur in a wide
spectrum of ‘reflexive’ and interpenetrating genres: from Mahābhārata
4 Poole provides good guidelines here:
We can evaluate theories as metaphors or theory-constitutive metaphors—and their
entailed or implied analogical mappings—in terms of their formal structure, their clarity
and precision in focusing and delimiting comparison, their possibilities of extension
and generalization, their imaginative formulation of interesting and important puzzles
and problems, and their implications for charting future directions of analytic inquiry
(1986: 438, cf. 421n24).
5 Compare J. Z. Smith (1990: 14, 18, 43, 114) on the overlapping cluster of terms in
such scholarship that includes ‘corruptions’ which must be removed by the application
of the ‘historian’s method,’ ‘impostures,’ ‘diabolical intervention,’ and the ‘horrible
invention’ of the trinity.
36 chapter two
vernaculars to folk dramas, from folk dramas to ritual idioms, from ritual
idioms to temple tales, from temple tales to sisters’ tales, from sisters’
tales to regional folk epics, from regional folk epics to Mahābhārata
vernacularizations (Hiltebeitel 1991b: 421).
This metaphor ties regional epics into a circular linkage of ‘surfaced’
evidence, but it does not single out specific issues that are forefronted
by their relation to the classical epics. It is also somewhat inchoate and
romantically subaltern.
Starting Points
These metaphors pose the challenge of finding terms by which to
engage and interpret texts within fluid cultural processes that already
brim with their own play of tropes, in which metaphor itself must
not be privileged. Cumulatively, they also begin to evoke some com-
monalities in talking about something subtle and rich but necessarily
only dimly grasped. Four points about what they target can, I think,
be clarified by trying another ‘metaphoric lens.’6 One is the question of
where we start. Second is the nature of what feeds these oral traditions,
of what is in the pool. Third, something more is needed to envision
the complexity of developmental patterns. Fourth is the question of
the general and the particular: Can we find a metaphor that allows
us to move between the two? These four considerations, I will argue,
lead to some new clarity if we sound out the metaphor of primary
process, which, of course, comes from Sigmund Freud but through
intermediary readings of Victor Turner, Paul Ricoeur, and Gananath
Obeyesekere. It is also my point of engagement with Ramanujan’s
aphorism: ‘there, “always already” ’ and ‘never read for the first time,’
the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa are primary process for the cultural
work that produces regional martial oral epics.7
6 See especially Poole (1986), advocating a type of comparative analysis in which a
constructed metaphor or analogy may supply a ‘theoretical lens’ that ‘affords “epistemic
access” ’ to the ‘shared or analogous features’ that are posited ‘between entities that
otherwise may differ from one another in all or most respects’ (420). Poole proposes ‘a
genre of metaphoric construction that posits some critical “fiber” of resemblance and
constitutes the preliminary grounds for an analogic mapping’ of the ‘shared metaphori-
cal entailments,’ which may also be done with several metaphoric lenses to allow for
‘partially overlapping foci’ and ‘increasingly refined illumination’ (431, 432).
7 The closest any oral epic scholar comes to such a notion is Roghair (1982), who
writes of an ‘integrative process’ that entails ‘an underlying mythos’ (118); the ‘many
the primary process of the hindu epics 37
Lest I be misunderstood, I should insist that I do not import into
this discussion many of the full Freudian implications that this met-
aphor normally carries: a homeostatic principle of constancy; dis-
charge of tension; correlation with the pleasure principle; reference
to a ‘primitive state’ of the ‘psychical apparatus’ that traverses the link
between wishing and hallucinating; a ‘store of infantile memories’ or
‘id’ where the repressed wishes of infancy, and in particular the primi-
tive infantile scene of seduction, struggle to find expression in dream
images, are ‘modified by being transferred on to a recent experience,’
and leave vestiges in cultural myths; the one-sided implications of fan-
tasy, regression, and distortion (Freud 1961: 566, 604, 546; emphasis
in original).8
Truer Freudians than I have shown that certain classical epic epi-
sodes and relations can be illuminated from such a perspective (Gold-
man 1978, 1993; Masson 1975). Yet although one could dilate upon
several analogies here, the metaphor of primary process would itself be
a distortion were it applied as a Freudian whole to the classical epic/
regional epic relation, since it would involve prioritizing ‘primitive’
and psychosexual overtones.
Why then is it useful at all? What is interesting is not so much
what Freud posits about the content and ‘energies’ of primary process
but the relation of this process to the ‘formation of dreams’ through
the dream-work (Freud 1961: 597). Indeed, Freud seems to charac-
terize the ‘bewildering and irrational’ primary process ‘as being the
dream-work proper’ (1961: 597). This formation is accounted for by
the ‘transposition or distortion’ (Entstellung) of primary process mate-
rial (repressed infantile dream-thoughts) into the manifest content of
the dream. The dream-work is formal in that it ‘restricts itself to giv-
ing things a new form’ through the ‘mechanisms’ of condensation,
displacement, and representability9—which, along with the fourth
world-views’ of a ‘given local society’s mythos . . . will all conform in one way or another
to the mythos of the society as a whole’ (119). Yet Roghair’s stress on conforming,
superimposition, syncretism, overlap, and divergence (124–25, 136–37) does not admit
the possibility that the process is interior to the primary formation of oral epics. See
Kripal (1995), who, in my opinion, would have done better in this Freudianized book to
use ‘primary process’ for what he calls ‘the social process of interpretation and debate’
in which ‘psyche and culture formed one another’ (219–20, 227, 236, 257, 314, 344–46)
in the experience of Rāmakṛsṇ ̣a and his followers.
8 See discussion in Ricoeur (1970: 75, 90–114, 263–70).
9 ‘The dream-work . . . does not think, calculate or judge in any way at all; it restricts
itself to giving things a new form. It is exhaustively described by an enumeration of
38 chapter two
mechanism of secondary revision, provide, as Hayden White (1978)
and others have demonstrated, an analog at the unconscious level of
the dream-work to the workings of metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche,
and irony, the fourfold classification of rhetorical tropes, on the con-
scious level of culture.10 I rather think it more helpful in studying epics
to think of the analogy as one in which the dream-work itself, like the
work of culture, would be no ‘deeper’ than its telling, its performance,
its production (cf. Lacan 1977: 147–49). It is with the model of the
dream-work that one can take up the metaphor of primary process in
relation to what Obeyesekere has called the work of culture.
As Freud says, primary process has ‘chronological priority’: it is what
is there ‘from the first’ (von Anfang an), ‘indestructible’ and ‘immortal’
(1961: 603, 577, 533), the ‘indestructability of one’s earliest desires’
(Ricoeur 1970: 268, cf. 104–5, 112–14). To some extent, this meta-
phor thus applies to our first consideration. The Mahābhārata and the
Rāmāyaṇa, ‘there, “always already,” ’ have their primacy and first time
unreadability precisely in two literary works of culture that exist in
Sanskrit. Having virtually said all of this himself and that a ‘native
intuition’ takes in a complex grammar that devolves from these very
texts, I do not think that we need to follow Paula Richman (1991: 5)
in moving from Ramanujan’s discussion to an argument against
‘privileging’ Vālmīki. Ramanujan is tempted by such a relativized (or
egalitarian) view but draws back from it as ‘too extreme’ (1991b: 44).
Ultimately he speaks of ‘a series of translations,’ some of which ‘cluster
around Vālmīki, another set around the Jaina Vimalasūri, and so on’
(Ramanujan 1991b: 44), all crystallizing from the ‘pool of signifiers.’
To be sure, Ramanujan traces the circulation of themes (especially oral
the conditions which it has to satisfy in producing its result’: as product, the dream
must ‘evade the censorship,’ to which end the dream-work makes use of displacement,
condensation, and representability (Freud 1961: 507, emphasis added; cf. Ricoeur 1970:
90–91). ‘Dream-displacement and dream-condensation are the two governing factors
to whose activity we may in essence ascribe the form [Gestaltung] assumed by dreams’
(Freud 1961: 308; Ricoeur 1970: 94). On Entstellung; see Ricoeur (1970: 90–91).
10 White (1978: 13–14): these correspondences are understood to be only approxi-
mate. White sees secondary revision, ‘that ironic trope,’ as introducing the ‘suggestion
of a . . . diachronic dimension in the dreamwork,’ since it requires the ‘matter’ provided
by the other mechanisms on which to work (1978: 13). His important point is that
Freud works out ‘on the level of the Unconscious’ a counterpart to what others, since
the nineteenth century, have done through similar variations on ‘the fourfold schema
of tropes as a model of the modes of mental association characteristic of human con-
sciousness’ (White 1978: 13; cf. Bloom 1973).
the primary process of the hindu epics 39
and Southeast Asian ones) that are ‘unknown to Vālmīki’ (1991b: 37).
Yet Vālmīki’s telling is ‘the earliest and most prestigious of them all’
(Ramanujan 1991b: 25).11 Richman rightly sees Ramanujan as urging
us to avoid seeing ‘different tellings . . . as “divergences” from the “real”
version by Vālmīki’ and rather as ‘the expression of an extraordinarily
rich set of resources existing, throughout history’ (1991: 7–8). Yet
this history has a beginning with two monumental written texts that
launch a distinctive cultural reading process by their ‘central structur-
ing principle’ of ‘a certain kind of repetition’ (Ramanujan 1991a: 421)
or ‘rhythmic recurrence’ (1991b: 40).12 It is this cultural reading pro-
cess or ‘manner of reading,’ rather than any specific epic content,
that we may treat as analogous to Freud’s principles of transposition
(which requires a kind of repetition) and distortion (which occurs
within rhythmic recurrence).
The Pool of Signifiers
Our second consideration addresses the nature of what feeds from this
primary epic process into other South Asian epic traditions. What is
the nature of the signifiers in the pool? Even sustaining the linguis-
tic metaphor, they cannot all be arbitrary. Obeyesekere, arguing that
comparative and ‘thick description’ etnographies should ‘play’ with
Freud’s first topography (unconscious, preconscious, conscious) but
reject the Westernized personology of his second (id, ego, superego),
holds a similar reservation about Freud’s imputation of ‘impersonality’
to the primary process.
Id is the neuter of the personology, for it must be remembered that Freud
believed that primary processes possess this ‘impersonal’ character. The
id is, I believe, once again an inadequate metaphor to characterize the
region of primary process that is often peopled with beings—distorted
representations of significant others, archaic objects of fantasy, and in
11 Similarly, ‘to some extent all later Rāmāyaṇas play on the knowledge of previous
tellings’ (Ramanujan 1991b: 33); Kampan̠ ‘makes full use of his predecessor Vālmīki’
(31); the above-mentioned Jaina telling by Vimalasūri ‘obviously . . . knows its Vālmīki
and proceeds to correct its errors and Hindu extravagances’ (34).
12 On the written, not oral, production of the Sanskrit epics, about which there is of
course some disagreement, see Hiltebeitel (1993: 28, 1999a, 1999b: 155–57, 2001). Appli-
cation of oral theory to these epics has, I would argue, produced only misreadings.
40 chapter two
many cultures, at another level of symbolic remove, ghosts and demons.
(Obeyesekere 1990: 253–54; emphasis in original)
As Obeyesekere suggests, the primary process metaphor is adequate,
within the first topography and without the second, to account for a
‘peopling’ of dreams through pictorial representation in images.13 In
conjunction with the dream-work and the royal two-way road it opens
to interpretation, it is also adequate to the work of culture:
The dream text is the descriptive account of the dream; insofar as this is
the case it can be ‘thickly described.’ . . . The description is followed by an
interpretation that renders the text intelligible in terms of the dreamer’s
deep motivation. Now this model can easily be applied to ethnography (and
not just psycho-ethnography). One could have a thick description of let us
say, a festival, a ritual, a myth, or whatever (Obeyesekere 1990: 266).
If we move to the significant others ‘peopled’ in Hindu epics, we not
only have certain specifically heightened close familial relationships,
plus ghosts and demons, but, at other levels of symbolic remove,
p ersonalized talking animals, gurus, and gods. There can really be
no doubt that Hindus see ‘transposed and distorted’ condensations,
displacements, represent-ations, and secondary revisions of them-
selves in epic figures, their interrelationships, and their worlds (see
Kakar 1978).14
These peopled signifiers and their interrelationships are also among
the important constellations that are ‘transposed and distorted’ when
primary process epic material swerves into regional epics, Thus in
typical South Indian fashion, Tamil Mahābhārata reenplotments in
both the Aṇṇan̠mar Katai and the Draupadī cult Mahābhārata intro-
duce brother-sister relations that are absent from the classical epic and
intensify cross-cousin and mother-son relationships (see Beck 1982:
13 Freud posits images in the primary process but without discrimination between
images as hallucinatory and perceptions inhibited by reality, which occurs in the sec-
ondary process. The wish-fulfilling ‘dream-thoughts’ thus pictorially represented are
‘the same as the thoughts of waking life,’ their strangeness consisting not in their being
thoughts or desires represented in images but in their ‘transposition or distortion’ that
results from the dream-work (see Ricoeur 1970: 78, 91–92). On Freud’s important
distinction between pictorial representation and symbolization and its limitations,
especially regarding myths and rituals, see Ricoeur (1970: 99–102,498–502).
14 Compare also Kothari (1989: 114), who curiously argues that whereas the Sanskrit
epics provide ‘models’ for people in society, the folk epic heroes and heroines supply
only proverbs. It is hard to imagine that this position would survive closer exploration of
regional traditions. On talking animals in the Mahābhārata, see Hiltebeitel (2001a).
the primary process of the hindu epics 41
174).15 Similarly, in typical North Indian fashion, the tensions of the
daughter/father relationship find expression in the Hindi Ālhā, build-
ing on the Mahābhārata, and the mother-in-law/daughter-in-law rela-
tionship in Pābūjī, building on the Rāmāyaṇa.16 To be sure, there are
other kinds of signifiers in the pool, and these all have a surplus of
other (including theological) meanings that may be no less primary
than the more psychodynamic ones. The point, however, is that the
pool of signifiers needs a little churning to account for its dynamic
properties.
Developmental Patterns
Our third consideration is the theme of development. Something is
needed to envision the complexity of developmental patterns beyond
the bottom up linearity of death, divinization, and pan-Indian legiti-
mization postulated by Blackburn for the origin and development of
South Asian epics. Even if we start from a pool of signifiers with a
bottom of a different kind, the problems posed by regional epics can-
not be resolved by Ramanujan’s notion of retelling as translation. Each
regional epic has selected its own limited set of iconic continuities and,
far more extensively, has worked out both its patterns of indexical
relocation and vernacularization and its themes of symbolic inversion
or subversion. Rather than being translations of the classical epics,
regional epics are ruptures from them. It is their discontinuities and
dislocations that stand out, and their subversions and inversions are
no longer versions but ‘aversions.’ The transformation can no longer
be sufficiently imaged as a crystallization. Primary process images are
reworked into them but at a culturally decisive ‘symbolic remove.’17
15 Compare the Draupadī cult Mahābhārata figures of Cank̇ uvati (the Pāṇḍavas ‘new’
younger sister: Hiltebeitel 1988: 344–49, 1991a: 29n26, 405–6, 418–23), the multiple
‘mothers’ who weep for Aravān̠ (1991a: 328), and the importance of the maittun̠an̠
relationships of the sister’s husband and wife’s brother that deepen the significance
of Jayadratha-Cayintavan̠ and Pōrman̠n̠an̠-Pōttu Rāja (1988: 348–49, 349n20, 397–98,
404–6). Compare Obeyesekere (1990: 146, 160–63) on the prominence of these same
three themes in the ‘family’ of Sri Lankan ‘Oedipal’ myths.
16 See Hiltebeitel 2001a on both, 1999c on father/daughter tensions, especially in
myths of sāti (widow immolation).
17 On this notion that Obeyesekere regards, along with what he considers to be
the lack of a censor, to be the main complexity that the work of culture adds to the
‘mechanisms’ of the dream-work, see his The Work of Culture (1990: 19–20, 49–51,
56–58, 201, 212, 271, 282). I resist only the insistence that the ‘core’ of a myth, from
42 chapter two
The rupture that is achieved by this remove makes for some-
thing analogous to secondary process ‘reality testing’ (Freud 1961:
566–67). After all, it is here that the primary process epic material
runs up against local realities of ‘cultural ideas about death’ (Kothari
1989: 112), regionally embedded obduracies of caste, the hard reali-
ties and dislocations of medieval history, sectarian rivalries, ancestral
landscapes, regional custom, pride, and so on.18 To be sure, regional
epics are also fed from these secondary process directions. Disconti-
nuity also enhances a revolutionary potential, emphasized in different
contexts by both Obeyesekere (1990: 187–88, 213–14) and V. Turner
(1974: 72, 110–12,122–23), that can be found when classical epic pri-
mary process material is reshaped toward new political ends. In terms
developed by Deborah Dunham and James Fernandez (1991) and
T. Turner (1991) and sounded out from different perspectives by Homi
Bhabha (1994), the politics of discontinuity can find its most expressive
figuration in a poeisis of creative metonymy that buries metaphors and
darkens the transparency and complicity of metaphoric continuities of
resemblance.
In trying to write of something on the margins of nationalism having
to do with locality, Bhabha’s topic has at least that much in common
with what is called for in writing about regional folk epics. Allowing
that good comparison ‘is a disciplined exaggeration in the service of
knowledge’ (J.Z. Smith 1990: 52), it is thus useful to draw an analogy
between regional oral epics and what Bhabha calls ‘counter-narratives’
in colonial and postcolonial discourse, especially in terms of his dis-
which symbolic remove occurs, will always be sexually psychodynamic (Obeyesekere
1990: 33, 210–11).
18 Schomer works out the implications of such reality-testing and symbolic remove
in showing how the Hindi Ālhā, as ‘Mahābhārata of the Kali Yuga,’ ‘has built into it
a tension between the Dvāpara Yuga paradigms and its own historical realities’ (1989:
149–50). She highlights four ‘marked contrast[s]’: (i) a different sociopolitical order
(the Mahābhārata’s ‘independent territorial kingdoms’ versus ‘congeries of small
principalities ruled by rival clans and bound together by a complex network of feudal
relationships’); (ii) different social status among the heroes (‘Instead of being the scions
of an ancient dynasty,’ the Ālhā heroes, with their ‘egalitarian’ army, are the mixed
origin and reputedly ‘vile’ Banāphars); (iii) different ‘dominant concern[s]’ (vindication
of position as rightful heirs versus Rājpūt honor); and (iv) different motivations for
the final conflict (royal succession versus the ‘interrelated issues’ of individual status
[ascribed or achieved], strict hypergamy, and a woman’s shifting of loyalty from natal
house to husband’s house).
the primary process of the hindu epics 43
cussion of their ‘metonymic strategies.’19 Like ‘counter-narratives of
the nation that continually evoke and erase its totalizing boundaries,’
regional oral epics ‘disturb those ideological manoeuvres through which
“imagined communities” are given essentialist identities’ (Bhabha
1994: 149). In its own way, each of the Sanskrit epics is a totalizing
(and, one might add, ‘colonizing’) text, and each reinforces the same
totality from different angles with similar metaphoric transparencies.20
The Mahābhārata totalizes outspokenly in its famous ‘whatever is here
is elsewhere’ dictum and in its boast of containing ‘the entire thought’
of Veda Vyāsa (perhaps a metaphor for its own primary process in the
depths of Veda”),21 in its instruction about all four ‘goals of human
life,’ and through its narrative frames and textual boundaries that keep
turning in on themselves as text while opening out to embrace infinity
and exclude only that which ‘is not found elsewhere.’22 The Rāmāyaṇa
totalizes through its image of the perfect man, the perfect kingdom,
the perfect dharma, and the perfect world for Brahmins. In contrast,
regional folk epics test the transparencies and ‘reality-effects’ of these
prior harmonizations of eternal Veda, fifth Veda, and dharmic subtlety
and perfection.23 They are p artializing d iscourses, in which m etaphors
can be buried, or generatively entrenched in new metonymic domains,
19 Compare Spivak: ‘We might consider the Mahābhārata itself in its colonialist
function in the interest of the so-called Aryan invaders of India’ (1988: 183). Spivak,
however, situates this function not in an ideological tension between total and regional
visions or in an intertextual relation between the substance and tenor of texts but in
the dubious areas of textual development (‘an accretive epic’) and historicity (‘the
“sacred” geography of an ancient battle is slowly expanded by succeeding generations
of poets so that the secular geography of the expanding Aryan colony can present itself
as identical with it and thus justify itself’). The analogy, in any case, ceases at the point
where colonial and postcolonial counternarratives entail supraregional ‘identities’ that
confront transcultural and transnational ‘others.’
20 One can churn Ramanujan’s pool metaphor with this point in mind, since both
epics foreground the myth of the churning of the ocean. Ramanujan may also have
self-consciously invoked India’s ‘ocean of the streams of story’ (Kathāsaritsāgara) and
the ‘fathomless lake’ of the Rāmcaritmānas (Lutgendorf 1991: 16–22) here as well.
21 I pursue the undertheorized matter of Veda-epic relations in Hiltebeitel 2001a
with this analogy in mind: that Veda is to the Sanskrit epics as the Sanskrit epics are
to regional oral martial epics.
22 On frame stories in the Mahābhārata, see Hiltebeitel (2001a); Minkowski (1989).
23 See Bhabha (1991: 90, 1994: 48, 108–11) on the ‘reality-effects’ produced and
secured. through the ‘invention of historicity’ and the ‘transparency of realist metanar-
ratives’ (and other such transparencies) in colonial and nationalist discourses. Compare
Barthes (1972) and J.Z. Smith (1990: 52–53) on the need to face the ‘political impli-
cations’ of ‘the quest for the “real” historical connections’ in comparisons. Equally
interesting, at least for Hindu epics, is their imagined historical connections.
44 chapter two
or, in Bhabha’s (1994: 74) terms, ‘disavowed’ in a ‘metonymy of pres-
ence’ that in its accent on fragments and contiguities, rather than
transparent resemblances, can register the perception not only of hid-
denness but of absence or lack.24 They afford a ‘metonymic strategy,’
a ‘partializing process of hybridity,’ ‘at once a mode of appropria-
tion and resistance’ that employs mimicry, irony, and camouflage in
‘an agonistic space’ (Bhabha 1994: 120–21). It is thus not an issue,
as with Ramanujan, of translation and representation of a transpar-
ent and crystalline whole but of displacement, condensation, and
re-p resentation in parts. Yet from their inception, India’s regional folk
epics have coexisted with the classical epics in a double articulation
that resembles the
two disproportionate sites of colonial discourse and power: the colonial
scene as the invention of historicity, mastery, mimesis, [and] the ‘other
scene’ of Enstellung, displacement, fantasy, psychic defense, and an ‘open’
textuality (Bhabha 1994: 108).
Metonymies of presence ‘cross the boundaries of the culture of enun-
ciation through a strategic confusion of the metaphoric and met-
onymic axes of the cultural production of meaning’ (Bhabha 1994:
90, 1984: 130) and ‘disturb the systematic (and systemic) construc-
tion of discriminatory knowledges’ (1994: 115). In this light, and in
terms parallel to Bhabha’s discussion of metonymic disavowals of ver-
tical transparencies, regional folk epics are ‘a complex cryptic figure
of enunciation, . . . an uncanny performance of substitutability and in
that very act an impossibility of simultaneity, . . . always less than one
and double’ (1991: 92), ‘an obscure and ubiquitous form of living the
locality of culture’ (1994: 140; emphasis in original). Bhabha’s guid-
ance through the ‘gaps’ of this ‘doubling’ that is ‘not depth’ and ‘not
resemblance’ (1994: 50–53) opens pathways into the ruptures and dis-
locations of space, time, and character that one finds in regional oral
martial epics. Yet one must recognize that the revolutionary potential
of such epics is not so richly imagined (except by some scholars) or
24 The Sanskrit epics could be said to have a ‘colonizing’ function analogous to that
of the English Bible as ‘the Word in the wilds,’ as discussed in Bhabha’s ‘Signs Taken
for Wonders’: ‘the idea of the English book is presented as universally adequate’; ‘the
sign of appropriate representation [read: metaphor]: the word of God, truth, art creates
the conditions for a beginning, a practice of history and narrative’; but its institution is
‘also an Enstellung, a process of displacement, distortion, dislocation, repetition [read:
metonymy]’ (1994: 105).
the primary process of the hindu epics 45
avowedly oppositional as Bhabha’s own metonymic strategies;25 one
must remember that metonyms can double back as metaphors, cre-
ate echoes and resonances, and sustain domains of reference and thus
interreferential domains.
It is, in any case, such strategies as these that allow regional epics
to appear to be countercultural or non-Brāhmanical at the same time
that they draw from primary storehouses of mainstream Brāhmanical
culture. On a dream-work/work of culture analogy, the discontinui-
ties of reality-testing, revolutionary potential, and creative metonymy
entail a kind of ‘reenplotment’ of a primary plot (cf. Obeyesekere
1990: 267). For both the dream-work and the work of culture, what
one needs to conceptualize are the ‘rules of engagement’ that charac-
terize such reenplotment and make ‘thick description’ of it possible’
(cf. Obeyesekere 1990: 282).26 To continue one of Obeyesekere’s points,
the description of a festival, ritual or myth
can be followed by an interpretation based on a set of metatheoretical
rules, if one also recognizes that the description itself is influenced by
these rules. In fact much of ethnographic work is of this order, except
that the rules of interpretation are rarely clearly formulated. Instead there
is ad hoc theory or interpretation through megaconcepts.
The preceding view of the dream work as ‘rules of interpretation’ does
not mean that I accept them. Quite the contrary: the rules must be vali-
dated in a ‘variety of ways and then revised or extended (1990: 266).
Instead of applying ‘megaconcepts’ like development, divinization, and
history,27 we must ‘tack’ back and forth from the text as work of culture
to the interests (political, sociological, familial, sexual, religious, and so
on) that enliven it and, in working back and forth, discern the rules
by which to identify the shifts and turns that characterize specific texts
25 Note that Bhabha wisely omits from 1994: 90 a sentence found in 1984: 130
(immediately following the passage from those pages just cited) that includes a one-
sided reference to ‘the metaphoric as the process of repression.’
26 See Poole (1986: 414–15), noting that using metaphoric lenses for analogic map-
ping ‘inevitably involves some mode of classification and categorization’ to enable
comparison ‘through some set of correspondence rules.’
27 On the distinction, between metatheory (for example, Freud and Weber) and
megaconcept (Jung), see Obeyesekere (1990: 256–61, especially 261):
The special part of the metatheory that helps us understand the manner in which
unconscious thoughts are transformed into images is the ‘dream work.’ Once
dreams are interpreted through the theory it is possible for Freud to discuss ‘the
logic of unconscious thought,’ . . . a kind of syntax or a ‘philosophical’ grammar
of the unconscious.
46 chapter two
in relation to others, recognizing that the description is influenced by
the rules thus disengaged.28 Among the rules of transformation at the
point of tacking between classical Sanskrit and regional oral martial
epics are two drawn from the classical epics themselves but uniquely
applied in regional oral martial epics: ‘transposition and distortion’ of
classical heroic ages into regional times and spaces; and reincarnation
of classical epic heroes into regional heroes who complete their ‘unfin-
ished business.’ Unlike the local hero traditions from which Blackburn
(1989: 22) starts, where the ‘generative point’ is a hero’s death, it is
possible to say of these epics that they begin with webs of linkages that
are already there. Indeed, the classical epics are treated as their frame
stories (Hiltebeitel 1999a: 43–47).
General versus Particular
Finally, our fourth consideration raises the question of the general and
the particular: Does the metaphor of primary process allow us to move
back and forth between the two? Ramanujan has dealt with this ques-
tion by noting the varied iconic, indexical, and symbolic possibilities
of translation. These are quite workable not only in comparing differ-
ent tellings but also in considering regional oral epic reenplotments at
a more distant metonymically entailed symbolic remove. The meta-
phor of primary process does, however, invite one more extension
at this point. As Obeyesekere observes, ‘the strength of the Freudian
approach lies in its case history method’ (1990: 270). The analogue
in studying the work of culture would be the ‘ “case history” of the
group’ (Obeyesekere 1990: 270). In effect, it is a move from Freud to
Max Weber. Obeyesekere undertakes such a project in studying the
parricide kings of Buddhist (and especially Sri Lankan) myth and his-
tory (1990: 143–214) and the Sri Lankan cultic adaptations of the epic
myth of Pattin̠i (1984). He retains his ‘core’ questions ‘about the values
held by the group, about maternal and family relations, sexuality, and
28 Compare Ricoeur (1970: 88): Freudian dream interpretation is thematized within
construction of the system; Poole on Clifford Geertz’s process of ‘ “dialectical tacking”
back and forth between the particular and the general, the experience-near and the
experience-distant, the emic and the etic’ (1986: 419). This is the one problem I have
with Handelman’s (1982) otherwise stimulating book: that in its oppositional treat-
ment of other hermeneutics, it does not envision a dialectical tacking of Rabbinic
hermeneutics back and forth with anything but itself.
the primary process of the hindu epics 47
so forth’ (1990: 270; emphasis in original). He tries to ‘show that these
values, if implemented in the consciousness of the ideal typical per-
son, might well result in the kind of anxieties that are externalized in
the collective representations’ (Obeyesekere 1990: 270). He also seeks
to validate them by the principle of ‘enough frequency’ (Obeyesekere
1990: 271). For Obeyesekere, ‘case histories of the group’ are possible
where one finds ‘psychic structures of the long run.’29 With some addi-
tional core questions, a move to the relation between India’s classi-
cal and folk martial epics is a simple one. Regional folk epics provide
material for similar case studies of primary processes long at work.
29 Obeseyekere 1990: 187 (parricides), 201–2, 209–10 (Sinhabāhu as the paradigmatic
Sri Lankan Oedipus), 147–48, 154, 160 (Aśoka), 180, 183–84 (Kāśyapa I), 209–10.
Fascinating for Hindu studies is his contrast of two models of conscience, Arjuna and
Aśoka (189), although the comparison should be extended further to one between
Aśoka and Yudhisṭḥ ira.

CHAPTER THREE
MORE RETHINKING THE MAHĀBHĀRATA:
TOWARD A POLITICS OF BHAKTI
Appreciative of the attention my 2001 book Rethinking the Mahābhārata1
(henceforth Rethinking) has received from the learned scrutiny of
colleagues in recent reviews,2 and mindful of my long and fruitful
exchange with most of the colleagues in question, I would like, while
attentive to helpful criticisms, to respond to them in the context of my
ongoing and especially most recent work for which Rethinking will, I
hope, serve in the not too distant future as a precursor to a book that I
am planning under the provisional title of Mapping the Sanskrit Epics:
Poetry, Dharma, and Devotion (henceforth Mapping).3 This projected
book4 will draw together work done since the completion of Rethink-
ing. It has begun taking form in conference presentations, several ref-
erenced in this essay, at venues where I have been able to continue to
work out my views in dialogue with colleagues—most notably James
1 Alf Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education
of the Dharma King (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001). I thank my friends
and colleagues Jonathan Chaves and Randy Kloetzli for helpful first readings of this
essay, and also Wendy Doniger, James Fitzgerald, and Luis Gonzáles-Reimann for
helpful critiques offered in presentations and discussions at a panel on Rethinking at
the 32nd Annual South Asia Conference, Madison WI, October 2003 where a second
draft was presented with only the first part of the title. It is this panel that put the idea
for the subtitle in motion.
2 I will respond to the following: Mary Brockington, review of Rethinking, Indo-
Iranian Journal 45 (2002); John Brockington, review of Rethinking, Bulletin of the School
of Oriental and African Studies 65, 3 (2002), 601; Peter Schreiner, review of Rethinking,
Journal of Religion 83, 2 (2003), 323; and James L. Fitzgerald, “The Many Voices of the
Mahābhārata: An Article Reviewing Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to
the Education of the Dharma King by Alf Hiltebeitel,” to appear in the Journal of the
American Oriental Society, henceforth “Many Voices,” citations of which are made of
a pre-print draft of March 2003a. Fitzgerald’s article is now to be found in Journal of
the American Oriental Society 123, 4: 803–18, See also Naina Dayal, “The ‘Cooking’
Time” (review of Rethinking), The Book Review (Delhi), January 2004: 8–9.
3 I note with appreciation Schreiner’s comment, in his review of Rethinking, 332,
that “in a guidebook one expects more maps and clearer sign posts.”
4 I soon abandoned the plan for a book of that title. The studies announced for it
in this chapter are for the most part now included in this book.
50 chapter three
L. Fitzgerald, who has been co-empanelled with me at all these venues,
and whose review of Rethinking will be foregrounded in this essay.
Near the beginning of his discussion of Rethinking, Fitzgerald men-
tions two matters that he takes to characterize my work from 1976
to 2001.5 I am said to be “[a] consistent advocate of the intentional
unity of the MBh (more or less the Pune text) and, especially, a fierce
defender of the importance of the divine Kṛsṇ ̣a and Kṛsṇ ̣a-bhakti in
that text.”6 On bhakti, briefly (for the moment): yes. But on “inten-
tional unity” I would like to set matters in the context of my develop-
ing ideas.
It is only since 1992 that I would own up to being “an advocate of
the intentional unity of the Mbh.,”7 and thus I am not a “consistent
advocate” of that position.” My 1976 book, The Ritual of Battle, car-
ried arguments that archaic elements of the Mbh were drawn from
Indo-European myth, ritual, and epic, and that growths and interpo-
lations occurred around such an “archaic epic” core. Indeed, it was
my burden in that book to argue that Kṛsṇ ̣a’s affinities with Visṇ ̣u (in
the epic’s incarnational “avatāra”8 scheme) had Brahmanical, Vedic,
para-Vedic, and Indo-European roots that implied pre-epic growths,
and were thus not among the things requiring interpolation theory or
the alleged lateness of Kṛsṇ ̣a-bhakti to explain them. I would no longer
make such a developmental argument to account for these associa-
tions. I would approach them from the standpoint of what dawned on
me in 1992—that the Mahābhārata is a work of literature involving
writing.
5 That is, from my The Ritual of Battle: Krishna in the Mahābhārata (Ithaca: Cor-
nell University Press, 1976; Albany: State University of New York Press, 1990) to
Rethinking.
6 Fitzgerald, “Many Voices” ms., 1.
7 These words are taken from an e-mail exchange with Fitzgerald of March 5, 2003,
the first of several over his review. I was deliberately misquoting his abbreviation MBh.
As I point out in Rethinking; 108, the abbreviation Mbh is preferable to MBh since
there is no evidence for a prior “Bh” outside the secondary literature.
8 As has been long and widely recognized, and will be discussed further below, the
avatāra concept is under formation in the Mbh without yet being used as a substan-
tive: See Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 109 n. 56—a note overlooked even though it is back-
referenced in a note on page 236 n. 36, a page that John Brockington cites to criticize
one of my approaches to this topic as “implausible” on the sole stated grounds that I
“show no recognition of the fact that the term [avatāra] is later than the epics”; see
J. Brockington’s review of Rethinking [2002], 601.
more rethinking the mahābhārata 51
My epiphany as to the written literary character of the Mbh owed
a good deal to prior points made by Fitzgerald,9 who has since clari-
fied how he regards the text to have undergone two written recen-
sions: one, the redaction of a “main Mahābhārata”10 that would have
been “completed through a deliberate authorial and redactorial effort
sometime during or shortly after the times of the Brahman dynasties
of the Śuṅgas and the Kāṇvas; that is, after the middle of the second
century B.C. and before the end of the first century B.C., though per-
haps even as late as the first century A.D.”; and second, a “ ‘Gupta
text”’ destined to become the “normative redaction” that would have
been “created and promulgated” “at some point around the time of the
Gupta Empire” (320–497 A.D.).11 I find the notion of a second redac-
tion gratuitous and ungainly and the notion of royal support for the
epic’s production and dissemination unnecessary. In my current work
on the Nārāyaṇīya, I attempt to show that the Guptas do not help us
to account for anything in the Critical Edition of the Mbh that can-
not be accounted for well before their time; and I maintain this point
especially with regard to bhakti segments, elements, and themes, for
which pre-Gupta (not to mention pre-Common Era) iconographical
and para-epic textual evidence is surprisingly ample. Moreover, I draw
on the inspired work of T.P. Mahadevan12 to argue that, based on the
correspondence between Kaśmīrī-Śāradā and Malayālam manuscripts
of the Mbh and the likelihood that the latter were brought south by
Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans before the Gupta Dynasty, the Guptas cannot
9 See James L. Fitzgerald, “The Moksạ Anthology of the Great Bhārata: An Initial
Survey of Structural Issues, Themes, and Rhetorical Strategies,” PhD dissertation
(Chicago: University of Chicago, 1980), 56–57, 62, 190; idem, “India’s Fifth Veda:
The Mahābhārata’s Presentation of Itself,” in Arvind Sharma, ed., Essays on the
Mahābhārata (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991), 152–58, especially 153 n. 5—both as cited in
Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 24 n. 97.
10 “Many Voices” ms., 10. Fitzgerald grants in a footnote (idem, 10 n. 34) that
“main Mahābhārata” is a “vague expression.” He would seem to have coined it, in
preference to the often-used “main story,” as one that admits to a text and is thus
quite different from the “main story.” Schreiner, review of Rethinking; 332, notes my
usage of “main story” as “integrated . . . with whatever is other than ‘main’ (Hiltebeitel
speaks of ‘inner’ and ‘outer’).” It could be clearer in his point that the latter usages
refer to “frame stories.”
11 James L. Fitzgerald, “Making Yudhisṭḥ ira the King: The Dialectics and the Politics
of Violence in the Mahābhārata,” Rocznik Orientalistyczny 54, 1 (2001), 68.
12 T. P. Mahadevan, “Brahmans and the Sanskrit Epics: Their Migrations to the
South,” paper presented to the University Seminar on South Asia, The George Washing-
ton University, January 16, 2003, which derived from his work in progress, The Arrival
of Vedism in South India: The Aparaśikhā and Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans (tentative title).
52 chapter three
be responsible for the dissemination of any “normative redaction” of
the epic.
Nonetheless, what remains of interest is that Fitzgerald argues for
the writtenness not only of the “normative” Gupta redaction but of the
“main Mahābhārata” that supposedly preceded it. Calling his argu-
ments “impressionistic rather than demonstrable,” he offers “two basic
reasons” in favor of the writtenness of this Ur-text: “I think the intricacy
of the narrative would have been easier to develop with writing, and
some of the highly refined elements of the text, such as the perfectly
regular classical meters, suggest the likelihood of writing being used in
their development.”13 Tentative as they are, I welcome these additional
arguments for the written character of what Fitzgerald considers the
earliest Mbh text. But the clearest evidence for writing would come
not from this “ main Mahābhārata,” on which more in a moment, but
from the enlarged “ ‘Gupta text,’ ” where a definite reference to writing
and likely allusions to books can be found in didactic material and in
connection with the Mahābhārata’s three interwoven frame stories:
the “outermost” authorial frame in which Vyāsa recites the Mbh to his
five disciples, including his son Śuka; the “inner” generational frame
in which the Pāṇḍavas’ great grandson Janamejaya performs the snake
sacrifice at which he (along with Vyāsa and Śuka) hears the Mbh from
Vaiśampāyana, one of the four initial disciples to have learned it from
Vyāsa in the first place; and the “outer” cosmological frame in which
the Ṛsịs of the Naimisạ Forest hear the Mbh from the bard Ugraśravas
who had also heard it at Janamejaya’s snake sacrifice. It is thus likely
that Mbh 1.1.208, from the “outer” frame (the last of the three in
the epic’s sequencing of their delivery), alludes to written “volumes”
when Ugraśravas says that the Mahābhārata weighs more on a scale
than the four Vedas.14 Likewise at 12.335.21–66, in the Nārāyaṇīya,
it would seem that something bookishly hefty is at hand when the
asuras Madhu and Kaitạ bha steal the Vedas from Brahmā and try to
throw them into hell (12.335.21–66). And writing itself is explicitly
mentioned at 13.24.70 where Bhīsṃ a tells Yudhisṭḥ ira, “Sellers of the
Vedas, corrupters of the Vedas, and those who write the Vedas, these
surely go to hell.”15 Is this distribution simply an indication that the
13 Fitzgerald, “Many Voices” ms., p. 14.
14 See further 1.1.16–19 as translated and discussed in Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 100.
15 I discuss these passages in Hiltebeitel, “Weighting Orality and Writing in the
Sanskrit Epics,” presented August 2002 and to appear in Petteri Koskikallio, ed.,
more rethinking the mahābhārata 53
Mahābhārata, by Fitzgerald’s account (as well as mine) a written work
from the start, is more prone to refer to books and writing outside of
its first writing (that is, outside the “main Mahābhārata”) than in it?
Does it tactically avoid reference to writing in the main story because
it is a story of older times, or “Vedic times”? Or does it become more
explicit about books and writing with time? And if so, over what kind
of time?
Yet reference to writing and books cannot be all there is to the
“intentional literary unity” of such a text—one that, with its literary
experiments such as frame stories, long didactic interludes, and many
subtales, might, let us note, intend more unity than it achieves, at least
by any conventional standard. In my study of the Nārāyaṇīya,16 I argue
that this proverbially late devotional text maps movements between the
Mahābhārata’s three frames, and that this feature of the Nārāyaṇīya
allows one to discern how the three frames work throughout the Mbh
as a whole. For Fitzgerald, however, the “main Mahābhārata” is com-
posed before this entanglement of frames: it includes only “the basic
Vaiśampāyana frame with its amśāvatāraṇa listing,” that is, only part
of the “inner” Vaiśampāyana frame itself, and the other two frames
not at all. This “main Mahābhārata;” says Fitzgerald, is “concerned to
provide ideological and narrative grounding for a Brahminical concep-
tion of kingly rule and hierarchical society in the wake of the Mauryan
Empire and that government’s cosmopolitanism and its insufficient
recognition of the uniqueness of Brahminic authority.”17 More reveal-
ing than what Fitzgerald includes in this “main Mahābhārata” is his
list of what “probably came later”: “[m]ost of the material in Bhīsṃ a’s
instructions to Yudhisṭḥ ira,” the Bhagavad Gītā, “all episodes that
elaborate some theme of devotion to Visṇ ̣u, Śiva, or Kṛsṇ ̣a” (three
“such as” examples are given from the “main story,” including the
killing of Śiśupāla), and “several highly polished expressions of Kṛsṇ ̣a
Proceedings of the Third Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics
and Purāṇas (DICSEP). Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts; and further
in Hiltebeitel, “Buddhism and the Mahābhārata,” prepared for Professor Frits Staal’s
class on Buddhism at the University of Leiden, November 2003, and now for Federico
Squarcini, ed., Boundaries, Dynamics and Construction of Traditions in South Asia
(Florence, forthcoming).
16 Alf Hiltebeitel. “The Nārāyaṇīya: Ongoing Problems in Dating the Sanskrit Epics.”
See now chapter Joydeep: Is this chapter included in this book?
17 “Many Voices” ms., 10.
54 chapter three
bhakti” between 12.40 and 12.56.18 Can such selective reading be suc-
cessful? In defense of the practice of what I mostly call “excavation,”
Fitzgerald upholds the practice in the name of three “metaphor[s] of
disconnection”: “ ‘excavation,’ ‘analysis,’ [and] ‘surgical excision.’ ”19
While “analysis” recalls the terms used a century ago by Edward Wash-
burn Hopkins to distinguish his own approach from the “synthetic”
approach he ascribed principally to Joseph Dahlmann, Fitzgerald sup-
plies the third term himself, thereby giving us a hint that he is less the
excavator than the textual surgeon: excavators dig beneath a text for
what would be old; surgeons remove later growths, especially in this
case bhakti appendages. Bhakti appendectomies on the Indian epics
are an old and continuing practice and people have performed them
for over a century of different reasons. But Fitzgerald’s are distinc-
tive and challenging. His “main Mahābhārata” centers on Dharmarāja
Yudhisṭḥ ira as a grim and somber extension of his father Dharmarāja
Yama, the god of death. This “dark” Yudhisṭḥ ira must preside over
a divine raiding party of the gods that descends to earth to restore
Brahmans to privileges denied them by the pro-Buddhist Mauryan
emperor Aśoka—these being the Brahmans who, according to Fitzger-
ald, would have composed the first written “main Mahābhārata” out
of “rage” at their treatment under Aśoka—”a deep and bitter politi-
cal rage at the center of the Mahābhārata”20 Be it noted that Fitzger-
ald and I agree both on the approximate dates of the earliest Mbh
and on its having been written, but we disagree over whether it was
again overwritten with new material of two main types: instructional
material on dharma and related matters that Yudhisṭḥ ira hears about
from Bhīsṃ a, and bhakti material; and of the latter, not only didactic
bhakti material like the Gītā and the Nārāyaṇīya, but narrative mate-
rial within the main story. That it has been possible for the “original
versus late” status of bhakti in the Mbh to remain so long unresolved
is testimony to the insufficiency of the arguments that have been raised
18 See James L. Fitzgerald, “The Position of Brahmins in the Mahābhārata: New
Perspectives on the Development and Growth of the Epic Between the Empires,” 3,
Between the Empires Conference, University of Texas at Austin, April 2003.
19 “Many Voices” ms., 11 n. 36.
20 See Fitzgerald, “Making Yudhisṭḥ ira the King,” 85, thus attributing this “rage”
to his first group of epic-writing Brahmans as the motive behind their portrayal of
his darker Yudhisṭḥ ira (85–90), a dark underside that I would certainly agree is there
(see Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 119–20, 135–39), but not prior to his larger portrayal as a
thoughtful, virtuous man and endearing source of occasional light.
more rethinking the mahābhārata 55
on both sides of the question, my own in The Ritual of Battle included.
And perhaps we are destined to remain stuck at this impasse forever.
But Fitzgerald freshens the challenge and raises the stakes. Although
I cannot address this topic as fully here as I hope to do in Mapping,
above all because the exposition involves not only the Mbh but the
Rāmāyaṇa, Fitzgerald’s views point up the need to clarify the nature
and importance of bhakti in these texts. For the Mbh, I would thus
begin by going a few steps further than I do in Rethinking.
Fitzgerald observes that in Rethinking I “[o]nly occasionally . . . make
observations (usually incidentally, often only in the notes) regarding
the central importance for the MBh of such themes as Kṛsṇ ̣a being
the supreme God incarnate, bhakti, the four-yuga theme, the avatāra
theme, the soteriological worldview of yoga, and so on; but these
asides serve to remind readers of those arguments of Hiltebeitel and
Madeleine Biardeau that do depend on a rigorously synchronous read-
ing of the text”—a characterization that, for reasons I will bring out
later in this essay, I must reject. Nor for that matter is Biardeau rigor-
ously synchronic, since for her the Nārāyaṇīya is late.21 On my epi-
sodic treatment of bhakti in Rethinking, Fitzgerald adds in a footnote:
“For the most part these observations do not contribute anything new
to those arguments.”22 The point about footnotes, “asides,” and little
new is engaging, and correctly calls attention to the fact that bhakti is
not a direct subject of this book but rather a matter of my continuing
emphasis. But considering that the only exception Fitzgerald cites to
the charge of little new is my argument about a particular textual pas-
sage (Draupadī’s call to “Govinda” during her disrobing), it looks also
to be a way of reassuring readers that the listed themes do not disturb
any settled opinion that numerous if not most bhakti elements should
be brought under the surgical knife.23 Yet Fitzgerald does not number
21 See Madeleine Biardeau, Le Mahābhārata: Un récit fondateur du brahmanisme et
son interprétation, 2 vols, (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 2002), vol. 2, 566.
22 Fitzgerald, “Many Voices” ms., 10–11 and n. 9.
23 John Brockington, who makes bhakti excisions in the practice of oral epic theory,
says my treatment of this saree-restoration scene “includes rather specious arguments
against Edgerton’s text,” referring to a page on which I say that “Edgerton’s ‘choice
could merely typify the eagerness of the Critical Edition’s editors to excise bhakti by
stripping the text” (Rethinking, 251). But Brockington does not mention my arguments,
much less show how they are specious; see his review of Rethinking, 602. Similarly,
Mary Brockington fails to indicate why she attributes to me “unfairness to Julius
Lipner (p. 257 n. 49)” in my summary of some of his arguments on this episode: see
M. Brockington, review of Rethinking, Indo-Iranian Journal 45 (2002). The references
56 chapter three
among the bhakti matter that he peripheralizes an argument that is
new, central to the book, and one that he finds to be “[o]ne of [the
book’s] interesting generalizations”: “A clear epic-long pattern is that
while the deity and author [Kṛsṇ ̣a and Vyāsa] work together, the god
deals primarily with Arjuna and the author with Yudhisṭḥ ira.”24 For
me, the point has some value against arguments for the alleged lateness
of the Bhagavad Gītā; as I maintain in my study of the Nārāyaṇīya.
But more centrally, Rethinking does not focus on bhakti because it is
concerned primarily with the relationship of Vyāsa and Yudhisṭḥ ira,
not with that between Kṛsṇ ̣a and Arjuna, which is where bhakti in
the Mbh certainly gets its deepest articulations. With this in mind,
let me say a bit about where I believe the argument for bhakti in the
epics must go. To requote Fitzgerald, I believe that both epics’ Brah-
man poets “provide [their] ideological and narrative grounding for
a Brahminical conception of kingly rule and hierarchical society” in
bhakti, in bhakti itself, but that it is mapped differently in the two
epics. Whereas the Rāmāyaṇa, which I regard to be the slightly later of
the two,25 grounds its politics of bhakti in a politics of kingship,26 the
Mbh, to borrow a phrase, grounds its politics of bhakti in a politics of
friendship27—or, more exactly, since it concerns not only Arjuna but
are to Franklin Edgerton, ed., Sabhāparvan. Introduction and Apparatus (Poona:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1944), from the Pune Critical Edition of the
Mbh, and Julius Lipner, Hindus: Their Religious, Beliefs and Practices (London and
New York: Routledge, 1994).
24 Fitzgerald, “Many Voices” ms., 16, citing Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 90; cf. “Many
Voices” ms., 16 n. 51.
25 I am persuaded by Madeleine Biardeau here as regards the sequence of the two
epics, though I believe the distance in time between them is less than she proposes;
see Biardeau, Le Rāmāyaṇa de Vālmīki (Paris: Gallimard, 1999), xxxv, li–lii; Le
Mahābhārata, vol. 1, 70I.
26 This was appreciated by Sheldon Pollock, who I believe nonetheless made the
mistake of chronologically prioritizing the politics over the bhakti even though he
admitted that no evidence supported it; see Pollock, trans., The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki:
An Epic of Ancient India, vol. 3: Araṇyakāṇḍa, Robert P. Goldman, ed. (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1991), 46, 52; Hiltebeitel, “Epic Studies: Classical Hinduism
in the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute 74 (1994), 36–54; and idem, “India’s Epics: Writing, Orality, and Divinity,”
in Arvind Sharma, ed., The Study of Hinduism (Columbia, SC: University of South
Carolina Press, 2003), 123–24.
27 See Jacques Derrida, Politics of Friendship, George Collins trans. (London: Verso,
1997), repeatedly and provocatively applicable to the consideration of friendship not
only in the Mbh but in early Buddhism.
more rethinking the mahābhārata 57
Karṇa, a politics of friendship and the enemy.28 I believe one cannot
have much of a “main Mahābhārata”—or even, for that matter, much
of a “dark” Yudhisṭḥ ira, whom Karṇa dogs at every step—without it.
It is thus here, over the relation between politics and bhakti, that
Fitzgerald and I have our most central divergence, but also, I would
like to believe, the chance for our most productive conversation. Find-
ing me remiss in attending to the politics of the Mbh, Fitzgerald thinks
I may have “divert[ed] my gaze” from Yudhisṭḥ ira the king to his rela-
tions to Draupadī, his father Dharma, and my “sense that the MBh
truly is about the incarnation of the Supreme God Kṛsṇ ̣a Vāsudeva at
a juncture of yugas,” leaving “these politically important themes [to]
remain the concealed dark matter of this book.”29 Here, I should like
to bring their dark matter into greater political light. First, however,
it is striking that Fitzgerald emphasizes the participation of the “three
Kṛsṇ ̣as”—Kṛsṇ ̣a Vāsudeva, Draupadī Kṛsṇ ̣ā, and Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana
Vyāsa—in the “main Mahābhārata.” It is this triad that presents the
most explicit “dark matter” (kṛsṇ ̣a means “dark” or “black”) of the
Mbh, and it would seem that Fitzgerald would be obliged to explain
their intervention without reference to bhakti, since such a color cod-
ing also applies to Arjuna, to Rāma and Bharata in the Rāmāyaṇa, and
to other (albeit later) avatāra iconographies.30 Let it suffice to suggest
that, at least in the Mbh, these three or more Kṛsṇ ̣as motivate the nar-
ratives through areas of darkness in which divine and political power
converge. Fitzgerald, however, treats these explicitly “dark” figures as
28 This was a leading subject in my “Mapping Bhakti in the Sanskrit Epics,” pre-
sented at the 214th meeting of the American Oriental Society at San Diego, March
2004. Here I draw on an old interest: see Hiltebeitel, Ritual of Battle, 254–66; “Brothers,
Friends, and Charioteers: Parallel Episodes in the Irish and Indian Epics,” ed. Edgar C.
Polomé, Homage to Georges Dumézil: Journal of Indo-European Studies Monograph,
No. 3 (1982): 85–112; “The Two Kṛsṇ ̣as on One Chariot: Upanisạ dic Imagery and
Epic Mythology,” History of Religions 24 (1984): 1–26. As I hope to show in Mapping,
friendship relates to a whole cluster of themes that can be tied together in and around
Karṇa, while friendship in relation to enmity is the epic ground of dvesạ bhakti, “devo-
tion by hatred,” for which the above-mentioned Śiśupāla—whom Fitzgerald would
like to excise from the Mbh—is the most prominent Mbh example and, like Karṇa
and Arjuna, a son of one of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s paternal aunts; see Georges Dumézil, Mythe et
épopée, 2: Types épiques indo-européens: un héros, un sorcier, un roi (Paris: Editions
Gallimard, 1971), 63, 65–66.
29 “Many Voices” ms., 7.
30 See Hiltebeitel, Ritual of Battle, 60–76.
58 chapter three
“holy agents” of Brahmanism31 and, from what I can gather, as more
or less metaphoric supports for the first composing Brahmans’ more
basic portrayal of the dark Yudhisṭḥ ira, whom Fitzgerald finds, as
noted, to be darker than the more “idealistic” Yudhisṭḥ ira I supposedly
present (for I do also darken Yudhisṭḥ ira in a new way)32. Apparently
Kṛsṇ ̣a bhakti, once it overwrites the text, would not only be a later but
a lighter political theology overlaid upon this originally darker vision.
For me, however, there is already in The Ritual of Battle, as there is
in Rethinking, an argument that the epic manages to hold a darker
and more idealist Yudhisṭḥ ira and its arguments with and about God
together in a dark and richly satisfying tension.
In any case, Fitzgerald finds that I do not say enough about the poli-
tics of the Brahmans who lie behind what I call the epic’s composing
committee and its portrayal of Vyāsa as author.33 Yet as I have noted,
he tends to define the epic poets’ Brahman politics only in relation to
contemporary kings,34 whereas I hold that they were capable of com-
posing and disseminating the Mbh without major (i.e., Gupta, or any
earlier) royal patronage. What I intend to argue further is that, if I am
right, it makes the politics of these Brahmans all the more interesting.
In brief, given that we agree that the Mbh is a post-Aśokan text and
thus colored by experiences of Buddhism and the other heterodoxies,35
and assuming that we are dealing with arguments over ideas, is there
a “main Mahābhārata” that is the projection of “a deep and bitter
political rage” in which faith is mostly a matter of afterthoughts, or
are the Mbh and Rāmāyaṇa both designed to sustain a sly and patient
political theology that unfolds a new bhakti cosmology in which royal
31 See James L. Fitzgerald, 1999 ms. of the article “Mahābhārata,” to appear in Gene
Thursby and Sushil Mittal, eds., The Hindu World (New York: Routledge, 2004), 7: the
Pāṇḍavas are “aided by three ‘dark,’ ‘obscure,’ or ‘secret’ (krsṇ ̣a) holy agents whose
true identities or interests are not publicly known . . . [who are] representative of the
world’s Vedic brahmins”; idem, 17: while in hiding after the lacquer house episode,
“the Pāṇḍavas are aided by the mysterious (kṛsṇ ̣a) agent of Brahmanism Vyāsa.”
32 In proposing that what Fitzgerald now calls the “divine raiding party” theme is
actually launched in the myth of the five former Indras through the Vrātya associa-
tions that link Yudhisṭḥ ira to Yama, and the Pāṇḍavas altogether, to Indra (Rethinking,
135–38 and especially 237, n. 20).
33 “Many Voices” ms., 7: Hiltebeitel says “more about these Brahmins—if not their
politics.”
34 Fitzgerald, “Making Yudhisṭḥ ira the King,” 66, n. 10; 67; 79, n. 51; 85.
35 Rethinking, 163 and passim. Fitzgerald and I are closer here than this review would
imply; see his “Making Yudhisṭḥ ira the King,” 78–83.
more rethinking the mahābhārata 59
patronage and Brahman prestige find new justifications and meanings
that are still nonetheless saturated with overtones of Veda?
In Mapping, I hope to work further on the ways the two epic texts
construct their Brahman authors in relation to Veda, comparing the
ways that Vyāsa and Vālmīki figure in their own texts, particularly
in relation to other prominent Brahman sages or Ṛsịs, most of them
with Vedic associations, and to the heroines.36 Noticeable among the
differences, however, is this: whereas in the Rāmāyaṇa’s single frame
story, Vālmīki is virtually the sole Ṛsị other than in his brief exchange
with Nārada, in the Mbh, the three frame stories relate Vyāsa to a
number of Ṛsịs in whom I sought, in Rethinking, to detect allusions
to a composing committee. On this subject, Fitzgerald has his reserva-
tions.37 Yet it is one of the values of a challenging and learned discus-
sion that criticism on such a point can inspire a new idea. Fitzgerald
finds it difficult to imagine “a committee of poets jointly inventing such
a complex and ingenious connected narrative [as the Mbh] and at the
same time allowing itself such ‘loose joins.’ Everything we know about
Brahminic and old Indian textual traditions tells us that editors and
compilers amalgamate texts and do not at all mind ‘loose joins’ or
having no ‘join’ other than physical contiguity; but individual authors
in the Sanskrit tradition—when we have them: Pāṇini, Patañjali,
Aśvaghosạ , Kālidāsa—enforce exceptionally tight connections in the
texts they fashion.”38 I find, however, that this contrast between editors
and compilers on the one hand and individual authors on the other
opens another way to think about how the epic poets worked within
these very parameters. As in so many things, their model would have
36 See Hiltebeitel, “Authorial Paths Through the Two Sanskrit Epics, Via the
Rāmopākhyāna,” paper delivered at the 14th World Sanskrit Conference, Helsinki
Finland, July 2003. See now chapter 7 below.
37 I wonder at Fitzgerald’s statement that I apply “a hermeneutic lever that is too
powerful and easy to use” (“Many Voices” ms., 18)—as if interpolation and redaction
theory were made of sterner stuff, Fitzgerald makes an allied point that excavationist
and surgical approaches are economical, and believes that I argue for joint authorship
as an argument of convenience. There would, however, have to be a correlation between
convenience and economy, and I disagree that “imagining the authorial agents respon-
sible for the ‘epic’ to be separated in time and interest and location” (“Many Voices”
ms., 10) is the less convenient or more economical of the options. A lot hangs on
that point, but so be it. Indeed, even while defending “excavation theories,” Fitzgerald
grants that one of the reasons to suspect them is that “it is intellectually easier . . . to take
something apart than it is to find the often subtle connections that hold it together”
(“Many Voices” ms., 11).
38 “Many Voices” ms., 11 (my italics).
60 chapter three
been their image of Veda—Veda as a multi-genre, multi-style, multi-
authored and loosely-joined totality, from the Ṛg Veda through the
Vedic corpus—which they imagine their own Fifth Veda to extend
and rejuvenate. But as to individual authors and a “jointly inventing”
committee, these comments are based on an incomplete reading of
my indications of how the committee would have worked. Individual
authors would have written much as Fitzgerald says others have done,
often “enforc[ing] tight connections in the texts they fashion,” such
as “Nala,” “Śuka,” and many other subtales. But the invention of the
“complex and ingenious connected narrative” and provision for “loose
joins” would have come from the person the Mahābhārata and I call
“the author.” Since Fitzgerald gives some plausibility to the idea of a
committee, our differences thus lie mainly in how we imagine such
a committee could most likely have worked, especially in relation to
“the author.”
With regard to Vyāsa, Fitzgerald makes it clear I could have been
more straightforward about some things, and have thought further
about others. Fitzgerald takes issue with my “construction of the ‘ever-
receding’ author Vyāsa as a deeply knowing fiction of authorship”;39
likewise, with my reading of “the MBh through the keyhole of the
Śuka story,”40 ascribing such a reading to my alleged “a priori convic-
tion that! [the Śuka] story must be synchronous with the rest of the
MBh.”41 But in my Nārāyaṇīya study, composed before seeing Fitzger-
ald’s essay on my book, I argue that certain units in the Mbh suggest
the wrapping up of the project: the ‘Śuka’ story being one of them. I
thus have· no such ‘a priori conviction’ about it or any other segment
being “synchronous” with the rest. Like the Nārāyaṇīya, I think, the
Śuka story is ‘late’—in the short sense I advocate for that term. More-
over, if my “keyhole” reading of the Śuka story is emblematic of my
approach, Fitzgerald does something much the same with his insight-
ful reading of the “artificial, didactic parable” of Tanu (“Skinny”) as
what he calls “an important key to the epic” and “a stroke of symbol-
making genius” in his article “Making Yudhisṭḥ ira the King.”42 As the
39 “Many Voices” ms., 15.
40 Ibid. ms., 18.
41 Ibid. ms., 17.
42 Fitzgerald, “Making Yudhisṭḥ ira the King,” 75–76. I do not, however, follow
Fitzgerald’s assessment of how old and new senses of dharma found in the Tanu story
reflect the history of the Mbh.
more rethinking the mahābhārata 61
Mbh indicates right after the Śuka story and the Nārāyaṇīya, there
are many doors to heaven;43 just so, there would be many keys and
keyholes to this text.
Since there is no point in my leaving matters obscure, let me, despite
some inevitable regrets, go beyond the hints offered in Rethinking and
underscore how I believe the composing committee, emblemized in
the relations between the three frames, could have worked in relation
to “the author.”
Most straightforward is an indication in Rethinking that Fitzgerald
overlooks: “Somewhere in back of all this the author spent 3 years on
this work—perhaps, as Vaidya saw it, doing such ‘splendid plot-laying’
as to rival Shakespeare.”44 Regarding C.V. Vaidya, I highlight his fine
evaluation45 of the “splendid plot-laying of Vyāsa, of which he says, ‘It
has often occurred to me that if the story of the Mahābhārata is not
a historical one, it must indeed be the production of an imagination
which is higher than that of Shakespeare.’ ”46 Meanwhile, the reference
to Vyāsa’s “three years” is a hint from the Mbh itself, where it says,
“For 3 years the Muni Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana always got up making this
superb Mahābhārata story.”47 Surely obscure, but just as surely it also
means something. In Rethinking I was not willing to speculate beyond
bringing it into relation to the “splendid plot-laying” lines laid out by
C.V. Vaidya. But for me it is also a hint that, diachronically speak-
ing, the text probably took somewhere between this 3 years and the
couple of generations I propose for its production, and that the 3 years
may be commemorated here as all that the person pseudonymized
as Vyāsa had to give to the plot-laying project. If so, I think the pas-
sage may also hint that the spirit of this person would have lived on
among the members of the working committee. And I would relate
this to another of the epic’s possible indications: the hint that by mak-
ing Vyāsa a sadasya—seated attendee—at Janamejaya’s snake sacrifice
five generations after he has fathered the fathers of the epic’s heroes,
43 12.342.9; 16; see Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 20.
44 Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 169; cf. 17.
45 My purpose in discussing Vaidya’s work at some length was to look past his
impossible chronologies to the truly generative insights of a largely forgotten scholar.
I do not just “criticize” him (see J. Brockington 2002, 601).
46 Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 17, citing Chintaman Vinayak Vaidya, The Mahābhārata:
A Criticism (Bombay: Bombay Book Depot and Delhi: Mehar Chand Lachhman Das,
[1905] 1966), 49.
47 Mbh 1.56.32; see Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 169, n. 134.
62 chapter three
the poets give presence to the author at his work’s debut. For there,
as a silent listener48 to the Mbh which he is said to have created and
imparted as his “entire thought” to Vaiśampāyana and the four other
disciples, including Śuka, Vyāsa’s authorial presence is “felt” behind
all three frames.49 But more than this, it is not just Vyāsa who is there
listening at the snake sacrifice. So is Śuka.50 What to make of this one
obscurity couched within another? It would have to be a problem for
Fitzgerald, who limits his “main Mahābhārata” to material selected
from the Vaiśampāyana frame. It seems that he wants not to have
to reckon with this double father and son felt presence at this very
narration and behind it. Fitzgerald is willing to grant that “[p]arts of
the story of Vyāsa and Śuka certainly do form a masterful fiction of
intergenerational anxiety,”51 but surely there is more to it than that. It
is a masterful fiction that relates a specifically father-son story to the
composition and dissemination of the Mbh. And it does this by chal-
lenging the very limits of narrative and temporal logic, for not only
must Vyāsa survive six generations to be present at Vaiśampāyana’s
recital; the best explanation for Śuka’s being there is that he would
have to have returned from moksạ !
Keeping these hints together, it was in the back of my mind when
I wrote Rethinking that the composing committee, in presencing the
author and his son so strikingly at the epic’s first “public” telling, might
have lingered not only on the memory of “the author’s” 3-year con-
tribution, but on this poignant tale about how his lost son was once
among these disciples as a co-disciple. No doubt one can appreciate
my hesitancy in spelling this out.52 But it was among my consider-
ations in suggesting a limit of two generations: that such a span could
include time either for a son to carry on the work of his father, or
time for the work to have been carried on by, among others, the son’s
48 Silent but for one revealing exception discussed in Hiltebeitel, “The Nārāyaṇīya:
Ongoing Problems in Dating the Sanskrit Epics.”
49 Cf. Christopher Z. Minkowski, “Janamejaya’s sattra and Ritual Structure,” Journal
of the American Oriental Society 109, 3 (1989), 405, as cited in Hiltebeitel, Rethinking,
94. Indeed, there are differences in the way these two presences are felt throughout
the inner frame. The outer Ugraśravas-Ṛsịs of the Naimisạ Forest frame is felt as an
overhearing of the inner frame as retold from afar, whereas the outermost Vyāsa and
disciples frame is felt literally and with immediacy by Śuka and Vyāsa’s listening and
bodily presence at Janamejaya’s snake sacrifice itself.
50 Mbh 1.48.7; see Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 115 and n. 71; 284 and n. 16.
51 “Many Voices” ms., 18.
52 See what I set as my limits for such discussion in Rethinking, 317 and n. 131.
more rethinking the mahābhārata 63
co-disciples who might have survived him and/or the father. Thus, in
suggesting that the Śuka story is probably, like the Nārāyaṇīya, late “in
the short sense I advocate for that term,” let me call attention to my
suggestion53 that the Śuka story should be considered along with its
sequel, the Nārāyaṇīya, and the latter’s sequel—the story that is infor-
mative about the many doors to heaven, and also about “gleaners”
and the Naimisạ Forest (Mbh 12.240–53)—as a three-part sequence
that concludes the Moksạ dharma section of the Sāntiparvan. Indeed,
I would now mention a principle that guided me in this view of epic
diachrony: that the manner in which portions of the text are wound
up is a better indicator of relative lateness than the joint premise of
interpolation and centuries-later redaction. Indeed, another sequence
to which such winding up, or leaving for the end, applies, in my view,
is the Mbh’s last two short parvans, which come just after Vyāsa makes
the last of his epic appearances to tell Arjuna what he should convey
to Yudhisṭḥ ira as to how the great story must end.54 In any case, I sug-
gest that the interesting problems lie in the dynamic between the epic’s
three frames, for it is there that the “real Brahman authors . . . must
have enjoyed creating . . . some complex image of themselves.”55 In this
dynamic, “the author” is not to be set aside and there is no “periphery”
or “perimeter” of the text to allow for what Fitzgerald calls “even-
tual authorship.” This thoroughly imbricated author, who is cleverly
presenced everywhere, even in his characters’ thoughts, is, like Kṛsṇ ̣a,
an authority one cannot go beyond in matters of dharma and bhakti,
and the relation of dharma and bhakti to each other. It is thus only
half the story to say that I impute “transcendent-author themes” to
Vyāsa.56 Similarly, although I appreciate Fitzgerald’s insight that I
“read . . . Vyāsa as an analog of the absent Buddha,”57 it misses the same
point: that Vyāsa is as much presenced as absenced.
In other words, the author is part of the design of the text. But
what is design? Fitzgerald writes, even while sounding dubious, that
it “could be fruitful to approach every aspect of the text as being,
possibly, a contingent invention designed for some specific artistic
53 Ibid., 19–20, 28–29.
54 Mbh 16.9; Rethinking, 87–90.
55 Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 101.
56 Fitzgerald, “Many Voices” ms., 3.
57 “Many Voices” ms., 16, recalling his earlier citation (9) of Hiltebeitel, Rethink-
ing, 158.
64 chapter three
purpose.”58 Here, when Fitzgerald writes of design it is as an inter-
polationist, arguing that not all passages are “designed with the same
degree of artistic purpose and freedom”59 for inclusion in the text. That
is, he is assuming that both early and late redactors, and especially the
latter, would design passages for an expanding Mbh that lies somewhat
inchoate before them waiting for their improvements. For this he gives
his analogy of “a great cathedral” with multiple architects contributing
over time.60 As I indicate in my piece on “Weighting Orality and Writ-
ing,” I prefer a different image: that of the atelier, where one master
artist inspires the contributory work of a school.61 The textual arche-
type unveiled by the Pune Critical Edition reveals a design behind
the Mbh that could be and, I think it best to think, would be coeval
with its first imagining, which are indeed what I think the epic calls
“the entire thought” of Vyāsa, and what I have in mind in quoting
C. V. Vaidya’s attribution to Vyāsa of “such ‘splendid plot-laying’ as
to rival Shakespeare.” Individual passages would have been created for
and within that design, which would have been blueprinted to accom-
modate material of the great variety we find. One reason for regarding
the archetypal design as this early is that it is gratuitous to go before
or after the Critical Edition to account for individual passages in it.
Another is that this design is understood, at least in its broad out-
lines, by Vālmīki (or if one prefers, by the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa), which
cannot be much later than the Mbh—a point that needs of course
to be developed beyond what can be said here.62 But if I am on the
58 “Many Voices” ms., 5 (my italics).
59 Ibid.
60 “I myself am inclined to imagine the development of the Mahābhārata more
along the lines of the gradual building, modification, and occasional refurbishment
of a great cathedral, under the direction of different architects and master-builders at
different points of time. I think the ‘gradualist’ models of the epic’s development that
have prevailed in Western scholarship are obviously more plausible than Hiltebeitel’s
one-time symposium” (“Many Voices,” 15). “Obviously,’ however, is a word that merely
appeals to a “prevailing” view.
61 See n. 15 above. Note that for such a text, there would be no clear line between
authors and redactors; cf. Fitzgerald, “Making Yudhisṭḥ ira the King,” 73, 86.
62 See Alf Hiltebeitel, “Authorial Paths through the Two Sanskrit, Epics, Via the
Rāmopākhyāna,” 14th World Sanskrit Conference, Helsinki, Finland, July 2003. But
some of the groundwork for the claim is indicated in Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 6,
n. 27, citing Sheldon I. Pollock, trans., The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki: An Epic of Ancient
India, vol. 2: Ayodhyākāṇḍa (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986), 38–42, and
Madeleine Biardeau, “Some Remarks on the Links between the Epics, the Purāṇas
and their Vedic Sources,” in Gerhard Oberhammer, ed., Studies in Hinduism: Vedism
more rethinking the mahābhārata 65
right track in bringing the Rāmāyaṇa into this argument from design,
another reason to favor it would be the logical priority of a bhakti poli-
tics of friendship over a bhakti politics of kingship. And another is the
likelihood, mentioned earlier, that the correspondences between the
Śāradā-Kaśmīrī and Malayālam recensions, which include this design
and with it the Nārāyaṇīya, are significantly pre-Gupta.63
Finally, Fitzgerald’s critique has led me recognize the need to be
clearer regarding the stress I place on the use of poetic conventions that
give life and body to the Mbh’s design. In looking back at Rethinking, I
was surprised to find that one point I meant to be important was made
only in a footnote: that literary conventions “do not last forever.”64 The
point is now worth exploring further, and above the line. In discuss-
ing the epic poets’ use of conventions, I make four points that bear on
their not lasting forever. I maintain, with regard to the conventions I
concentrate on, that a primary source for these particular conventions
was the poets’ Vedic background and their sense of Vedic images as
enigmas.65 I argue that these conventions have to do with nuances of
and Hinduism (Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften,
1997), 77–119.
63 Indeed, another is that rather than growing on trees, such designs are trees. I have
in mind here Frits Staal’s discussion of “trees” as designs within Vedic ritual; see his
Ritual and Mantras: Rules without Meaning (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, [1990] 1996,
105–8), and wish to imply that the epic’s design has these ritual designs as a familiar
model. Although the discussion is of “embeddedness” (Staal, ibid.) rather than specifically
of “trees,” the point is anticipated by Christopher Z. Minkowski, “Janamejaya’s sattra
and Ritual Structure,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 109, 3 (1989): 401–20
and his “Snakes, sattras and the Mahābhārata,” in Arvind Sharma, ed., Essays on the
Mahābhārata (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991), 384–400; by Michael Witzel, “JB Paulpūlanī:
The Structure of a Brāhmana Tale,” in M. D. Balasubrahmaniam, ed., Dr. B. R. Sharma
Felicitation Volume (Tirupati: Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, 1986), 189–216; and,
with acknowledgment to both them and Staal, in Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 93–94 and
nn. 9 and 10.
64 Rethinking, 29, n. 120. I use the phrase in debating the views of Tamar Chana Reich,
“A Battlefield of a Text: Inner Textual Interpretation in the Sanskrit Mahābhārata,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Chicago: University of Chicago, 1998: “Granted we ‘know’ the
Mbh as a text that ‘grew, and became what it is by expansion’ (with italics), but not
that it took eight ‘centuries of textual production.’ . . . Reich [thinks the Mbh develops
through] eight-hundred year[s] . . . of ‘contestatory discourse’ governed by an ‘aesthetic
of expansion’ (citing Reich 51, 32, and 31 successively). This aesthetic better befits a
short period of controlled, consensual ‘contestation,’ and also shared conventions,
which do not last forever”—indeed, my note goes on to show that “Reich sometimes
points in this direction.” It is in any case the first thing I say in the book about con-
ventions (353 [Index]).
65 Rethinking, 40 and n. 28.
66 chapter three
cosmology.66 And, I contend that while their “ ‘empire of conventions’
would ‘grow in proportion to the representative ambition’ of authors
from the epics through the purāṇas,”67 once outside the web of mean-
ings sustained within the Mbh, these specific conventions either no
longer retained the same range or precision when used by Vālmīki68 or
in the puraṇas,69 or else took on new precisions. One could infer that
the politics of these conventions would lie in their “Vedic” ambitions,
and their bhakti in the cosmological nuances.
While Rethinking takes preliminary note of a variety of conventional
usages that roughly fit the four traits of Vedic background, cosmo-
logical nuance, literary novelty, and textual specificity, the four points
bear most directly on three particular conventions: usages of, antara
or “interval”; of nimisạ /nimesạ or “moment”; and of pṛsṭ ḥ a as “back”
in the context of the “backs of mountains” and the phrase nākapṛsṭ ḥ a,
“back of the firmament.” Fitzgerald seems to have no difficulty with
the first,70 which, as others have noted, relates to well-attested paral-
lels between ritual and narrative embeddedness that have helped us
unpack the epic’s frame stories, including the Vaiśampāyana frame
that Fitzgerald is willing to keep in a truncated way. As to the sec-
ond, he puzzles over it and pulls together many passages, mainly in
a footnote,71 outlining what I have said, and placing it among things
he finds not central to his argument, perhaps because to discuss a
convention that ties in with the Naimisạ Forest—the site of the epic’s
outer frame—takes him outside the Vaiśampāyana inner frame that
he partially accepts.
Fitzgerald does, however, take issue with my translation of pṛsṭ ḥ a by
“back.” He makes several points: with regard to mountains, that “their
prominent topsides, upper ridges, or peaks . . . is the usual usage in the
MBh”; that this so-called “usual usage seems to work fine in the Śuka
66 A matter of major importance too often disregarded.
67 Ibid., citing Paul Ricoeur, Time and Narrative (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press 1985), Vol. 2, 13.
68 See ibid., 124 and 285, on Valmīki’s likely but very limited adoption of the naimisạ
convention (Rām 7.82.13, with vana rather than araṇya: see Fitzgerald, “Many Voices”
ms., 8 n. 30) in connection with his minimal but probably knowing placement of
Rāma’s Aśvamedha at Naimisạ Forest, making it the place where Rāma hears his sons
recite the Rāmāyaṇa.
69 See ibid., 156 on an extended meaning of the Naimisạ Forest in the Brahmāṇḍa
Purāṇa; 282–86 on epic and purāṇic treatments of Śuka.
70 See “Many Voices” ms., 8.
71 “Many Voices” ms., 8 and n. 30.
more rethinking the mahābhārata 67
episode”; and that while “[s]tandalone adverbial uses” of pṛsṭ ḥ a refer
to “the rear or backside of a person or thing,” uses of pṛsṭ ḥ a “as the
final member of a tatpurusạ compound . . . seem consistently to refer to
the upper sides of animals (elephants, horses, tortoises) or the upper
side of the firmament (the nākapṛsṭ ḥ a) or the upper ridges and peaks
of mountains.”72 But here is an example from Rethinking itself that
disproves the argument for consistency of the “usual usage.”73 Once
Yudhisṭḥ ira agrees to perform a horse sacrifice as purification after the
great war, Vyāsa tells him where to find the riches on Mount Muñjavat,
a big golden “base” or “foothill” (pāda) that one approaches on the
way to Mount Meru from the north side of Mount Himavat and “on
the back of Mount Himavat” (girer himavataḥ pṛsṭ ḥ e) where Śiva, per-
forms tapas in the company of Umā and their hosts (Mbh 14.8.1–3).
No ordinary mountain, Muñjavat glows like gold on all sides with the
same radiance as the morning sun, and cannot be seen by the liv-
ing with their “natural fleshy eyes” (prākṛtair māṃsa-locanaiḥ; 7–10).74
It would be hard to imagine Mount Muñjavat on the top of Mount
Himavat, and I believe it is safe to say that even Indian cosmology is
yet to do so. Moreover, the passage is explicit that it is to the north of
Himavat, and thus in back of it from Yudhisṭḥ ira and Vyāsa’s current
location. Indeed, Muñjavat is distinct here from both Himavat and
Meru as a “base” or “foothill” and cannot be regarded as an “upper
ridge” of either the grand range or the cosmic mountain.75 Another
pertinent usage of pṛsṭ ḥ a as “back” describes where the Sarasvatī River
“disappears into the back of the desert (marupṛsṭ ḥ e)” (3.80.118)—that
is, certainly not the desert’s top or upper ridges. Other examples could
be cited in favor of the translation “back,” or in some cases, as Fitzger-
ald allows, “upper ridges,” so long as one recognizes the implication
72 “Many Voices” ms., 17 n. 57.
73 The usage is with a genitive rather than in a tatpurusạ , but that only shows that
the meaning would be pertinent, too, to a tatpurusạ .
74 Rethinking, 74, with a correction from himavatḥ to himavataḥ; cf. 77, where the
point about the· back of the mountain is restated.
75 Proposing that Mt. Mūjavat, the earlier spelling of this mountain as one of great
Vedic import as the source of soma, be identified as “Muztagh Ata, (Uighur) ‘Father
of Muz Mountain(s),’ a giant mountain towering over a mountain complex on the
border of Tajikistan and Xinjiang, close to the source of the Oxus and Yarkand-Tarim
rivers,” see Frits Staal, “Three Mountains and Seven Rivers,” forthcoming in Shoun
Hino and Toshihiro Wada, eds., Indian Culture and Buddhism: Felicitation Volume
for Professor Musashi Tachikawa (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass), manuscript courtesy of
the author, p. 2.
68 chapter three
of a certain other-sidedness, out-of-sightness, and hiddenness, often
associated: with caves.76 The meaning “back” is a literal bodily mean-
ing susceptible—I would say, irresistibly—to metaphoric uses,77 and
hardly reducible to such a bland meaning as top of the mountain,
for which Sanskrit has so many other words. In fact, Michael Witzel
translates a Vedic usage of nākasyapṛsṭ ḥ āt as “du dos du firmament.”78
“Back” is a meaning that is consistent and powerful for mountains, the
firmament, and the desert, and repeatedly pertinent to the Śuka story.
Indeed, the, cosmological significance of “the back of the mountain”
makes for a certain equivalence, when the mountain is Himavat, to
the “back of the firmament,” since what is in back of Himavat is the
cosmic mountain Meru, around which the heavens move.79
Indeed, as the poets show us in the case of Muñjavat, “the back of
the mountain” is a metaphoric goldmine. But I am hardly arguing that
this mother loded convention supplies the only meaning. I am arguing
for ślesa: double and indeed multiple meaning: that is, polysemy.80 I
believe that Fitzgerald’s concern as a translator makes him justly cau-
tious. He wants to bring out baseline readings for ordinary English-
speaking readers. This is usually (I regard the present case to be an
exception) a good guideline for a translation that does not want to
76 Other passages pertinent to this sense are 3.155.16cd and 157, in which the “back
of Himavat” is wooded and a place for hunting; 5.11.8, 9.47.41, and 12.160.31, each
as a setting for narratives related to celestial movements (Seven Ṛsịs, Nahusạ ) on, the
back of Himavat; and 3.266.1–2 and 21, where the Rāmopākhyāna describes Rāma
and Laksṃ aṇa’s residence on Mount Mālyavat during the rainy season away from
Kisḳ indhā; cf. Rām 4.27.1 and 46.10 using pṛsṭḥ a for their “mountain cave” (giriguha)
rainy season residence (4.25.24) near lakes and cranes, while āsinaḥ parvatāsyāgre at
4.29.5 should probably be “seated on that foremost mountain” rather than “seated
on the mountaintop,” as per Rosalind Lefeber, trans., The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki: An
Epic of Ancient India, vol. 4: Kisḳ indhākāṇḍa (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1994), 118.
77 On body metaphors, see George Lakoff and Mark Turner, More than Cool Reason:
A Field Guide to Poetic Metaphor (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989).
78 Michael Witzel, “Sur le chemin du ciel,” Bulletin des études indiennes 2 (1984):
219, citing Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 9.2.3.26; see Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata,
147. n. 61.
79 See Hiltebeitel, Rethinking, 150, 309.
80 On ślesạ in “Śuka,” see Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahābhārata, 306, where these
comments apply also to Fitzgerald’s advocacy (“Many Voices,” 17, n. 58) of a “straight-
forward” translation of the marvel of the mountains in the Śuka story as a sufficient
reading. See similarly J. Brockington 2002, 601–2, on the phrase arthaṃ vicintayan in
this story which suggests both “pondering the meaning” and (as I was certainly aware)
“keeping in mind his purpose,” but not “no more than” the latter.
more rethinking the mahābhārata 69
encumber itself with any more footnotes or introductory caveats than
it has to. But it is not a sufficient guideline for Mbh interpretation.
Beyond treating these three particular conventions in Rethinking, I
flagged some others in passing.81 For this essay, one of these has been
worth exploring further, for as a case of textual specificity that takes on
new precisions after the Mbh, it shows the epic poets displaying liter-
ary novelty and cosmological nuance in beginning to give play to what
will become the signature concept of the politics of bhakti: “avatāra.”
The text that most prominently links the two epics, the Rāmopākhyāna
(the Mbh’s chief account of the Rāma story), provides the most striking
single piece of evidence. There, at the decisive moment of Rāma’s con-
ception, Brahmā tells the gods and Ṛsịs how Rāvaṇa will be killed: “For
that purpose the four-armed Visṇ ̣u has descended (avatirṇo . . . visṇ ̣uḥ)
at my command”82—upon which Brahmā goes on to command the
hosts of gods to take birth on earth as “Visṇ ̣u’s companions (visṇ ̣oḥ
sahāyān)” (260.6–7).83 Another intriguing usage of ava-tṛ; occurs in
descriptions of divinely incarnated heroes “descending to Kuruksẹ tra,”
which is, after all, not only the battlefield where they resolve the polit-
ical action of the Mahābhārata but the “high altar (uttaravedi) of
81 E.g., telling a story before it happens (Hiltebeitel, Rethinking; 285–86), and usages
of muhūrtam, “hour” as a kind of indeterminate time-passer, an “awhile” or “mean-
while” (72, 74, 300). One could also speak of a “doors convention” (see, to begin with,
the citation at n. 43 above) and a “path convention” in connection with the way each
epic traces a path linking the author and the heroine through the narratives, and most
centrally through the forest books; see Hiltebeitel, “Authorial Paths through the Two
Sanskrit Epics, Via the Rāmopākhyāna,” cited above. The “path” idea is mentioned in
Rethinking; 112, n. 64.
82 3.260.5: tad artham avatīrṇo ‘sau mat niyogāc caturbhujaḥ/visṇ ̣uḥ’.
83 The same term used by Vaiśampāyana in the Rāmopākhyāna’s “frame story” to
describe the monkeys, bears, Pāṇḍavas, and allies of Indra (276.5–10—four times). On
these passages, see Hiltebeitel, “Authorial Paths.” Not surprisingly (see n. 23 above),
J. Brockington sees these verses as an interpolation; see J. Brockington 1998, 476. Con-
sidering the Rāmopākhyāna as subsequent to the Rāmāyaṇa (a matter I cannot take up
here, but on which I do not agree), Brockington takes these Rāmopākyāna/Mbh verses
as indicative of growth subsequent to the Rāmāyaṇa’s “second stage,” arguing that
they are “[t]he sole exception” to Rāma being mainly a human and exemplary figure,
“the position reached in the middle of the second stage of growth of the Rāmāyaṇa.”
He finds it “the more significant that the Rāmopākhyāna does not allude to Rāma’s
divinity in its closing chapter.” But it is hard not to read Brahmā’s closing words there
as just such an allusion: “Like an immortal, you have accomplished a great feat of the
gods (kṛtaṃ tvayā mahatkāryaṃ devānām amaraprabha)” (3.275.34cd). In any case,
it is in the same adhyāya that Rāma is soon consecrated “the vaisṇ ̣ava hero” (65). For
similar comments (“the only exception”), see also J. Brockington, Epic Threads John
Brockington on the Sanskrit Epics, Greg Bailey and Mary Brockington, eds. (New Delhi:
Oxford University Press, 2000), 300.
70 chapter three
Prajāpati” (Mbh 9.52,.20) to which descend the Vedic gods in sacrifice.
I cited two such instances in Rethinking—one describing the Pāṇḍavas
and Kṛsṇ ̣a (12.48.3) and the other Balarāma (9.53.33) “descending to
Kuruksẹ tra.”84 I now find four additional instances of “descending
to Kuruksẹ tra”: one describing the Pāṇḍavas and Somakas (avatīrya
kuruksẹ tram; 6.1.3); one for Vāsudeva, his horses, and charioteer
(kuruksẹ tram; avātaran; 12.53.23); one for Yudhisṭḥ ira, having first
crossed over—uttīrya—the purifying Yamunā (kuruksẹ tram avātarat;
15.30.16); and one for Arjuna, accompanying the remaining Vṛsṇ ̣i
women after the death of Kṛsṇ ̣a (kuruksetram avātarat; 16.8.65). To be
sure, such uses might be cautiously translated by “reached” or “crossed,”
but their frequency and the particular descending s ubjects—all linked
with the Pāṇḍava side and/or the entourage of Kṛsṇ ̣a; none linked with
the Kaurava side—suggest something more: that they are describing,
in Fitzgerald’s terms, the “divine raiding party of the gods.” Against
this emerging background, I also drew in the instance of Vārsṇ ̣eya, the
charioteer of Nala with this name of Kṛsṇ ̣a (Kṛsṇ ̣a is called Vārsṇ ̣eya as
a member of the Vṛsṇ ̣i clan) who, in “superfluously” descending from
Nala’s chariot (avatīrya vārsṇ ̣eyo), doubles for Kṛsṇ ̣a himself 85—the
charioteer Kṛsṇ ̣a who will daily ascend and descend from his friend
Arjuna’s chariot while crafting the bhakti politics of the Mbh war. I
would now submit that this is cumulative evidence for what I would
tall a “descent convention” that uses derivatives of the verb ava-tṛ
before the noun avatāra becomes the favored purāṇic term for cosmic
divine descent.
Because it comes from a Mahābhārata connoisseur, Fitzgerald’s
carefully considered challenge to continue rethinking the Mbh toward
clarification of its politics of bhakti is a stimulating one to attempt to
carry forward. Yet even if we are not reaching agreement on these
matters, it is important to underscore a hardly surprising but still grat-
84 Rethinking; 70 n. 35, 146, 232 n. 36: the first with the simple phrase avatīrya
kuruksẹ tram; the second using avatīrya in the context of making that “descent.” I also
noted a verse describing Vyāsa’s disciples descending to earth (12.315.8); Rethinking,
295.
85 The superfluity arises from the fact that this “double of Kṛsṇ ̣a” never has to take
the reins, since Nala is driving; see Hiltebeitel, Rethinking: 232–33. As mentioned in
n. 7 above, J. Brockington finds this “implausible.” For valuable discussion of the
“avatāra” theme in both epics, and especially in the Rāmāyaṇa, see also Robert P. Gold-
man and Sally J. Sutherland, trans. The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki, Vol. 5: Sundarakāṇḍa
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996), 29–33, 69, 73.
more rethinking the mahābhārata 71
ifying point on which we do agree, which Fitzgerald often remarks
on: that he and I mostly disagree over points about which either of
us could be right. Another is that the Mbh is a work of many voices.
Fitzgerald and I are each Mbh pluralists, and are each challenged by
what that would best mean in engaging this text. A photo taken at the
2003 “Between the Empires” Conference at Austin, Texas, catches the
two of us scratching our heads together over the Mbh. That is some-
thing we have done for years, as have many others. The appreciation
of many voices thus applies as well to the international and interdis-
ciplinary project of ongoing Mbh rethinking, which to my mind does
its work best when it starts from Mbh appreciation.

CHAPTER FOUR
WHY ITIHĀSA? NEW POSSIBILITIES AND LIMITS IN
CONSIDERING THE MAHĀBHĀRATA AS HISTORY
There are two basic, and optimally interrelated, approaches to the
question of interpreting the Mahābhārata as a coherent “whole”1—
by which I mean the text of the Pune Critical Edition, the question
of whose pros and cons I will be raising in chapter 5. One of these
approaches is to try to demonstrate coherence as operative within
the Mahābhārata text itself. As everyone knows, there is a long and
to many thankless tradition of scholarship in this vein, to which the
names of Joseph Dahlmann (1895), Madeleine Biardeau (especially
2002), and a late-career book by V.S. Sukthankar (1957) can be cited
as leading entries, and to which, since about 1992, I myself have tried
to make varied supportive contributions. I am, however, the only one
of these scholars to view the Critical Edition as having a more success-
ful outcome in uncovering an archetype than even its editors, includ-
ing Sukthankar, could perceive. The other approach, which Biardeau
began to take up mainly in her later works, but which did not so much
preoccupy Dahlmann or Sukthankar, is to try to determine—wherever
possible by historical information, and otherwise, more precariously,
of course, by intertextual considerations—the ante quem and post
quem parameters by which it would be possible to hypothesize the
time span during which the composition of this archetype would have
been achieved, and with that, for it to have started to find readers and
be disseminated.
Let me mention a few promising results of such inquiries, limiting
myself for the moment to ones in which I have participated. Backed
1 A short presentation of this chapter was included in a special panel on the benefits
of interpreting the Mahābhārata “whole” at the September, 2009 14th World Sanskrit
Conference in Kyoto, along with contributions by Vishwa Adluri, Joydeep Bagchee,
Simon Brodbeck, and T. P. Mahadevan—each of whom I thank for our many spirited
and profitable exchanges around this project. See now the essays by these authors,
plus one by Fernando Wulff Alonso, in Adluri in press. An earlier short version was
presented at the March, 2009 Annual Meeting of the American Oriental Society in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. I thank Jason Neelis and Luis González-Reimann for their
helpful comments on that version.
74 chapter four
by a number of scholars, including Biardeau (2002), James Fitzger-
ald (2001), Nick Sutton (1997), and myself (1989, 2005b), there has
emerged something of a consensus that the epic “as we have it” is
post-Aśokan. Taking us further down in time, I have argued that the
epic’s references to Cīnas probably make it younger than the reputa-
tion of the Chin Dynasty for unifying China, and that in combination
with references to Hūṇas, Yavanas (Ionians or Greeks), Antioch, and
Rome, we must posit that the epic poets were familiar with some of
these people less by proximity or invasion than by familiarity with
their “geographical and historical reputation[s]” and even their “for-
eign histories” (Hiltebeitel 2001a, 30–31). I am pleased that Michael
Witzel regards this “lead” as worth following. Witzel proposes that we
should “take a much closer look at the time frame around 150 B.C.E.
as that of the first assembly of the text . . . probably carried out by a
group of Brahmans who worked on earlier bardic materials” (2005,
67; cf. 53–56). On the other hand, at the ante quem end I have argued
(2006c) that the Mahābhārata would have preexisted the first or second
century dates ascribed to the kāvya poet Aśvaghosạ , since he refers to
Vyāsa and Vālmīki as precedent-setting poets for his Buddhacarita; he
knows a Mahābhārata story with substories well enough to selectively
allude to both; and he is especially attentive to usages of the terms
svadharma, rājadharma, and moksạ dharma in ways that quite clearly
allude to the Bhagavad Gītā and the Śāntiparvan. I also believe, with
Biardeau (1999), that major insights emerge once we recognize that
the Mahābhārata, and with it the Rāmopākhyāna, is earlier than the
Rāmāyaṇa (see Hiltebeitel 2009). Since Aśvaghosạ knew both epics
and actually has enough poetic distance—which need not mean great
temporal distance—to consider them bifocally, this would mean that
we have some suggestive evidence for a position that a Mahābhārata
archetype may be dated to some relatively short span from the period
between circa 150 B.C.E. to the turn of the millennium—the dates I
proposed in my book Rethinking the Mahābhārata (2001a, 18–21).
In this chapter, I will be working primarily within this second
parameter-setting approach, with the goal not only of continuing to
refine our intertextual parameters, but of taking us into historical con-
siderations bearing on the very period I continue to propose. In so
doing, I believe two questions—one, of the text’s historical setting; the
other, of its claim to being itihāsa or “history”—gain new clarity once
we lift the clouds of what may be called a perfect scholarly storm that
has just brewed up and passed before our eyes.
why itihāsa? 75
A. Two Mahābhārata Usages of Itihāsa
I begin, however, briefly from the intratextual side, which requires some
preliminary tracking of where the Mahābhārata uses the term itihāsa,
and what it intends (a more purposeful question than what it means)
by itihāsa. The Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa each use a variety of
genric terms to identify themselves, although the Mahābhārata uses
many more. A few of them—ākhyāna, carita, and kathā—are used by
both epics. But each work also has a distinctive term for itself: for the
Mahābhārata, itihāsa (etymologically, “so indeed it was”—or as we tend
to say, “history”), by which it characterizes itself eight times; and for the
Rāmāyaṇa, kāvya (“poetry”), used thirteen times (Hiltebeitel 2005a, 465,
477). In fact, as I will be maintaining in chapter 6,2 itihāsa “is not only
unused to describe the Rāmāyaṇa but, excepting two interpolations,3 is
absent from its entire Critical Edition text. In this, it is like the absence
of kāvya in the Mahābhārata’s Critical Edition; as if the two texts were
in early agreement to yield one of these terms to the other” (idem,
476–77). Moreover, just as the Rāmāyaṇa’s thirteen usages of kāvya
all occur at points where the text is framing itself—that is, either in its
Upodghāta (“Preamble”) or at the Aśvamedha scene where Rāma’s sons
arrive to recite Vālmīki’s creation (idem, 477), so it can be shown that all
of the Mahābhārata’s eight usages of itihāsa to characterize the text as a
whole occur only at well-threaded framing points: either in its opening
or closing adhyāyas, or where Vaiśampāyana launches his recitation
at Vyāsa’s bidding. It is not my aim to inventory these eight framing
usages of itihāsa here.4 Suffice it to say that every occurrence comes
along with some memorable statement of what the Mahābhārata is
all about,5 and that among these iterations about the text being itihāsa
are some that anchor what the Mahābhārata frame sequences have to
say about time: from cosmogony to genealogy (1.1.27–38); that “time
2 Just cited as Hiltebeitel 2005a.
3 1, Appendix 1 line 4; 6.3709*. I thank Shubha Pathak (2005, 50) for these
references.
4 Shulman raises a seeming problem here, saying the Mahābhārata “is ‘itihāsa’ or,
as it calls itself, ‘itihāsapurāṇa’ (see 1.1.16–20)” (2001, 22). Presumably he is citing the
Southern Recension, as he does elsewhere in the study in question.
5 Other such framing references to itihāsa refer to its ties with the Veda and other
“books” (1.1.17; cf. 1.1.52; 18.5.43); its importance to the past and future (1.1.24) and
the inspiration it offers to all other poets (1.2.237); that it is called Jaya, “Triumph”
(1.56.19; 18.5.39); and that whereas what occurs in it occurs elsewhere, what does not
occur in it occurs nowhere else (1.56.16–33; 18.5.38).
76 chapter four
cooks” (1.1.188); that Rāma Jāmadagnya’s slaughter of all the Ksạ triyas
occurred at the juncture between the Tretā and Dvāpara Yugas and
the Mahābhārata war at the juncture between the Dvāpara and Kali
Yugas (1.2.3, 9); and, in the closing wraparound, what the fruits are
that come from hearing “this meritorious ‘so indeed it was’ ” (itihāsam
imam puṇyam; 18.5.43–54).
Now it might strike textual stratifiers as good news that, as such
a vigorous genre-marker of the Mahābhārata, itihāsa occurs mainly
in the frames, on which there has been a tailor-made solution to cut
them off as “late.” But let us not move so fast. There is a pivotal usage
of itihāsa where the Mahābhārata finishes its account of the birth of
Bhīsṃ a (see chapter 13). Once Gaṅgā tells her husband Śantanu she has
married him “for the sake of success in accomplishing a purpose in the
work of the gods (devakāryārthasiddhyartham)” (1.92.49), which was
to fulfill her “agreement” (samaya) with the Vasus to return them to
heaven by drowning them as her children so as to “release them from
human birth” (53–54), Śantanu asks her to tell him more about why
the Ṛsị Vasisṭḥ a cursed the Vasus, and how this contretemps affected
the one remaining son he must think he and he alone has just rescued
from oblivion (93.1–3). What Gaṅgā tells him is this: his son—who is
of course yet to be called Bhīsṃ a—is the incarnation of the god Dyaus
(Sky), who was cursed by Vasisṭḥ a to take birth in a womb because,
as the Vasus’ ringleader, he led them, at his wife’s request, to abduct
Vasisṭḥ a’s divine cow (26). Although Vasisṭḥ a shortened the terms for
the other Vasus, Dyaus was cursed to “dwell in the human world for a
long time by his own karma (svakarmaṇā)” (36cd; cf. 42). This would
imply that Dyaus’s karma will carry over into this human life. Gaṅgā
then tells Śantanu some things he can expect about his surviving son,
some of which sounds good: “. . . He will be a soul of dharma, conver-
sant with all the scriptures”6 (39ab); while some is bound to be unset-
tling: “The high-minded one will not reproduce among humans. . .”
(38cd). Even more troubling, “Devoted to his father’s pleasure, he will
forsake the enjoyment of women” (39cd). Gaṅgā then offers a brief
self-exoneration for throwing the other boys into the river for the
sake of their release (moksạ̄ rtham) from the curse, and upon that, “the
Goddess disappeared right there” (43) taking the boy with her. For
Gaṅgā to vanish (antar-adhīyata)—literally, “to put herself within”—
6 The Critical Edition follows the S recension with śāstras (scriptures) rather than
śastras (weapons).
why itihāsa? 77
is to return to her own element, whether it be water or space (ākāśa),
since she is of course the Ākāśa-Gaṅgā. In going with her, Bhīsṃ a’s
disappearance is almost like the drowning of his brothers. But Śantanu
knows Gaṅgā has taken him away with the promise of a long life ahead
of him. Śantanu goes “back to his capital afflicted with grief” (44).
Having finally spoken out to keep his eighth son even though he knew
it would mean losing his wife, he has suddenly lost them both.
The Mahābhārata’s “history” now begins with Gaṅgā’s departure, yet
also with her ongoing blessing: thanks to her “devotion” to Śantanu’s
father Pratῑpa, Gaṅgā will “love the famous Bhārata lineage” whose
guṇas she is unable to recount “even in a hundred years” In effect,
from a heavenly story moved down to earth, the Mahābhārata will
stay largely on earth. After Śantanu’s “lost time” with Gaṅgā, time gets
condensed into charted time along the epic’s flow, beginning soon
with the return of Bhīsṃ a and the entry into the lineage of Satyavatī,
mother of the author.7 How better to begin “history” than by the with-
drawal of the celestial Gaṅgā, whose very intervention has resolved a
crisis in the genealogy that will eventually bring forth—indeed, make
possible the births of—the Kauravas and the Pāṇḍavas?8
With this most telling usage in mind, we are entitled to ask how else
the term itihāsa is used in the Mahābhārata outside (or better along
side of) its main narrative? Most prominently, it is used in the phrase
itihāsam purātanam along with the quotative formula atrāpy udāharanti,
or the like, in the sense, “Now they also quote this ancient history.”9
This Mahābhārata usage to characterize smaller units— especially
dialogues (saṃvādas)—will justify a little intertextual archeology.
7 The verse on “itihāsa” ends an adhyāya. In effect, “history” begins directly after
this in the next adhyāya with the story of Śantanu’s second marriage to Satyavatī, who
is already the mother of Vyāsa, the author. With typical recursivity, the Mahābhārata
has begun that “prehistory” earlier with the story of Vasu Uparicara (1.57), which,
at Mbh 1.1.50–51, is introduced as one of the three starting points from which some
Brahmins learn the epic—the other two being “from Manu onward” and “from Āstīka
onward” (1.1.50–51).
8 Cf. Brodbeck 2009, 158 n. 18, resisting such an “astronomical cosmological inter-
pretation” while attending to genealogical matters, which the Mahābhārata actually
subordinates to its divine plan and its cosmologically worked out sense of “history.”
Indeed, Gaṅgā’s intervention in the Bhārata genealogy is similar to the “descent of
the Gaṅgā” (gaṅgāvataraṇa) in the Rāmāyaṇa, where she solves a genealogical crisis
of the Iksṿ āku lineage posed by the disappearance of the sons of Sāgara; see Adluri’s
introduction to this chapter.
9 See Tokunaga 2009, 28: “atrāpy udāharanti comes from athāpy udāharanti in the
Dharmasūtras. The particle atha, which matches the style of the treatise, was changed
to atra (‘as to this [point in your question]’) in the dialogue in the MBh.”
78 chapter four
Long ago, the young E. W. Hopkins observed that the Vasisṭ ḥ a
Dharmasūtra cites the person “Manu” and the text of Manu in two
different ways. Says Hopkins in 1882, “. . . there is an interesting differ-
ence in the way in which his quotations are made. I notice that” when a
passage begins with “Manu said (abravīt),” one finds nothing in Manu
“exactly corresponding to it”; but “whenever Vāsisṭ ḥ a gives a quota-
tion which answers exactly10 to some verse in our present M-treatise
[i.e., Manu], he always introduces it with the words ‘now they relate
on this point a Manavan verse’ (mānava cā’tra çlokam udāharanti)”
(1882, 241). Whereas there is some minimal dharmasūtra precedent for
quoting Manu by the first formula (“he said”), there is none for quot-
ing him using this second formula involving citation by śloka along
with the base formula athāpy udāharanti. Without mentioning Manu,
however, this formula is used frequently in the dharmasūtras by both
Āpastamba and Baudhāyana (but not by Gautama). Āpastamba, who
is most interesting for being probably the earliest of the four surviving
dharmasūtrakāras, and also, as we shall see, for his familiarity with
something he calls the Bhavisỵ a Purāṇa, begins with ten usages. Two
of these refer to what Olivelle (1999, 30) translates as “two verses from
a Purāṇa” (purāṇe ślokau), one involving a godly quote from Prajāpati
and the other a mythological anecdote (Āp 1.19.13; 2.23.3–5). Others
recount illustrative stories (notably 1.22.3–8, an allegory of the eter-
nal being residing in the cave in the heart; 1.32.23, quoting Mṛtyu
[Death]; and 2.13.6, pertaining to paternity once one is in the abode
of Yama). Most of the rest are just proverbial sayings (e.g., 1.19.15;
25.9–10; 35.23–31.1; 2.9.13; 2.17.7–8). Baudhāyana then generalizes
the practice, using the athāpy udāharanti phrasing forty-nine times
virtually anywhere he turns from prose to a quoted verse, one of which
is his version of why a woman must be non-independent through the
three phases of her life (B 2.3.45).11 He is proportionally less inclined
to relate the phrase to mythical anecdotes, of which I note only three
instances (2.3.31–35, similar in part to Āp 2.13.6; B 2.4.26, recalling a
dialogue between the two wives of the epic’s Yayāti; and 2.11.28 on
the origin of the āśramas). And unlike Āpastamba, he never conjoins
10 Hopkins exaggerates the degree to which all such matches are “exact,” but not to
the point that it undermines his contrastive observation. I discuss details in Hiltebeitel
forthcoming, chapter 5.
11 A view made famous by its version at Manu 5.147–48.
why itihāsa? 79
the quotative phrase with the term purāṇa. Gautama then clears the
quotative phrase out entirely from his entirely prose dharmasūtra.
Now the revealing point is this: while reference to purāṇa as author-
itative seems to be stripped away after its first usages by Āpastamba,
none of these authors link quotations about dharma with the term
itihāsa, even though all but Āpastamba use the term itihāsapurāṇa,
albeit in each case only once (G 1.8.6; B 2.9.14; V 27.6). 12 Moreover,
while Vasisṭ ḥ a is thus the first and only dharmasūtra to use the quota-
tive phrase with the source as Manu, or more exactly, a “Mānavan
śloka,” the Mahābhārata is the first and indeed only one of these texts
to use it with the phrase itihāsam purātanam and thus, moreover, to
use it in conjunction not only with the phrase but with the term itihāsa!
It uses the formula liberally, especially in the dharma instructions of
its twelfth and thirteenth Books, while Manu and the Rāmāyaṇa,
like Gautama, do not use it at all. It would make a highly interest-
ing study to look into the ways that four of these classical dharma
texts (Āpastamba, Baudhāyana, Vasisṭ ḥ a, and the Mahābhārata) use
the athāpy/atrāpy udāharanti formula while three (Gautama, Manu,
and the Rāmāyaṇa) do not, but one of the reasons why seems fairly
clear. As I believe can be generalized from what I have tried to show
in the case of the Mahābhārata’s use of this formula in my “Bhīsṃ a’s
Sources” (Hiltebeitel 2001b; see chapter 13), the intertextual citational
interest of the first group bears a certain resemblance to a scholarly
apparatus of footnotes that would be pertinent to texts that reflect the
debates of a scholarly tradition on dharma as legal precedent, and take
some delight in absorbing themselves in a world of varied and often
conflicting views about it. If this is the case, it would suggest that the
second group would be one of texts that claim authority independent
of and above that nexus, no doubt each for its own reasons but in each
case in the name of some kind of streamlining and moral r earmament.13
12 I avoid discussing the Arthaśāstra, which subordinates dharma to artha. It does
cite others’ views (e.g., 1.4.6), but not by this formula. It introduces itihāsa as a cover-
term for the textual genres a prince should study in the latter part of his day: “(he
should engage) in listening to Itihāsa. The Purāṇas, Itivṛtta, Akhyānikā, Udāharaṇa,
Dharmaśāstra and Arthaśāstra,—these constitute Itihāsa” (AS 1.5.13–14; Kangle [1972]
2003, 11). Kangle cites a commentary that Itivṛttam would include the epics. The Mbh
would probably be comfortable with this definition, but of course it has a more ambi-
tious project in constituting and being history.
13 Cf. Tokunaga 2009, 28–29, observing the same distribution and tracing “the
stock phrase athāpyudāharanti further back to the Gṛhyasūtras,” his explanation for
its absence from the Rāmāyaṇa being that it “stands free from the influence of Vedic
80 chapter four
This point may now be enriched by a brilliant point made by Muneo
Tokunaga, that the Mahābhārata’s use of this formula treats the infor-
mative narrative told as exemplum as the third member of the classi-
cal syllogism to provide illustration or corroboration of the speaker’s
thesis.14 Not only are the epic’s leading characters “living history,”
they are interested in hearing it and citing it in support of their varied
views. And of course this would help to create other readerships and
audiences interested in sharing this sense of history. 15
B. A Perfect Storm
But now to my main purpose in this chapter, which is to try to get us
closer to the historical conditions under which such a work of Brah-
manical “history” could have been composed.16 If we ask the question
“Why itihāsa?” it may lead us to a realization that a perfect turbulence
of scholarly brainstorms has recently placed us at a point where we can
form a useful hypothesis on the conditions that lie behind this epic’s
production. Among those who have stirred the pot, Hans van Buit-
enen suggestively wrote, “At an early enough date The Mahābhārata
was conceived as standing close to the beginning of national history”
exegesis . . . at the beginning of a new era of Sanskrit literature culminating in classical
Kāvya literature.”
14 Tokunaga shows that in such usages, “itihāsas correspond to the third member of
the pañcāvayava syllogism of parārthānumāna in the classical Indian logic. That means,
itihāsa plays the role of illustration or corroboration of the instruction or thesis. . . . It
is therefore quite appropriate that an itihāsa is quoted by the word udāharanti, the
noun form of which is udāharaṇa, one of the terms for the third member of the syl-
logism” (2009, 24–25). Cf. MW [1899] 1964, 185 on udāharaṇam, and n. 12 above
on the Arthaśāstra. Tokunaga thinks it “is highly probable that itihāsa was originally
the designation of a text not according to its substance or form, but according to its
use in a didactic discussion” (26–27), and shows that Mbh usages typically occur with
instruction either before or after the formula, with the instruction being about factual,
moral, political, philosophical, or religious matters.
15 Since I see the two Mbh usages going hand in hand, I do not follow Tokunaga’s
idea that the “moral (or dharmic) instructions” in the Rājadharma mark the point
from which the quotative usage “spread” to later parts of the epic (2009, 27), or that
usages of itihāsa to characterize the epic in its frames result from “the long history of
[its] textual development” as it “gradually changed its nature under the influence of
Vedic exegesis” (29). See Mbh 1.93.46cd, cited above, where the Mahābhārata begins
its itihāsa in launching its main story
16 For me it is important that it was composed by poets (see Hiltebeitel forthcoming,
chapter 5) as written poetry (see chapter 1), and not just “arranged,” “assembled,” or
“collected” by “redactors” (cf. Witzel 2005, 59, 63–64).
why itihāsa? 81
(1973, 6). Laurie Patton has shown how an “aitihāsika school” can
be seen at work in the Bṛhaddevatā and Yāska’s Nirukta organizing
legendary information about Ṛsịs and deities that is paralleled in the
epics (1996, 195–214). And scholars like Romila Thapar (1979, 1989,
1991, 1994, 1996, 1997)17 and James Hegarty (2006) have engaged the
idea that the Mahābhārata works out various intersecting ways to con-
struct a significant historical past: among them notions about yugas
and kalpas, on which Luis González-Reimann is making important
contributions (2002, 2008); and genealogical constructions, on which
Simon Brodbeck is writing (2009). But I must single out five recent
interventions more specifically before getting on to the main text I wish
to discuss, the Yuga Purāṇa. These five brainstorms have come from
Michael Witzel, Fernando Wulff Alonso, T.P. Mahadevan, Johannes
Bronkhorst, and Heinrich von Stietencron. Briefly on the first three,
Witzel’s 2005 article “The Vedas and the Epics: Some Comparative
Notes on Persons, Lineages, Geography, and Grammar” has demon-
strated that the Mahābhārata poets extracted plausible historical data
from all parts of the Vedic canon to construct their own narrative18
(and substories). Wulff has reinforced the likelihood that the skein of
four declining yugas would be among the “connection points” that the
same poets reworked from “el repertorio griego del Mahābhārata” (the
Greek repertory of the Mahābhārata) that likely introduced to India
the Greek scheme of the decline of Justice through five races or ages.19
17 From the beginning, however, always with some insistence that Brahmanical
interpolators must have concealed what was once “bardic” and historical in the main
stories of both epics—a view I do not share.
18 This is my own formulation from Witzel’s article, not necessarily his own formula-
tion of the significance of the epic’s relation to Vedic evidence, which he locates in a
“development” of the epic story through “multiple re-statements” of “Vedic reminis-
cences” of the Battle of the Ten Kings (2005, 22–50) 50)—something on which I remain
skeptical (see Hiltebeitel 2001a, 2 n.12), although Witzel makes his most plausible case
for it in this article.
19 Wulff 2008, 153–56. The more specific parallels to the Hesiodic scheme include
a divine plan to kill off a generation of fighters as the previous age ends, and then,
in this age, deterioration in the performers and practices of sacrifices; ruptures in the
human age cycle and getting old prematurely; degradation of parental relationships
especially between fathers and sons; and, with temporal and dietary inversions: whereas
in the Kali age people from India “will migrate to countries where they eat wheat
and earth-smoke” (godhūma is another term for wheat) (3.188.43), the Bronze age
generation of cruel warriors did not eat wheat—as Wulff says, this “calls attention to
the use of this alimentary component to signal an optimal humanity in one case and
its negation in the other (156). Like the Mahābhārata, Hesiod also probably held that
another Golden or Perfect age would follow after the gods bring this one to an end
82 chapter four
And Mahadevan has shown that Pūrvaśikhā Brahmins were positioned
to have written the Mahābhārata archetype in the Kuru-Pañcāla area
sometime between 300–100 B.C.E., and that they probably brought
a Mahābhārata close to the Pune Critical Edition archetype to south
India soon thereafter as a contribution to Tamil Saṅgam culture (2008,
7–9, 11–15, 18–19, 84–92, 101–2 nn. 9 and 10; 2010).
For me, however, or at least for this chapter, what brought this tur-
bulence to the point where things started falling into place is Bronk-
horst’s 2007 book Greater Magadha: Studies in the Culture of Early
India. Bronkhorst challenges orthogenetic theories that project mod-
ern visions of a unified “India”—grounded in the unfolding of the
Veda—back on India’s post-Vedic classical past. If Bronkhorst is right
to introduce “Greater Magadha” as a “separate culture” area in north-
eastern India (2007, 1–9), we would do well to think about the ways
other cultural regions of the period responded to Greater Magadha’s
rise to dominance and fall into decline, including—if the sources allow
it—the ways writers reflecting the cultures of other regions envisioned,
indeed, constructed, their own alternate histories and different theo-
ries of time through which to frame their historiography.
My touchstone in Bronkhorst’s study comes after his opening dis-
cussion of the “fundamental spiritual ideology” that distinguished
Greater Magadha’s non-Vedic heterodoxies and, he thinks, affected
the Bhagavad Gītā. He seeks to distinguish four “features” of “what
must have been the culture of Greater Magadha” (55): funerary prac-
tices, medicine, the godlike status of the sage Kapila, and what he calls
“cyclical time.” This last section is brief (69–71) and, I believe, hasty
on three matters. First, Bronkhorst speaks generally about “a cyclical
notion of time, in which kalpas, yugas and other time units” impact
later Hinduism. Leaving one to think that kalpas and yugas would
once its degradation has peaked (154–56). On this matter of longstanding discussion,
see also Beall 2005/06, 165–68, pointing out in n. 23 that already in the 11th century
the Persian scholar al-Bīrūnī compared the Indian account of four yugas with the
Greek narrative (citing Sachau 1964, I:378–85), and that in fact, the Indian account
as we have it (Mahābhārata 3.148, 3.186) dates from after the Alexandrian conquest
since ‘foreign rulers,’ including Greeks, are presupposed; in n. 33, he cites Hiltebeitel
[1976] 1990, 48–59 for a summary treatment in which I note that in the Indian case the
Bhārata war is an episode between the third and fourth ages (contra Clay’s (2003) 81
belief that the oriental parallels lack heroes). Clay starts out accepting the vague view
that Hesiod’s account . . . may ultimately derive from Near Eastern or Indo-European
traditions, and is more interested to point out that there appear no Oriental parallels
to the insertion of a race of heroes (my emphasis).
why itihāsa? 83
have a common background in Greater Magadha, he does not take
note that kalpas and yugas seem to be concepts with separate early
histories. As González-Reimann observed at the 2008 meeting of the
American Oriental Society, the kalpa appears to begin as a distinctly
Buddhist concept with its first documentable usage possibly being by
Aśoka on a couple of his edicts: to be precise, on two mid-career rock
edicts [RE], numbers 4 and 5.20 In RE 4, Aśoka hopes that the changes
in dhaṃma that he has initiated will continue to increase, thanks to his
“sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons, . . . until the end of the world
(āva sa(ṃ)vatṭạ kappā).” Moreover, he positions his reign not only to
have effected a dynastic turnabout in the progress of dhaṃma into a
kalpic future that will be secured by his children and descendants, but
with reference to past “centuries.” He begins RE 4, “In the past, over
many centuries, killing, violence done to creatures, discourtesy to rela-
tives, and disrespect for Brahmins and Samaṇas have only increased.
But now, . . . promulgation of dhaṃma has increased that which did
not exist over many centuries: abstention from killing, kindness to
creatures, respect to relatives, respect for Brahmins and Samaṇas, and
obedience to mother, father, and elders” (Bloch 1950, 100, my transla-
tion). Yet all this has fallen flat, a year later, in RE 5. Using the same
terms, Aśoka now makes the possibility of dhaṃma progressing to “the
end of the kalpa” contingent upon the dubious virtue of his children,
and turns everything over—even watching over the royal harems—to
his newly appointed dhaṃma superintendants (dhaṃmamahāmattās).
What is striking is that if we set aside RE 4’s mention of disrespect for
Samaṇas (Buddhist and other non-Brahmanical ascetics), it recalls the
past of recent centuries in terms of the same types of failures in dharma
that Brahmanical texts will soon ascribe to the Kali Yuga (see above,
n. 19). By RE 5, it is clear that the attempt to imagine the progress
of dhaṃma over the long haul of the kalpa was a bad fit, and that if
Aśoka had been able to conjure with a theory of yugas, he probably
20 See González-Reimann 2008, citing Bloch 1950, 100, 102. For fuller discussion
of these two rock edicts and the Buddhist overtones of their usages of “kalpa,” see
Hiltebeitel forthcoming, chapters 2 and 6. See González-Reimann 2002, 129, 198
n. 98; cf. 64, 70, 167 and n. 19, 169–72 and nn. 36–37; 2008. Cf. Pingree 1963, 238; 1990,
275 on the Buddhist kappa being “much earlier” than the yuga, whose appearances
in the Mbh and Manu he dates to “about the second century A.D.”; Biardeau 2002, 1:
94. I differentiate yuga chronometry from usages of the terms yuga and even yugānta,
which do occur in the Pāli canon; see González-Reimann 2002, 62–64; 70.
84 chapter four
would have used it. Not surprisingly, RE 5 is the last we hear from
Aśoka about “the end of the kalpa.”
As to chronometry by yugas, as González-Reimann demonstrates
in his 2002 book, The Mahābhārata and the Yugas, yuga calculations
are not mentioned by Buddhists until quite late—nor does the yuga
appear to be a feature of the time-reckoning of the other heterodox-
ies. Second, whereas the kalpa can rather reasonably be identified with
calculations of cyclical time, and indeed moreso than the compet-
ing Jain and Ājīvika concepts current in Greater Magadha that have
more to do with downswings and upswings of time, cyclicity is less
clear in the yuga, which lends itself more readily to accounts of lin-
ear and indeed historical time. Third, Bronkhorst endorses, if a little
tentatively, González-Reimann’s “conclusion ‘that the yuga theory is
a relatively late addition’ ” to the Mahābhārata (72, citing González-
Reimann 2002, 202). We need to think further about the provenance
of the yuga theory, by which I mean the chronometry of four ages,
and whether it could be a “late addition” to the Mahābhārata. But the
important point to begin with is the one of regionality: Bronkhorst
allows us to identify the kalpa as one of the competing notions of the
vastness of time that were advanced in Greater Magadha, and perhaps
the only one that could properly be called cyclical.
As to von Stietencron’s contribution, titled “Purāṇic Genealogies
and the Date of the Buddha” and appearing in English in 2005, I must
address his geographical considerations about the provenance of the
yuga theory because they will help to contextualize what we will find
in the Yuga Purāṇa.
According to von Stietencron, the Vaṃśānucarita section of the
Purāṇas “comprises lists which, in essence, pertain to the issue of
regal succession in various kingdoms and were important for estab-
lishing the legitimacy of descent. The text consists of a list of kings and
sages from early times up to the fifth or seventh generation after the
Mahābhārata war, written in the past tense; and a second [list] in the
form of future prophesies (the so-called Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa) which
continues the line of kings into the Kali age in various redactions until
it is completed in the early Gupta era.”21
21 von Stietencron 2005, 65; cf. 73: “The fact that the basic text of the Bhaviṣya(t)
Purāṇa originated before the Gupta period is proven beyond doubt by the evidence
of the Matsya Purāṇa and its several supplements. It is also suggested by the quota-
tions in the Āpastamba Dharmasūtra.” Cf. idem n. 12: as discussed above, Āpastamba
why itihāsa? 85
Von Stietencron’s main interest lies in the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa por-
tion, which tells how royal lines will continue into the Kali age, among
them the Paurava line, beginning from a Pāṇḍava descendant named
Adhisīmakṛsṇ ̣a,22 at whose ten-year sacrifice in Naimisạ Forest this tex-
tual unit was recited. Von Stietencron posits that the Vaṃśānucarita
is a heterogeneous text, and asks “in which stages of redaction did
it originate?” (2005, 70). He attempts to relate the text’s two main
chronological sequences—its pre- and post-Adhisīmakṛsṇ ̣a sections—
to geographical considerations: “What is certain . . . is that the redac-
tors belonged to different regions. The focus of the earlier genealogies
is the present-day Uttar Pradesh and the adjacent areas to the south
and west. In contrast, in the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa portion the focus of
the first and second redactions is Magadha (Bihar); it is the Dekkhan
when it comes to the third and fourth and, with the last redaction,
it is once again Magadha” (2005, 78–79). What he calls the “literary
framework” (70) that sets the recitation of the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa at
the sacrifice of King Adhisīmakṛsṇ ̣a is “indicative of the area of the
Kurupañcālas, as seen in the mention of the place of the prophecy as
the Naimisạ Forest” (73).
Von Stietencron asks whether the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa is a homoge-
neous or heterogeneous text, and if, as he posits, it is the latter, then
when and “in which stages of redaction did it originate?” (70). While
crediting Pargiter’s work in clarifying four stages of revision or sup-
plementation from the late Śātavāhanas to early Guptas,23 he offers
mentions a Bhaviṣya Purāṇa at 2,24,3–6 (Olivelle 1999, 67 has it as Bhavisỵ at), which
von Stietencron indicates is what he probably refers to when citing a “Purāṇa” at
1,19,13; 1,29,7; and 2,23,3–5.
22 Enumeration of “members of these ruling houses ends with the fifth-seventh gen-
eration after the Bhārata war. The last king of each dynasty is mentioned as currently
reigning.” The number of rulers varies. “All that matters is the succession to power. The
Purāṇa states that the reigning ruler in the dynasty of the Pauravas is Adhisīmakrṣ ṇ ̣a”
(73); “the continuation of the lists of the rulers, and certain crucial events, such as the
relocation or founding of capital cities, are projected as future events into the Kali Age”
(71). The chief contemporaries of Adhisīmakrṣ ṇ ̣a in Hāstinapura are Kings Divākara
in Ayodhyā (Kosala) and Senajit in Girivraja (Magadha) (78).
23 Pargiter found four major caesuras: 1. the ninth year in the reign of Śātavāhana
king Yajñaśrī (ca. A.D. 206); 2. “The period shortly before the end of the Śātavāhanas
after the middle of the third century A.D.,” where all Matsya Purāṇa manuscripts stop;
3. 320/330 C.E., “when Candragupta I had consolidated the core kingdom of the Gup-
tas (a Vāyu Purāṇa manuscript that includes the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa “stems from this
period”); and 4. 330/35 C.E. when, during Candragupta I’s reign, the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa
was revised, to become a final source for Visṇ ̣u, Vāyu, and Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇas. Sam-
udragupta and his conquests are no longer included. Several indigenous ruling families
86 chapter four
new considerations on the question of its origins.24 Ruling out the
possibility that it could have been continually updated for well over
a thousand years since the supposed time of Adhisīmakṛsṇ ̣a,25 von
Stietencron states that “the only plausible framework for such a text,
compiled from several ancient sources coming from different parts of
India, is the assumption of a period of Brahmin restoration” (2005,
72). After considering four possibilities for such a milieu, 26 he favors
the earliest— “the first half of the reign of Candragupta Maurya before
he turned toward Jainism” (2005, 72)—and along with this, a Magadha
location for the text’s composition.27 In assigning the composition of
the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa proper to the early reign of Candragupta Mau-
rya, von Stietencron brings in several interesting considerations, among
them what he considers to be “irrefutable evidence” that this account
already existed in Candragupta’s time. This evidence comes from Meg-
asthenes, via Arrian, and is—as von Stietencron admits— “anything
but obvious.” According to Megasthenes, Indians listed 153 kings
from the first ones to Sandracottus/Candragupta. There are 50 or 49
kings if one counts back from Candragupta to the son of Jarāsaṃdha,
Sahadeva, who fell in the Mahābhārata war, and by various calcula-
tions enough kings from Sahadeva back to Manu to total either 150 or
154, which is, according to von Stietencron, too close to Megasthenes’
number, 153, “to be a mere coincidence” (2005, 82–83).
Von Stietencron strongly emphasizes his sense that the author of
the earliest Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa redaction was “a declared enemy of the
Nandas” who would not have sponsored such a text during their rule.28
of north and central India are mentioned, as well as foreigners like the Gardabhin, Śaka,
Yavana, Tusạ̄ ra (Kusạ̄ ṇa), Muruṇḍa, and Mauna (Huna), of which the “last mentioned
are probably still in the remote north-west” (von Stietencron 2005, 71–72).
24 “It was not clear, until now, when the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa originated” (2005, 71).
25 This “reconstruction of regnal succession . . . comprises a period of more than 1600
years before Aśoka’s coronation. . . . [and] continues for 600 yrs thereafter” (2005, 76).
26 The other three periods considered are those of the early Śuṅgas (approximately
mid 2nd century B.C.E.); of the Kaṇvāyanas, mid-first century B.C.E.; and “the time
of the Śatavāhanas, the ninth year of the reign of Yajñaśrī around C.E. 206 being the
latest possible date” (2005, 72–73).
27 “We can thus safely conclude that the compilation of the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa
took place in Magadha and, further, in one of the first three periods listed above when
Magadha, at least nominally, retained its imperial status. If it had been compiled under
the Mauryas or the Śuṅgas it must have, nevertheless, been supplemented under the
Kaṇvas” (von Stietencron 2005, 73).
28 Yet von Stietencron posits that the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa’s composers would have
transformed information that was first gathered in Magadha (2005, 73) under the
why itihāsa? 87
He thus regards the Nandas as providing a terminus post quem for the
Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa (2005, 82–83), since the unit regards them with
strong disfavor, and Mahāpadma Nanda particularly so for having
“vanquished the old dynasties of North India—not as was customary,
to extract tribute from them and to be recognized as the most pow-
erful, the saṃrāt ̣ or cakravartin, but in order to dethrone them and
set himself up as the ekarāt ̣ and ekacchattra, the sole ruler of North
India. He exterminated the vanquished princely families and central-
ized the governmental power in Magadha through appointing gover-
nors in the formerly independent kingdoms” (79–80). The Bhavisỵ a(t)
Purāṇā section would, however, be narrativizing the past-to- “future”
of such defeated royal lines “not for the purpose of reinstating them
as independent regents—since the vast centralized empire had already
proven its advantage—but in order to base the power wrested from
the deposed Nandas on the co-operation of those very people who had
suffered due to the former and hated them” (2005, 81).
This narrativization comes to be tied in with the concept of the yuga:
“The collapse of the old Ksạ triya dynasties under the vigorous policies
of Mahāpadmananda, who is explicitly denigrated as the son of a Śūdra
(śūdra-yoni), the support extended by the rulers to non-Vedic religions
and the invasions of barbarians—all this is seen negatively as a sign of
Kaliyuga” (2005, 72). Yet as von Stietencron is quick to point out, “The
yuga doctrine appears to be a relatively late insertion in the Bhavisỵ a(t)
Purāṇa and certainly postdates Mahāpadma Nanda due to whom the
Kaliyuga grows in vigour (vṛddhiṃ gamisỵ ati). If at all conceived by
the first compiler of the Purāṇa at the time of this supposed Brahmani-
cal restoration, its yuga calculations must have been based upon short
time cycles which were not yet in conformity with the later teachings.”
He speaks here of “the later yuga concept” that starts the Kali Yuga
“with the death of Kṛsṇ ̣a”—which, as González-R eimann demonstrates
(2002, 51–52, 60, 73, 94–97, 105, 115–16), is not f ormulated around
that precise turning point until the Purāṇas.29 Von Stietencron seems
N andas (2005, 73). These initial Nanda compilers would have had “no precise, first-hand
knowledge of all the dynasties. Rather, their compilation was the outcome of research,
based on different regional sources” (2005, 76) that probably made use of pre-Mauryan
writing to archive the record at Pātạ liputra (81) before the data was worked up under
the first Maurya as the dry futuristic Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa (74–75).
29 As von Stietencron remarks, “If this concept existed when the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa
was compiled, one would expect that kings from Pariksịt onwards would have all been
listed as the future rulers of the Kali Age. This is not the case. Therefore, there almost
88 chapter four
to be aware that there are, as González-Reimann documents, usages of
the term yuga in the Ṛg Veda, the Brāhmaṇas, and the Jyotisạ Vedāṅga
(which González-Reimann dates circa “the fifth century B.C.E.”) for
time-spans (a generation, a five-year cycle, “an age in general” [2002,
6–7, 16 n. 10]) that are shorter than those that come to be associated
with the yuga in classical, including epic, usages.30
Now, what is interesting for present purposes is that von Stieten-
cron attempts to relate these chronological considerations about the
two portions of the Vaṃśānucarita to geographical ones, calling atten-
tion to their handling of two different groups of kingdoms:
1. Those from Kosala to Avanti, “well documented in the Bhavisỵ a(t)
Purāṇa, . . . which were conquered by the Śiśunāgas and the Nandas, pri-
marily under Mahānandin and Mahāpadma Nanda, and subsumed under
the first great North Indian empire with its centre at Magadha,” whose
expansion would have begun with Udāyin (on whom see below).
2. A list of “perfunctorily mentioned” dynasties originating “in another
context,” including Kurus, Aiksṿ ākus, Pāñcālas, Kāśeyas, Kaliṅgas, and
Śūrasenas, all belonging “to families found in the list of early dynasties,
and whose absence in the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa was bound to be conspicu-
ous when a complete redaction of the vaṃśānucarita section was made.
At the same time they are families which, in a favourable or unfavour-
able sense, are connected to the later Kali Yuga doctrine—a fact which
distinguishes them from the other old princely houses of the Punjāb and
Saurāsṭṛa which are not appended here. They perish in the Kaliyuga,
are known opponents of Kṛsṇ ̣a, or are supporters of the Bauddhas and
Jains” (2005, 79–80).
For von Stietencron, “What is certain . . . is that the redactors belonged
to different regions. The focus of the earlier genealogies is the present-day
Uttar Pradesh and the adjacent areas to the south and west. In contrast,
in the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa the focus of the first and second redactions is
Magadha (Bihar); it is the Dekkhan when it comes to the third and fourth
and, with the last redaction, it is once again Magadha” (2005, 78–79). On
the other hand, the “literary framework” is “indicative of the area of the
Kurupañcālas, as seen in the mention of the place of the prophecy as the
Naimisạ Forest” (73).
Yet I do not think we should posit separate regions behind the redac-
tion of the vaṃśānucarita’s two sections. As the Naimisạ Forest setting
certainly existed a Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa prior to this doctrine, a text which started six-
eight generations after Pariksịt in the future tense and which remained unmodified in
its kernel while being supplemented at its end. The later yuga doctrine is definitely in
existence by the time of the final redaction in the early Gupta period” (2005, 73).
30 See González-Reimann 2002, 223–25 on parvan rather than yuga being used for
throws of the dice in the Ṣaḍviṃśa Brāhmaṇa.
why itihāsa? 89
suggests, the Mahābhārata, which could not have been a model for the
Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa section, could be a likely model for the setting of this
“literary” framing of the prior segment on past kings, and thus a belated
framing of the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa as well.31 It would be sufficient to posit
that at some point after the early part of the reign of Candragupta Maurya,
familiarity with the Mahābhārata had simply intervened. It is now time
to introduce some considerations raised by the Yuga Purāṇa.
C. The Yuga Purāṇa
John E. Mitchiner introduces the Yuga Purāṇa, a short unit of only one
hundred and fifteen verses, as “the only Indian text” that “refers in any
detail to the presence of Indo-Greeks in India,” and as “important for
its account of the four Yugas,” being, he thinks, “probably the earliest
account of the Yugas in Indian literature” (1986, vii). He argues that
it was composed in Ujjain—“itself well-famed as a centre of jyotisạ -
studies” or astronomy and astrological sciences (79–80), probably in
Brāhmī (31, cf. 36), around 60–25 B.C.E., with the later date the most
likely (81; cf. 5, 11, 16). Mitchiner’s main evidence is that the Yuga
Purāṇa mentions Yavana and Śaka invasions, which continued down
to 60 B.C.E., but not the Pahlava incursions into northwest India that
probably did not occur until early in the first century C.E.32 But this is
a rather loose terminus. As we shall see, there could be other reasons
why the Yuga Purāṇa stops its north Indian history without getting
to the Pahlavas or Kusạ̄ ṇas. Yet it would be difficult to argue that its
31 Cf. von Stietencron 2005, 76–78 with map, holding that the epics could not have
served as a model for this material, since they are largely confined to the Solar, Lunar,
Yādava, and Bhārgava lineages. Von Stietencron seems to consider it most likely that
the material preceding the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa “might well have been prefixed to [it]
at a later date” (78).
32 See Mitchiner 1986, 81, mentioning Indo-Scythian and Indo-Parthian settlements
of ca A.D. 25 (I quote Mitchiner 1986 throughout; the 2002 revised edition only refor-
mats Mitchiner’s main discussion and translation). Cf. Nattier 1991, ascribing the origin
of the account of the end of the of the Buddhist dharma at Kauśāmbī to a period no
earlier than the occurrence of actual invasions by Greeks, Śakas, and Parthians, whose
three kings bear these peoples’ names as ethnonyms: “the best current estimate is that
the Parthians—the last of the three groups to arrive on the scene—invaded northwest
India sometime during the first half of the first century C.E.” (225, citing Frye 1983,
197–204). Cf. Nattier 1991, 152, n. 17: “Recent research into the chronology of the
Saka, Parthian, and Kushan invasions has demonstrated that the earliest Kushan incur-
sions into northwest India and adjacent territories were contemporary with those of
the Parthians, and presumably took place during the first century C.E.”—citing Frye
1983, 177–204.
90 chapter four
composer ignored the Pahlavas or Kusạ̄ ṇas, since the selected history
he describes all precedes them.33 I believe the Yuga Purāṇa may be a
little bit later than 25 B.C.E., perhaps by half a century, and that it was
probably composed during the period of Śaka consolidation between
circa 25 B.C.E. and the rise of the Kusạ̄ ṇas. Around 25 B.C.E.,34 the
Śakas established themselves as Ksạ trapas (Satraps), forming trade
networks and points of power from the northwest to the central north
India, and supporting mainly Buddhism.35
This so-called “Purāṇa” is found in an astronomical/astrological
treatise called the Gārgya-jyotisạ , and Mitchiner argues, I believe con-
vincingly, that it is composed as part of this treatise, although one
might consider the possibility that it was an added component. Its
author, Garga or Gārgya, is a sage known in the Mahābhārata. In
Mahābhārata Book 12, Garga is said to have become the “keeper of
the year, the almanac maker (sāṃvatsara)” of the primal—and first
favored—king [Pṛthu] Vainya.36 In Book 9, Old (Vṛddha) Garga, after
doing severe tapas at an auspicious tīrtha on the Sarasvatī River, is
said to have obtained the “knowledge of time and of the passing-away
(or, evil effects) of heavenly bodies (jyotisạ̄ ṃ ca vyatikramaḥ),” and of
favourable and unfavourable omens (utpātā dāruṇāś caiva śubhāś ca;
9.36.14–17). The association of the Sarasvatī with calendrical calcula-
tions is reminiscent of yātsattras: journeys up the Sarasvatī to its source
in conjunction with the winter solstice, and then back down. Yātsattras,
associated with Vrātyas, are first mentioned in the Brāhmaṇas and are
fairly frequently referenced in the Mahābhārata, with this citation a
case in point: the listener is Kṛsṇ ̣a’s brother Baladeva, who is making
just such a journey (Hiltebeitel 2001a, 120–26, 138–61). Along these
lines, in Book 13, the Anuśāsanaparvan, Gārgya reports that once when
33 One cannot rule out the possibility that the Yuga Purāṇa could have been com-
posed during these subsequent periods, but that is unlikely, given the seeming freshness
of the ex eventu history it highlights.
34 See Härtel 2007, 324: “Based on the archaeological data [at Sonkh, near Mathurā].
the Mitra period ends with Level 25 in about ± 25 B.C.” Cf. 346.
35 See Neelis 2007, 72–79, making the point that Brahmin texts produced xenologies
identifying the Śakas as adharmic barbarians, even though “Śaka support of Buddhism
did not preclude their support of other Indian religious traditions” (79 n. 100); 2008,
8–10, adding that “this support did not preclude the patronage of Brahmins, Jains,
and other non-Buddhists.”
36 Mbh 12.59.117cd; Fitzgerald trans., 2004a, 310. He is just called Vainya in this
context. Cf. Mitchiner 1986, 42.
why itihāsa? 91
Śiva was “pleased by my mental sacrifice, he gave [me] this great won-
drous knowledge of time contained in sixty-four divisions on the bank
of the Sarasvatī, as well as a thousand sons conversant with brahman
like me, and a life-span for me and my sons of a million years.”37
The mention in Mahābhārata Book 13 of sixty-four aṅgas is sugges-
tive, since the Gārgya-jyotisạ says of itself that it has sixty-four aṅgas,
although it includes only sixty-two (Mitchiner 1986, 10). The Yuga
Purāṇa is the Gārgya-jyotisạ ’s forty-first aṅga, coming in sequence
after aṅga 39 on portents—“Rāsṭ ṛ otpātalaksạ ṇa (Signs and Portents
of Calamity),” with twelve categories of signs and portents listed; and
aṅga 40 on “Tulākośa (Weighing on a Balance).” And it is followed by
aṅga 42 on “Sarvabhūtaruta (The Cries of all Creatures)”; aṅga 43 on
“Vastracheda (Tears in Clothes)”; and aṅga 44 titled Bṛhaspatipurāṇa
on Jupiter, one of the other two units called a “purāṇa” (Mitchiner
1986, 14–16, 108–10). The number sixty-four is intriguing as a cosmo-
logical and astronomical number, since, as Randy Kloetzli has discov-
ered, it occurs both in Archimedes’ “Sand-Reckoner” as the number
1063 or “one followed by 63 ciphers,” by which one can count the grains
of sand in the universe; and, in the Visuddhimāgga, as the total num-
ber of dissolutions that a world-system (Cakkavāla) undergoes before
it turns to dust: that is, 8 × 7 dissolutions by water, 7 × 1 by fire, and
a sixty-fourth by wind (Kloetzli 1983, 16, 115–22).38 I do not think we
need to date the Anuśāsana Parvan passage as later than the epic’s
other two because it refers to the same numerology as the treatise, and
possibly, as Mitchiner maintains (1986, 10, 45), to the treatise itself.
Mahadevan 2010 makes good new arguments against the Anuśāsana
Parvan being absent from the archetypal Mahābhārata that would have
been brought to the south. That would make the Anuśāsana passage
possibly earlier or roughly contemporary with the Yuga Purāṇa. For if
the Anuśāsana passage shows familiarity with a Yuga Purāṇa from the
late first century B.C.E. (Mitchiner’s proposed date), that would still
be in time to date it within the time span I proposed for Mahābhārata
composition near the beginning of this chapter: between 150 B.C.E.
37 Mbh 13.18.25–26: catuhsạ sṭỵ anġ am adadāt kālajñānam mahādbhutam/ sarasvatyās
tatẹ tusṭọ manoyajñena pāṇḍava// tulyam mama sahasraṃ tu sutānām brahmavādinām/
āyuś caiva saputrasya saṃvatsaraśatāyutam// Cf. Mitchiner’s trans., 1986, 102. More
fully, see Mitchiner 1986, 5, 7, 10–11, 16, 79, 101–3.
38 “Expressed in other terms, 1063 is the 64th term of a series beginning with one
and increasing by tens” (Kloetzli 1983, 122).
92 chapter four
and the year 0 (Hiltebeitel 2001a, 18). On the other hand, the Gārgya-
jyotisạ ’s claim of having sixty-four aṅgas when it has only sixty-two
could suggest that it was striving for a number it never reached on the
basis of Gargya’s epic reputation. In any case, I see no reason to regard
any of these passages to be late in the fashion that Mitchiner does in
assigning them to the third century C.E. (1986, 5).
In terms of overall structure, Mitchiner says the Yuga Purāṇa’s
“main aim” is “to give an outline account of the principal peoples and
events in each of the four yugas or ages, as an illustration of what
came to pass when dharma inevitably declined with the passing of
time” (1986, 50). Mitchiner says it “is perhaps above all concerned
with the preservation of dharma, or the proper ordering of life and
society; and it laments the weaknesses of dharma and the adoption of
adhārmic modes of life as the cycle of four Yugas progresses” (1986,
47). It is “primarily a Brahmin-oriented text . . . concerned with the
proper maintenance of the four varṇas or castes” (ślokas 15–19).39 “It
also decries the rise of Śūdras, Vṛsạ las (low-born men) and Pāsạ ṇḍas
(heretics) at the end of the Kali Yuga” who “usurp Brahmin roles” (śl
50–55). It opposes changing roles of women (śl 82–86); is anti-ascetic,
despising low-born Bhiksụ kas, both Hindu and Buddhist (śl 52); “and
it also condemns men for abandoning an active role in favour of tak-
ing their ease as gṛhasthas or house-dwellers.”40
As Mitchiner recognizes, the events that characterize the end of the
first three yugas are also referred to in the Mahābhārata,41 though that
text does not refer to the first episode—the destruction of the demon
Tāraka that ends the Kṛta Yuga—in connection with that yuga. But for
the other two, Rāma Jāmadagnya’s destruction of the Ksạ triyas thrice
39 Curiously, śl. 19 says that in the Tretā Yuga each class was intent upon its svakarma,
but shifts the terms for the Dvāpara Yuga, in which everyone did their svadharma
unquestioningly (śl 27) until the future (i.e., the Mahābhārata war) kicked in.
40 And dressing up in red (raktavāsas, a term again suggestive of either Hindu or
Buddhist ascetics” (Mitchiner 1986, 47, citing śl 86; see 55 n. 112). See Bhattacharya
2008. The criticism of grḥ asthas strikes me as unusual, and since I am familiar with such
a view mainly in certain Buddhist suttas, I would raise the possibility that it could reflect
an awareness of wealthy estate-holding mahāsāla Brahmins in the Greater Magadha
area. I raise this possibility in view of what Mitchiner will be saying about Pusỵ amitra
Śuṅga and what I will be calling Pusỵ amitra’s “Northern Midlands Alliance.”
41 He says “both in the Epics . . . and throughout the Purāṇas” (1986, 50), implying
that these texts would develop their accounts after the Yuga Purāṇa. But I emphasize
the Mahābhārata, since I believe it to be earlier than the Yuga Purāṇa. As to the
Rāmāyaṇa, Mitchiner makes the interesting observation that the Yuga Purāṇa ignores
“the entire Ramayaṇa tradition” (1986, 45).
why itihāsa? 93
seven times at the transition from the Tretā to the Dvāpara Yuga,
and the Mahābhārata war with the transition from the Dvāpara to
the Kali Yuga, the Mahābhārata does make the correlations—albeit
inconsistently, yet also right near its beginning in both cases: for Rāma
Jāmadagnya at the Tretā-to-Dvāpara juncture (Mbh 1.2.3) and for the
Mahābhārata war at the Dvāpara-to-Kali juncture (1.2.9)—all already
prefaced as past history, itihāsa. What is striking is that the Yuga
Purāṇa shifts from past to future tense right with the Mahābhārata
war (Mitchiner 1986, 35, 50), making that war and the end of the
Dvāpara Yuga a prophesy no less than the whole course of the Kali
Yuga that follows it. Keeping in mind that Mitchiner brings up these
matters under what he calls the Yuga Purāṇa’s “main aim,” I will now
begin to talk about the telos of that text.42 According to Mitchiner, the
Yuga Purāṇa is “selective” in two ways.
First, it does not give complete genealogies: that is, it is not focused
on an epic’s dynasty. Mitchiner thinks this would reflect a “fairly early
stage in the formulation of the Epic and Purāṇic genealogical tradi-
tion, which was only subsequently developed into the presentation of
complete genealogical lists. The Yuga-Purāṇa has clearly not derived
its account . . . from any other extant literary sources or from the main
Epic and Purāṇic tradition” (1986, 50). Yes and no. As Mitchiner wants
to maintain here, the Yuga Purāṇa shows unique and original features
in the events and personages it mentions. But there is no merit to his
idea that it would reflect an “early stage” of the epico-purāṇic genea-
logical tradition. It simply lacks a genealogical telos. More than this, as
von Stietencron shows, the royal genealogies of the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa
are probably earlier than both the Yuga Purāṇa and the epics.
The second area of selectivity gets us to some of the ways the Yuga
Purāṇa shows unique and original features, including the futurity
of the Mahābhārata. Says Mitchiner, it is neither “a complete” nor
“fully consecutive catalogue of events and characters, but rather pres-
ents . . . certain select and prominent occurrences: it is therefore impos-
sible to reconstruct, from this account alone, anything more than an
outline chronology for the people and events described” (1986, 50–51).
Mitchiner is speaking here mainly about what the Yuga Purāṇa pres-
ents as late “people and events” of the Kali Yuga, which I will get to
42 One would like to know how and whether this aim is related to the aim of
Gārgya-jyotisạ .
94 chapter four
shortly. The only outline chronology it is really interested in, however,
is that of the four yugas, and mainly, beginning with the Mahābhārata,
in the future, as prophesy. Considering what little it has to say about
what occurs before the Mahābhārata in the past, one could say it is
less interested in constructing history than the Mahābhārata itself!
Indeed, it calls itself a purāṇa, and does not use the term itihāsa.
C.1. The Yuga Purāṇa and Yugas in the Mahābhārata
Now Mitchiner maintains that the Yuga Purāṇa would be “probably
the earliest account of the Yugas in Indian literature” (1986, vii; cf. 35),
but on this point his explanation is unconvincing. For Mitchiner, the
Yuga Purāṇa’s “phrasing” of “its accounts of the Mahābhārata war
and the reign of Janamejaya Parīksịt also in the future tense . . . sug-
gests” that its “account was composed before such a convention of the
precise dividing-point between past and future time became widely
established” (35). Dividing lines between past and future, however,
are more flexible than the one between the Dvāpara and Kali Yuga,
on which the Yuga Purāṇa simply follows the Mahābhārata. As we
have seen, so does the Vaṃśānucarita, once its second section, the
Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa, begins the future during the reign of the Pāṇḍava
descendant Adhisīmakṛsṇ ̣a. Indeed, the Mahābhārata probably estab-
lishes the flexibility of this convention when Mārkaṇḍeya shifts to the
future tense to describe the end of the Kali Yuga.43 Mitchiner overlooks
that Yuga Purāṇa verses 28–39 are a kind of futuristic Mahābhārata
digest,44 and clearly show that some kind of Mahābhārata—almost
certainly one with yugas—is older than the Yuga Purāṇa:45
43 Mbh 3.188.10 ff. See Hiltebeitel 2005b, 125, n. 41.
44 It will be noted that the Yuga Purāṇa describes a somewhat rough-edged
Mahābhārata that may reflect popular conceptions of it, e.g., in some of the epic
names cited, and in the faulting of the war to Draupadī-Kṛsṇ ̣ā (see below, śl 36). One
might think of relating this to what Mitchiner calls the “hybrid” features of its Sanskrit
(1986, 20–36).
45 Cf. González-Reimann 2002, 142–43, maintaining that “a text like the Yuga
Purāṇa” could have worked out the Mahābhārata’s yuga chronology before the epic did
so itself, and that the epic “only later incorporated” it. Yet he acknowledges that “The
exact relationship between the Yuga Purāṇa and the Epic is difficult to ascertain.”
why itihāsa? 95
28. A nd at the end of that Yuga, the earth will go to destruction; men,
having come under the control of Time, will cook [for] their own
bodies (tasyāpi ca yugasyāṃte medavī ksạ yamesỵ ati/ narāspaksạ ṃti
svāndehān kālasya vaśamāgatāḥ).
29. Keśava (Visṇ ̣u) will arise at the end of the Dvāpara, in order to
destroy horses and elephants, princes and men (hayānāṃ ca gajānaṃ
ca pārthivānāṃ nrṇ ̣āṃ tathā/ vadhārtham dvāparasyāṃte samutpat-
syati keśavaḥ):
30. [he will be] four-armed, of great valour, bearing the conch, disc,
and mace: [and he will be] called Vāsudeva, the strong one, dressed
in yellow clothes (caturbāhurmahavīryaḥ śaṃkhacakragadādharaḥ/
vāsudeva iti khyātaḥ pītāṃbaradharo balī).46
31. Then, resembling Kailāsa, wearing a garland of flowers [and] bearing
the plough a weapon, there will arise Yudhisṭḥ ira47—the excellent
king of the Pāṇḍavas—for the purpose of slaughter at the end of the
Dvāpara, together with [his] four brothers (tataḥ kailāsasaṃkāśo
vanamālī halāyudhaḥ/ pāṇḍavānāṃ varo rājā bhavisỵ ati yudhisṭḥ iraḥ/
vadhārthaṃ dvāparasyāṃte caturbhir bhrātṛbhiḥ saha).
32. [namely] both Bhīmasena the son of Vāyu, and of severe tapas,
and the two brothers, Nakula and Sahadeva, born of the Aśvins
(vāyavyo bhīmasenaśca phālgunaśca mahātapāḥ/ nakulaḥ sahadevaśca
bhrātarāv aśvinātmajau).
33. Also Bhīsṃ a, Droṇa and others, and the prince Dhṛsṭạ dyumna and
Karṇa, the king of Aṅga, together with Aśvatthāman the invincible
(bhīsṃ adroṇādayaścaiva dhṛsṭạ dyumaśca pārthivaḥ/ aṅgarājastathā
karṇaḥ sāśvatthāmā ca durjayaḥ).
34. Devaka and Śatadhanvan, and Dāruka the illustrious—they will
arise at the end of the Yuga, in order to protect the world of men
(devakaḥ śatadhanvā ca dārukasya mahāyaśaḥ/ raksạ̄ rthaṃ naral-
okasya utpatsyaṃti yugaksạ ye).
35. S o too Śakuni and Dantavaktra, and Śiśupāla the haughty: together
with Śalya, Rukmi, Jarāsaṃdha, Kṛtavarman [and] Jayadratha
(śakunir-daṃtavaktraśca śiśupālaśca garvitaḥ/ śalyo rukmir
jarāsaṃdhaḥ kṛtavarmā jayadrathaḥ).
36. The cause [of strife] of these might[y] kings will be Kṛsṇ ̣ā, the
daughter of Drupada: [and] the earth will go48 to her destruction
(etesạ̄ mapi vīrāṇāṃ rājñāṃ heturbhavisỵ ati/ drupadasya sutā kṛsṇ ̣ā
dehāṃtaragatā mahī).
46 Mitchiner observes the sectarian tone of these two verses on Kṛsṇ ̣a, but correctly
observes that with its overall narration by Śiva, the Yuga Purāṇa “has no strong sec-
tarian bias” (1986, 46–47).
47 As Mitchiner 1986, 46, 90 n. 19 indicates, Yudhisṭḥ ira’s description seems to be
borrowed from Balarāma.
48 Mitchiner 1986, 90 n. 20: lit. “went.”
96 chapter four
37. Then, when the destruction of men has occurred and the circle of
kings has ended, there will be the fourth [and] final Yuga called Kali
(tato naraksạ ye vṛtte praśāṃte nṛpamaṇḍale/ bhavisỵ ati kalirnāma
caturthaṃ paścimaṃ yugaṃ).
38. Then at the start of the Kali Yuga, Janamejaya Pārīksịt will be
born, illustrious and celebrated on the earth—there is no doubt
(tataḥ kaliyugasyādau pārīksịj-janamejayaḥ/ pṛthivyāṃ prathitaḥ
śrīmānutpatsyati na saṃśayaḥ).
39. A nd that king will cause a quarrel with the Twice-born: 49 his anger
for his insulted wife50 having come under the power of time (so ‘pi
rājā dvijaiḥ sārdhaṃ virodhamupadhāsyati/ dāraviprakṛtāmarsạ ḥ
kālasya vaśamāgataḥ). (Mitchiner 1986, 90 trans.; xi–xv text)
Why would the Yuga Purāṇa innovate in this way by placing the
Mahābhārata war in the future? All we need to know for a reason-
able answer is that the Yuga Purāṇa is part of an astrological text and
that its frame story makes the whole unit a narrative by Śiva to his
son Skanda, the general of the gods. The shift shows the power of this
text to predict the Mahābhārata astronomically, not its priority to the
Mahābhārata.51 Śiva, as it were, scoops Mārkaṇḍeya and Vyāsa (who
49 See Mitchiner 1986, 51–52 on Janamejaya (śl 37–39): the Yuga Purāṇa knows
the story of his killing a Brahmin and regaining favor after an Aśvamadha, citing Mbh
12.146–8! See Fitzgerald 2004a, 786 n. to Mbh 12.146.3, joining attempts to explain
away Yudhisṭḥ ira’s hearing from Bhīsṃ a about their as-yet-unborn descendents Pariksịt
and Janamejaya (called “Bhārata” [147.20d]). Fitzgerald’s explanation is that “more
likely . . . the story originated apart from the MBh . . . and was inserted . . . relatively late.
The entire [Āpaddharma] seems to be significantly later than at least the first thirty-
five chapters of . . . the rājadharma.” But the Yuga Purāṇa most likely knows it from
the Mbh, and at a quite early time. For criticism of Fitzgerald’s staggering of the four
anthologies of the Śānti- and Anuśāsana-Parvans, see chapters 6 and 12 below, and
Hiltebeitel 2006c.
50 The Mbh does not tell of this; Mitchiner (1986, 51) cites Harivaṃśa 118.11–39,
which tells that Janamejaya blamed the priests for letting Indra enter the body of the
horse to have intercourse with his wife! On epic sensitivities concerning such Aśvamedha
scenes, see chapters 8 and 9 below. In the Mbh, before Janamejaya is instructed to per-
form the Aśvamedha, he is given the option of what amounts to an archaic yātsattra
by which he would traverse the Sarasvatī and Dṛsạ dvatī Rivers (Mbh 12.248.10–13).
On yātsattras in the Mbh, see Hiltebeitel 2001a, 130–55 and above (section C) on “Old
Garga’s” auspicious tīrtha on the Sarasvatī.
51 I suspect that in according the four yugas, without ever defining how long they
each last (González-Reimann 2002, 98), a decimally defined relation in terms of life
spans of 100,000 years in the Kṛta, 10,000 in the Tretā, 1,000 in the Dvāpara, “and (by
implication) 100 years in the Kali” (Mitchiner 2002, 43), with the length of a kalpa
given as 10,000,000 years (śls 8, 21, 24, 115), the Yuga Purāṇa shows not a priority to
the epic, with its 4–3–2–1 proportion of yuga-durations, but either a passing reference
to some things the epics say about long-lived persons in long-ago times, or more likely
an interpretation befitting the Gārgya-jyotisạ ’s interest in astronomical calculations. For
why itihāsa? 97
also has a prophetic side)52 to foretell the Mahābhārata as the entrée
to the Kali Yuga, which from its beginning thus becomes a some-
what redemptive tale. Moreover, the text shows its teleological hand
by moving directly from its prophesy of the Mahābhārata to more
recent persons and events of the late Kali Yuga. From the twelve verses
on the Mahābhārata and King Janamejaya, the next personage, men-
tioned, immediately, is the Magadha king Udāyin, of the pre-Nanda
Śiśunāgas, and his founding of the new Magadha capital at Pātạ liputra
(śl 40–43)!53 The telos of the Yuga Purāṇa will thus lie in Śiva’s predic-
tions connecting the Mahābhārata with certain persons, events, and
places of the late Kali Yuga.
Now as I have already mentioned, Mitchiner argues that the Yuga
Purāṇa was probably composed not in Magadha but in Ujjain. I
believe he is right to argue that it features a northwestern/north-
central Indian perspective rather than what we can now call a Greater
Magadhan northeastern one, which makes it interesting to compare
with the Greater Magadhan outlook of the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa. Actu-
ally, the Yuga Purāṇa prognosticates about three broad regions, which
we may call Greater Magadha, the Northern Midlands (for what I have
just called the northwestern/north-central area), and the Deccan or
South—including the Kāverī River basin (1986, 75–79 with map facing
78). As already indicated, the Yuga Purāṇa sketches out its program
instance, Randy Kloetzli informs me that Berossos, a 3rd century B.C.E. Chaldean priest
of Bel (Marduk) who interpreted Babylonian learning to the Greeks, used a sexagesimal
system in which “the ten kings of the ante-diluvian period ruled for a total of 120 saroi
(one saros = 3,600 years = 1,0,0 in base 60 notation) for a total of 432,000 years (2,0,0,0
in base 60 notation) said to be the duration of the Purāṇic Kali yuga as well” (e-mail,
June 2009). Cf. Pingree 1963, 238; 1990, 275; indeed one of Pingree’s points in these
articles is the creativity of Indian “astronomical yuga” theories, which are only loosely
adjusted to epico-purāṇic ones. Āryabhatạ , for instance, made the yugas’ lengths equal
(1963, 239). Cf. Mitchiner 1986, 15.
52 See most memorably Mbh 1.119.6–8, his parting words to his mother, who will
depart with the two sisters with whom, at her bidding, he sired the Kauravas and
Pāṇḍavas’ fathers: “The times of happiness are past and times of trouble lie ahead.
The days grow worse every new tomorrow, earth herself is aging. A dreadful time is
at hand, confounded by much witchery, beset by many vices, when all the acts and
manners of the Law shall be soiled. Go now, leave it all. Yoke yourself and live in the
wilderness of austerities, lest you must witness the ruination of your own dynasty”
(van Buitenen 1973, 64).
53 As indicated above, the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa traces Magadha expansionism to
Udāyin. See Mitchiner 1986, 52–53: Udāyin, who bears epithet śiśunāgātmaja, was
perhaps the successor of Ajātaśatru, ca. 460 B.C.E.; “for the author of the Yuga-Purāṇa,”
the founding “constituted a major event in the Kali Yuga.”
98 chapter four
highly selectively, mentioning events and personages found nowhere
else in the historical record: among them, it is “the only Indian text”
that “refers in any detail to the presence of Indo-Greeks in India.”54 I
limit myself to two featured themes: 1. the way that the Yuga Purāṇa
links its singular account of the Indo-Greeks in India with what I have
referred to as Pusỵ amitra’s Northern Midlands Alliance; and 2. the
Yuga Purāṇa’s peculiar notion of safe havens in the south. Be it noted
that the Yuga Purāṇa interprets both these themes redemptively: after
adharmic rule makes way for the Greek and Śaka invasions, both incur-
sions, says Śiva, will have redemptive outcomes, which will include the
invaders going back home.
C.2. The Greek Incursion and the Northern Midlands Alliance
The first incursion, then, is by the Greeks into Pātạ liputra. From
Udāyin’s founding of that Magadhan capital, the Yuga Purāṇa turns
immediately to a late Mauryan king there named Śāliśūka (Mitchiner
dates his ascent to about 205 B.C.E.), whose adharmic rule (śl 44–46;
1986, 91) sets the stage. The Yuga Purāṇa disparages Śāliśūka as “an
oppressor of his own kingdom” (śl 45), and Mitchiner takes him to
display the non-Brahmanical preferences of the late Mauryas.55 As
Mitchiner says, it is not necessarily a continuous chronology from
Śāliśūka to the Yavana incursion, but since the account goes on to
speak of Śuṅga kings, it would appear that the incursion would not
be much later than Śāliśūka. We now meet our Northern Midlands
54 Mitchiner 1986, 3, cited above, attempts to tie in these events with Greek pres-
ences in central and eastern India in inscriptions and with the history of Demetrios and
Khāravela (55–58). Fitzgerald 2007, at the end of a section titled “The General Historical
Setting of the Mahābhārata,” convincingly dates Khāravela later than Mitchiner and
an old consensus, promoting him to “the middle of the first c. B.C.E.,” but he makes a
rather fantastic attempt to imagine this Jaina Cedi king “or a clansman” to have had a
“possible role in sponsoring the Mahābhārata” (n. 12). Khāravela ruled from Kaliṅga
(Orissa), on which the Mahābhārata has many negative things to say (see Salomon
1978; Biardeau 2002, 1:298; 2:54, 756–57; Hiltebeitel 2005b, 118–21).
55 Purāṇic sources list him as a successor of Aśoka who could have ascended “shortly
before 200 B.C.” Cf. Thapar 1998, 183, 191, taking him from purāṇic sources to be the
fourth-to-last Maurya, and of a bad reputation also in the Gārgasaṃhitā. The Yuga
Purāṇa’s last word on him is that “he will, in delusion, cause his oldest brother to
establish a righteous [person] called Vijaya (vijayaṃ nāma dhārmikam.” (śl 46), which
Mitchiner says may be a negative-ironic twist on Aśoka’s dharmavijaya or “conquest
through righteousness” (1986, 52–55, 91 and n. 26). Proposing another interpretation
linked with Jainism, see Bhattachrarya 2008.
why itihāsa? 99
Alliance of Greek, Mathurā, and Pañcāla forces, which pass through
Sāketa (Ayodhyā) on the way to Pātạ liputra, where they tear down
the fort and leave the lands desolate. After this, however, the Yavanas
do not remain in “Madhyadeśa,”56 as war will break out in their own
realm (1986, 55–58; śl 47–48, 56–57; 91–92). Such a Yavana incur-
sion in alliance with Pañcāla and Mathurā after the adharmic rule of
Śāliśūka is, according to Mitchiner, most conceivable “around 190
B.C.E.: a period which saw . . . the secession of Sogdiana in the Indo-
Greek realm, which would doubtless have prompted the return of any
Indo-Greek expeditionary force to their own realm [in Bactria];57 and
a period which also witnessed the final downfall of the Mauryas and
the emergence of the new Śuṅga dynasty under Pusỵ amitra in India”
in circa 187 B.C.E. (1986, 58). Such a course of events may find cor-
roboration in the recent discovery that a Greek era was dated back to
186/85 B.C.E.58
Yet the overthrow of the last Maurya Bṛhadratha by his Brahmin
general Pusỵ amitra Śuṅga goes unmentioned in the Yuga Purāṇa,
and of the two, only Pusỵ amitra seems to be named—as one of four
kings who rules at Pātạ liputra (Mitchiner 1986, 63). Bronkhorst asso-
ciates the Yuga Purāṇa’s account of the Greeks’ part in this invasion
with the way some other sources represent them as provoking fear,
or as a threat to the order of Brahmanical society (2007, 359). But
note Śiva’s emphasis on their retreat. In any case, Mitchiner shows a
way to read these events as background to what I am calling the text’s
redemptive pattern. Says Mitchiner, “the confusion wrought by the
advent of a joint Yavana-Pañcāla-Māthura force may have provided
the opportunity for Pusỵ amitra to overthrow the last Maurya king and
establish his own dynasty. . . . [T]o judge from [Pusỵ amitra’s] name, it
is quite possible that he himself may have come from the then Mau-
rya domains of Pañcāla or Mathurā, where many of the subsequent
‘Mitra’ kings are known to have ruled” (1986, 58–59). Mitchiner goes
56 See Mitchiner 1986, 56: “‘Madhyadeśa’ seems to be intended here in the sense found
also in Buddhist works, denoting the region up to or beyond Kajaṅgala” (in southeast
Bihar, “and even Puṇḍra.” Cf. 92, n. 33; Rhys Davids 1904; Bronkhorst 2007, 1–4.
57 Mitchiner narrows this down from a starting period of circa 205–190 during the
overlapping reigns of Euthydemos and Demetrios as co-regents in Bactria, and the
span from circa 190–171 when Demetrios became supreme ruler.
58 I thank Jason Neelis for making this point (see above, n. 1). On the inscriptional
evidence for this Indo-Greek era, see Salomon 2005, 2007, 268; Bracey 2005; Mac
Dowell 2007, 113; Neelis 2007, 70 n. 63.
100 chapter four
on to enrich this hypothesis with a plot: “Seen in this light, therefore,
we may suppose that the Pañcālas and Māthuras—seeking to hasten
the fall of a rapidly weakening Maurya empire and to establish their
own independence [which, as shall be mentioned, they achieved in
their independent minting of coins]—enlisted the help of a Yavana
contingent and proceeded to the Maurya capital to sound the death-
knell of that dynasty. If the ‘Mitra’ Pusỵ amitra was indeed of Pañcāla
or Māthura origin, the advent of this force—comprised of many of his
compatriots—would have provided him with an ideal opportunity to
dispose of his Maurya master and to have himself proclaimed as ruler”
(1986, 59; my insertion).
Mitchiner goes on to propose that the seven kings of Sāketa, whom
the Yuga Purāṇa mentions next without names or details (śl 58–59),
serve not only to take us down to the conditions that presage the next
invasion by the Śakas, but might include descendants of Pusỵ amitra
as rulers of Kosala, which bordered on Pañcāla (1986, 59). Whatever
we make of Mitchiner historical reconstruction, we are left with the
question of why the Yuga Purāṇa features a Yavana-Pañcāla-Mathurā
coalition in a destruction of the Magadha capital, to which Mitchiner’s
solution offers a cogent answer. Along the same lines, why, according
to the Mānava Dharmaśāstra, should a king, who is given no particular
location for his capital, be urged to deploy soldiers “from the lands of
the Kurus, Matsyas, Pañcālas, and Śūrasenas” on his front lines when
he goes to battle (Mānava Dharmaśāstra 7.193)? With the Śūrasenas
being from Mathurā, it is much the same folk. The recommendation
would likely reflect that these lands yield loyal soldiers from the Mid-
lands, as they are said to have done in the Mahābhārata war.
Now if the Yuga Purāṇa does not mention Pusỵ amitra Śuṅga in
connection with the overthrow of the Mauryas, it probably does refer
to him under the name of Pusp̣ aka—identifying him as the cofounder
and then sole ruler of the kings called Agniveśyas (Mitchiner 1986, 3,
75, 93 śl 71–72)—that is, Śuṅga kings59 whom Mitchiner also calls the
“the ‘Mitra’ kings” with reference to their coinage. Not known by either
59 Śl 61, 70c-81. Says Mitchiner (1986, 62), the “name is apparently given to both
the dynasty as a whole (śloka 62) and also to one of its prominent members, who is
nonetheless not its founder (ślokas 79–80).” It is, however, not clear that the name
pertains to the whole line. The uncertainty of the chronology is compounded by the
mention before this (śl 60 and 65–70b) of a low-born ruler named Āmrātạ , who takes
over Pātạ liputra after an uprising. Mitchiner suggests he may be Khāravela (1986,
60–62), on whom see Fitzgerald 2007 and n. 54 above.
why itihāsa? 101
name from other sources, they are said to have ruled prosperously at
least for a while in Pātạ liputra (a.k.a. Pusp̣ apura), but also elsewhere.
Attention thus switches to a land called Bhadrayaka or Bhadrapaka,
otherwise unknown, where Agnimitra, possibly as a Śuṅga viceroy,60
and Agniveśya, probably another Śuṅga, may have ruled. Agniveśya is
said to have fought the Savaras there, which would suggest the Vind-
hyas (Mitchiner 1986, 62–63).
Looking at coins found from the Śuṅga period, Mitchiner remarks on
the rise of dynasties across northern India that issued anonymous sil-
ver and copper punch-marked coins first from Pātạ liputra, then briefly
at Mathurā, and subsequently from mints in Vidiśā, Ujjain, and Eran.
In these circumstances, the central areas of Mathurā, Pañcāla, Kosala,
and Kauśāmbī (capital of Vatsa)61 take prominence, while “in western
India and the Panjab, a number of small states and tribes asserted their
independence and issued coins,” including the Kurus, Purus, Vṛsṇ ̣is,
and Yaudheyas. But there were also coins of “further ‘Mitra’ kings—
including Indramitra” found at Pātạ liputra (1986, 63–64). With these
so-called Agniveśya or “ ‘Mitra’ kings,” we thus find a proliferation
of “little kingdoms,” reminding us how that ideal has flourished over
the centuries in Indian martial culture, and interestingly—given the
early names Agnimitra and Agniveśya—flourished under the name
and mythology of Agnikula or Agnivaṃśa Ksạ triyas or Rājpūts. That
is, it is used for kings, some of them of Brahmin extraction, who do
not trace their descent in the Lunar or Solar dynasties made normative
in the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa respectively (see Hiltebeitel 1999a,
211–363, 439–75; 1999b). One feature of the Yuga Purāṇa’s redemp-
tive history could thus be called the little kingdomization of Pātạ liputra
as preferable to rule there by the imperial Nandas or Mauryas. In the
post-Maurya period and before the rise of the Śaka Ksạ trapas (Satraps)
and Kusạ̄ ṇas, the Mitras were little kings, the biggest being Pusỵ amitra.
Says Mitchiner, “We might even go so far as to suggest that Pusỵ amitra
60 Agnimitra falls in love with a beautiful girl of the land in Kālidāsa’s Mālavikāgnimitra,
wherein he is a viceroy of Pusỵ amitra in Vidiśa, after being a co-ruler with him at the
beginning of his reign (Mitchiner 1986, 63). Mitchiner notes that an astronomical fea-
ture of his description in the Yuga Purāṇa may assign the beginning of his viceroyalty
in Vidiśā to 183 B.C.E. (66).
61 Kauśāmbī (see n. 32 above) is the royal city at stake in the comparable and prob-
ably later north Indian Buddhist prophesies of the end of the dharma, which usually
mention the Greeks, Śakas, and Pahlavas; see Nattier 1991; Hiltebeitel forthcoming,
chapter 6.
102 chapter four
was instrumental in establishing certain viceroys or regents in such
regions as Kosala, Pañcāla and Mathurā who—or whose successors—
thereafter asserted their own independence.” The Śuṅgas quickly lost
power in northern India,62 the focus of power shifting to “Malwa, cen-
tered on the three cities of Vidiśā, Eran and Ujjain”—where Mitchiner
posits that the Yuga Purāṇa would have been written (65).
Meanwhile, in around 110 B.C.E. and close to Vidiśā, something of
this Śuṅga period Northern Midlands Alliance with the Greeks could
still have inspired the Indo-Greek ambassador Heliodorus to inscribe
his Vaisṇ ̣ava sentiments on the famous Besnagar Garuḍa Pillar in a
śloka verse similar to one in the Mahābhārata (see Brockington 1998,
134; Witzel 2005, 62, 64, 66).
C.3. The Śaka Invasion and the Southern Safe Havens
It must be admitted that to call this amorcellization of kingship redemp-
tive is to play into a dead-end historiography. It may be better than
life under the Nandas or Mauryas, but it is going nowhere. The basic
pattern thus repeats itself. Following an interlude on evil conduct of
men and women, another bad ruler, King Satuvara (śl 87)—Mitchiner
thinks he is probably Śātavāhana or one of the early Śātavāhana kings
(1986, 66–67)—rules for ten years to set the stage for the Śaka inva-
sion, which is mentioned in the next verses (śl 88–89), though it is also
mentioned earlier (śl 62–64). This discontinuous chronology would
take us down to about 60 B.C.E. According to the Yuga Purāṇa, a
Śaka king plunders and destroys until he is killed by a Kaliṅga king
and a group of Sabalas, which for Mitchiner again suggests a Vindhya
location, now one close enough to Ujjain. Thereafter the Śakas, like the
Greeks, return to their own city (1986, 68).
Although the Purāṇas do not mention any Śaka incursion, the
story is related in the cycle that launches the Vikrama era, which was
62 See Härtel 2007, 346, finding it “amply clear that the Śuṅgas did not inherit the
Mauryan empire in its entirety; various small principalities had cropped up in the
various parts of the Mauryan empire along with the coup d’etat of Pusỵ amitra or soon
after it.” “The majority of historians agree on dating the beginning of the Local States
of Northern India to the second or later half of the second century B.C., taking for
granted the disintegration of the Śuṅga empire soon after Pusỵ amitra.”
why itihāsa? 103
adopted by the Guptas and Cālukyas.63 The Yuga Purāṇa’s redemp-
tive predictions now draw to their climax with a description of what
Mitchiner calls “Regions in Which Men Will Survive and Pros-
per” (1986, 75–76; śl 98–113). As he indicates, the area in question
lies “between the Vindhyas and the river Krishna (modern western
and central M adhya Pradesh, and Maharashtra), together with the
s outhern part of the eastern Ghats in Orissa, and the area around the
river Kāverī in Tamil Nadu” (75). As Mitchiner maps the locations
(facing p. 78), he must set the Kāverī area apart, but all the rest are
contiguous, and he takes them to imply a territory enjoying “renewed
prosperity” under the Śātavāhana empire (75–76). Noting the Yuga
Purāṇa’s prognostic emphasis, Mitchiner takes it that its author, who
he says is “well acquainted on the one hand with various regions
of northern India—which are mentioned in the context of the Kali
Yuga,” now mentions these “survival regions for the start of a new
(Kṛta) Yuga” (79): “clearly linking his account of the Yugas to histori-
cal events,” this author “believes that, shortly after the advent of the
Śakas, the Kali Yuga had come to an end; and that after an interval of
harsh conditions, a new Kṛta Yuga was beginning to dawn—an event
which he evidently believed was occurring at his own time of writ-
ing” (82).64 Mitchiner suggests that others in Ujjain would have shared
this view and its “optimism” in around 25 B.C.E., and that this would
“explain why the era of 58 B.C.—that was almost certainly founded
by [the Indo-Scythian king] Azes65—came to be called the Kṛta Yuga
when it was subsequently adopted by the inhabitants of Ujjain and
Malwa” (82).
63 Mitchiner 1986, 71; cf. 74–75 offering a “summarized reconstruction” of the
expulsion of the Śakas from Ujjain, leading to the founding of the era. On the story
cycle, see Brown 1933.
64 Cf. Mitchiner 1990, 321: After the Śakas’ “relatively brief plundering foray,” “the
Yuga Purāṇa describes the end of the Kali Yuga and the dawn of a new Kṛta Yuga.”
65 The equation of the Azes and Vikrama eras is recently disputed in Bracey 2005
based on an inscription dated in two eras, a Greek and Azes era; he concludes: “The
Azes era cannot be dated later than 30 B.C. or earlier than 80 B.C.” Cf. Cribb 2005.
See also González-Reimann 2002, 99; Hiltebeitel 1999a, 263–64: a probably fictional
Vikramāditya is credited with founding an era in 58 or 57 B.C.E. that may have Scytho-
Parthian origins in eastern Iran. Śālivāhana, linked with the Śaka era that seems actually
to mark the beginning of Kusạ̄ ṇa rule in 78 C.E., is probably a personification of the
Śātavāhanas (based in Paithan on the Godavari River near Aurangabad in Maharashtra,
but with origins in Andhra and north Kanara). He seems to draw his profile especially
from the first dynast Simuka-Śātavāhana (mid-first century B.C.E.) and Gautamīputra
Śātakarṇi (ca. 106–30 C.E.) who defeated a branch of Śakas.
104 chapter four
This credulity of the people of Ujjain twenty-five years before the
common era might, however, strike us as rather contrived. The Yuga
Purāṇa never makes it explicit that its closing events, involving what
Mitchiner calls the “Regions in Which Men Will Survive and Prosper,”
have anything to do with the Kṛta Yuga: a point acknowledged by
González-Reimann, who nonetheless says that “the text implies that at
that time, and in those places, a new Kṛta Yuga will commence” (2002,
99).66 Mitchiner is also misleading when he says men will “prosper” in
these regions due to what he calls “renewed prosperity” (75–76, 82)
under the Śātavāhana empire. They are better named by González-
Reimann, who calls them “safe havens” (2002, 99)—but in troubled
times. Although as we shall see, the safe havens sequence repeatedly
uses words for “the end of the yuga,” it never uses the term Kṛta Yuga,
and, I will argue, is not describing one as imminent or, much less, as a
“realized eschatology.” Here I must disagree not only with Mitchiner
but with González-Reimann, who launches his discussion of the Yuga
Purāṇa with the comment that, “At some point in the last centuries
B.C.E., and the early centuries C.E., there must have been real expecta-
tions that Kali would end in the foreseeable future” (2002, 97–98; cf.
144).67 I believe Mitchiner is again overstating his case to argue for the
priority of the Yuga Purāṇa’s yuga skein to that of the Mahābhārata.
Mitchiner attempts to make capital of the fact that the Yuga Purāṇa
does not mention the myth of Kalki, and takes the Mahābhārata’s pro-
phetic account of that myth by Mārkaṇḍeya—in which Mitchiner finds
similarities to the Yuga Purāṇa account, and one identical line68—to
66 See similarly Bhattacharya 2008: The Yuga Purāṇa “is the only text to speak of
12 regions (maṇḍalas) that are peopled after the end of the yuga. It is unique in not
terming these survivors as mlecchas.” Bhattacharya seems to miss the point that these
havens would be above all for Brahmins. Further, “For the Yuga Purāṇa, the end of
the Kali Yuga comes with the invasion of the Shakas, followed by drought. . . .”
67 With his view that the Mahābhārata accreted over many centuries, González-
Reimann (2002 and 2006), makes his project the working out a long developmental
logic of the yuga concept, from “mere metaphor” and “simple story” to systematic
complexities; but he takes a more restricted, if still vague, view of Vaisṇ ̣avism, suggesting
that the beginnings of its possible impact upon the epic would have begun “[a]round
the beginning of the common era” (2006, 227). For my views on this matter, see Hilte-
beitel 2001a, 20–31, and chapters 3, 7, 11, and 12 of this volume.
68 Mitchiner 1986, 38: Yuga Purāṇa śl 55ab = Mbh 3.186.33cd: bhovādinas tathā
śūdrā brāhmaṇāś cāryavadinaḥ. Van Buitinen 1975, 587 translates, “The serfs will say
‘Hey you!’, the brahmins will say ‘Pray sir!’ ” It looks to be simply proverbial. Mitchiner
says the Mahābhārata borrows this line (42). But why just a line?
why itihāsa? 105
be later.69 But an omission is not a sufficient reason to date one text
before the other. We are, in other words, back to the question of the
redemptive telos of the Yuga Purāṇa, which is obviously—to begin
with—just simply different from that of the Mahābhārata’s myth of
Kalki. To appreciate the distinctiveness of the Yuga Purāṇa’s redemp-
tive telos, we must consider how it uses the notion of “the end of the
yuga” in relation to the account of the safe havens that closes Śiva’s
prophesy to Skanda.
The Yuga Purāṇa refers to “the end of the yuga” in its run-up to the
description of the safe havens, first to describe the destructive situa-
tion: “there will be an end of the Yuga, the destruction of all living
beings (bhavisỵ ati yugasyāntam sarvaprāṇivināśanaṃ)” (Mitchiner
1986, 95, śl 91cd). There are then three successive verses that end in
yugaksạ ye, to describe the good and the wicked who will “remain at
the end [or destruction] of the yuga.” The good are those of “calmness,
patience and self-restraint” (śamaksạ madamās; śl 95c) and “those who
maintain firmness” (dhairyam; śl 97c). But the wicked, those “dear
to Kali who ever cause disbelief” (nāstikyaṃ . . . kalipriyam), will also
remain at the end of the yuga (yugaksạ ye) (śl 96). Such stock usages of
“at the end of the yuga” for a bad time—what González-Reimann likes
to call a “mere metaphor” (2002, 77)—are not sufficient to establish
that a Kṛta Yuga follows.
The same compound, yugaksạ ye, is then used at the end of the two
transitional verses that describe the “creation” of the twelve safe havens
(dvādaśamaṇḍalaḥ):
98. When the world has been afflicted with famine and has become a
terrible fire, [then] from regard for the welfare of living beings, twelve
regions were [i.e., will be] created (durbhiksạ̄ bhyāhate loke agnibhūte
sudaruṇe/aveksỵ arthaṃ prāṇiṇāṃ sṛsṭạ̄ dvādaśamaṇḍalaḥ).
99. The remnant in the world who are dear to dharma, those men who
resort to dharma, they will remain at the end of the Yuga, wearied by
hunger and thirst (śesạ̄ dharmapriyā loke ye narā dharmasaṃśritāḥ/
69 See Mitchiner 1986, 40–42, 44, adducing additionally that the Mahābhārata
prefaces the Kalki account by speaking not of individual kings, as the Yuga Purāṇa
does, but of peoples (3.186.30); the Mahābhārata’s citation of the Vāyu Purāṇa at
3.189.14, though not the extant one by that name; and that the Yuga Purāṇa account
also omits any mention of an era of the Seven Ṛsịs, i.e., a Manvantara. Bhattacharya
2008 follows Mitchiner on these points. As von Stietencron shows, however, and as
we know from the Āpastamba Dharmasūtra, they are probably named purāṇas before
the Mahābhārata.
106 chapter four
ksụ tpipāsapariśrāṃtāste sthāsyāṃti yugaksạ ye). (Mitchiner 1986, 96;
xxxiv–xxxv)
When it comes now to describing the twelve havens themselves and
the conditions under which this remnant of the good will survive, they
are said to do so in four cases “at the end of the yuga” (yugaksạ ye; śl
102d; 103d; 104d; 113d)—in the last case, which summarizes for the
whole, “in that terrible end of the yuga” (ghore tasmin yugaksạ ye).
Clearly none of the remnant is experiencing anything like a Kṛta Yuga.
Indeed, although after mentioning that those who seek refuge, “long-
ing for a better condition” in the first two havens, “will attain excellent
happiness” (sukham uttamaṃ)” there (śl 101), the conditions elsewhere
seem to be reminiscent of āpaddharma—that is, of topsyturvy dharma
for times of distress: in riverside, oceanside, mountainous, and for-
ested regions, “men will live on fish and costly flesh” (102); elsewhere,
“. . . through fish and birds” (107); “. . . on lotus fibres and lotus flowers”
(111). And “on the banks of the Kāverī . . . men will have contentment
there, through fish and boars” (106)! These are safe havens primarily
for Brahmins. Indeed, as T.P. Mahadevan reminds me, supplying the
following references, Tamil Sangam poetry depicts one poet, Kapilar,
as a Brahmin who “feasts full on meat” that was “stewed” or “fried”
(Hart 1975, 53; Hart and Heifitz 1999, 248–49).
I believe, then, that we must certainly rule out Mitchiner’s inter-
pretation that the Yuga Purāṇa ends with the author and the people
of Ujjain enjoying “prosperity” and happily anticipating or experienc-
ing the Kṛta Yuga. And with the rejection of that interpretation, we
must also dismiss his argument that the account would be an earlier
alternative to the Mahābhārata’s Kalki myth. There is nothing solid on
which to base a claim that it is earlier than the Kalki myth. But more
important, it is not an alternative to it,70 and it is not evidence that the
Yuga Purāṇa would be authoring “the earliest account of the Yugas in
Indian literature” (1986, vii). But if the Yuga Purāṇa is not describing
a pre-Mahābhārata account of the Kṛta Yuga, what is it describing and
what are its models? I believe there are two possible answers, both of
which would have Mahābhārata prefigurations.
70 A position that González-Reimann takes, in agreement with Mitchiner that the
Kalki myth is “probably a late adaptation or reformulation of ideas presented earlier
in the Yuga Purāṇa, or some other external source” (2002, 99).
why itihāsa? 107
The first explanation would draw on the Mahābhārata doctrine,
also aired in The Laws of Manu (9.301), that the king makes the yuga.
This explanation could borrow a little from Mitchiner’s view that the
Śātavāhana empire had created “Regions in Which Men Will Survive
and Prosper.” But the explanation has obvious difficulties. Since no
particular king is credited, the doctrine would have to be modified to
say that “the empire makes the yuga.” More than this, it is an account
of safe havens in troubled times. Of course, to say a king creates the
yuga is not to limit him, or an empire, to a Kṛta Yuga. But we don’t
hear about kings who create Tretā or Dvāpara Yugas, and since creat-
ing a Kali Yuga would be redundant, I think this explanation must be
put back on the shelf.
The second explanation, however, is sound, and has a more well-
developed Mahābhārata background, indeed, a myth. As we have
seen, Rāma Jāmadagnya empties the earth of Ksạ triyas twenty-one
times. But the job is never complete. Yudhisṭḥ ira, who has heard the
story once in the forest, hears it a second time after the war from
Kṛsṇ ̣a, who tells it to deter him from disavowing his hard-won king-
dom.71 In this account, the goddess Earth tells the Brahmin Kaśyapa
she has made safe havens for the eventual regeneration of the Ksạ triya
class, and implores Kaśyapa to reinstate them as kings to protect her.
As Kṛsṇ ̣a tells it (Mbh 12.49.66–75), neo-Ksạ triyas were raised in dif-
ferent forest, mountain,72 riverside, and oceanside73 locations by bears,
seers, cows, calves, monkeys, and the ocean (see Hiltebeitel 1999a, 460;
Fitzgerald 2004a, 279–80).
D. Conclusions
The following ten points can now be made by way of conclusion.
1. Megasthenes’ report from Candragupta’s Maurya’s time of a gene-
alogy of 153 kings shows that the Mauryans had an early historical
71 At first, says Kṛsṇ ̣a, Śūdras and Vaiśyas united with Brahmin women to produce
a kingless condition in which the strong ruled the weak (12.49.61–62). The South-
ern Recension adds that Brahmins abandoned their dharma and turned to heresies
(pāsạ ṇḍān; 111* line 4 following 49.62).
72 Including a Vulture Peak (gṛdhrakūtạ ; 12.49.73).
73 I assume Ocean did its protecting by the oceanside. Some northern texts add
that the ones thus protected lived among blacksmiths, goldsmiths, and such (vyokāra-
hemakārādi; 75 and 114*).
108 chapter four
record even before Aśoka, probably without yugas, or with them desig-
nating only short time-cycles. Aśoka himself, in a context where—had
he had access to it—the theory of yugas could have served him better,
tries rather falteringly in two of his edicts to imagine dhaṃma pro-
gressing through his dynastic descendants until the end of the kalpa.
Some time after Aśoka, a four-age yuga theory was probably brought
into Brahmanical texts as an historical armature with which to reframe
such genealogical information, filling out dynastic accounts in both
Sanskrit epics, and developing other temporal narratives, including
mythic pasts and dharmic prophesies.74
2. Coming then at the end of the Mauryan dynasty, a Yavana-
Pañcāla-Mathurā coalition to destroy the Magadha capital in conjunc-
tion with the rise of Pusỵ amitra Śuṅga in circa 187 B.C.E., could, when
looked at in retrospect, be among the “connection points” by which,
not too long after those events, the Mahābhārata poets would have
conceived of the yuga as a new way to think about turning points in
historical time.
3. The epic would have been composed by people interested in nar-
rating, preserving, and forwarding their own history in Vedic idioms,
with the emphasis on their Kuru-Pañcāla and still deeper Vedic pasts.
The recent Yavana-Pañcāla-Mathurā coalition would have prepared
them to link the Vedic name of yugas with what Fernando Wulff calls
the Greek repertory, with its five ages, the fourth—preceding ours—
being an Age of Heroes.
4. If this was done by out-of-sorts Brahmins in territories ruled by
little “Mitra” or “Agniveśya” kings, we don’t have to worry about find-
ing them a big royal patron.75
74 The essentially linear yuga would have served the epic’s poets as a better armature
for history than the kalpa, which—Aśoka aside—Buddhists found more relevant to
Jātakas and remembering past lives, as in the Buddha’s recollection of a lost city in the
Mahāsudassana Sutta, of which Rupert Gethin can say, “There is nothing here that the
modern mind would be tempted to read as history” (2006, 63).
75 See Hiltebeitel 2001a, 19 proposing that the Mahābhārata “was written by out of
sorts Brahmans who may have had some minor king’s or merchant’s patronage, but,
probably for personal reasons, show a deep appreciation of . . . Brahmans reduced to
poverty.” Fitzgerald’s turn to Khāravela (2007; see above nn. 54 and 59]) builds from
an opposite assumption, which he stated earlier as follows: “The production and prom-
ulgation of this text would have required a major effort and significant expense, so we
must imagine the support and backing of some prince or princes, or direct imperial
support” (2001, 69). Cf. Witzel 2005, 48, 60, 62 n. 132, 64, 70.
why itihāsa? 109
5. Like the Mahābhārata, the Yuga Purāṇa would then also look
askance at Magadha. But in contrast with both the Mahābhārata’s
northern Midlands orientation and with the Bhavisỵ a(t) Purāṇa’s
Magadha-oriented eastern one, which probably, under the impact of the
Mahābhārata’s frame story, only belatedly preponed an epico-purāṇic
Naimisạ Forest setting for itself, the Yuga Purāṇa also looks hope-
fully to a third region, the South. In looking south, however, the Yuga
Purāṇa looks to two separate regions there: one, the northern Deccan;
the other, the Kāverī River valley, with its welcoming fish and boars.
6. This look to the south may coincide with one of the reasons why
the Yuga Purāṇa stops its north Indian history with the Mitra kings
and Śakas. Its redemptive history was proving to be wishful think-
ing. The Śakas did not really go home like the Greeks. Around 25
B.C.E., they established themselves as Ksạ trapa successors to the Mitra
kings, and remained to stay, forming trade networks and points of
power at major centers from Taxila in the northwest to Mathurā in
the midlands, and also in Ujjain toward the southwest, where they
contributed to the support and spread of mainly Buddhism.76 There
would be no reason for the composer of the Yuga Purāṇa to envision
safe havens in the south under the Mitras, but there would have been
under the Ksạ trapas.
7. Following the arguments of T. P. Mahadevan, this could describe
the conditions in which, by around 25 B.C.E., out-of-sorts Pūrvaśikhā
Brahmins from the Mathurā-Kuru-Pañcāla northern midlands would
have headed south and reached the Tamil-speaking regions with some-
thing close to the Mahābhārata archetype in their possession.
8. As it does today, that archetype would have included passages
reflecting the theory of four ages and association of the epic’s main story
with the turn from the Dvāpara to the Kali Yuga—albeit, as González-
Reimann has demonstrated, associated loosely, inconsistently, and
often metaphorically treated, and sometimes “confusing” yugas and
kalpas (2002, 72, 85 n. 150), since, by the post-Aśokan time of the
Mahābhārata’s composition, this originally Greater Magadhan c oncept
of cyclical time—the kalpa—had been taken up in Brahmanical texts
and considerably modified in the Mahābhārata to round in the yuga.
76 See Neelis 2007, 72–79; 2008, 8–10; 2009. Eventually, they would be accorded the
little king status of “degenerate (vrātya) Ksạ triyas (Thapar 1992, 153), which would lend
itself to the colonial period’s idea of the “Scythian origins” of the Rājpūts (Hiltebeitel
1999a, 439–40).
110 chapter four
9. As to their futures, the Mahābhārata poets opened a much larger
canvas than the Yuga Purāṇa. There is obviously a difference between
a redemptive telos prophesied by Śiva to his son the war god, as if
the two were holding their destructive power in reserve, and a text
whose redemption of dharma prophesies a restoration of the Kṛta
Yuga under Kalki Visṇ ̣uyaśas, “the fame of Visṇ ̣u” (Mbh 3.188.89a),
and whose redemptive history itself features a Kṛsṇ ̣a who takes birth
from yuga to yuga whenever dharma declines.
10. The Mahābhārata poets may have “invented” the five Pāṇḍavas,
but not without also inventing the hundred Kauravas, and the three
generations preceding them, beginning with Gaṅgā.77 It is not only that
they traced the Pāṇḍavas and Kauravas’ dynastic genealogy from deep
in the Vedic past through the eponymous kings Pūru, Bharata, and
Kuru, and the Kuru-Pañcālas. With the killing of King Jarāsaṃdha of
Magadha in Mahābhārata Book 2, the downriver rivalry with Magadha
in the east could, at least “for the first time,” long ago, have been
resolved in the Midlands’ favor.78 Indeed, that would be part of a plot
that could thicken into the itihāsa of the Bhāratas once Mother Gaṅgā
had intervened in that genealogy and returned to her own element(s),
leaving her blessing that she would love the famous Bhārata lineage
whose guṇas could not be counted even in a hundred years.
77 This is, again, a comment on Fitzgerald 2007, who, like many others before him
(see Hiltebeitel 2001a, 2 n. 10), including Witzel (2005, 28, 35), wants to limit “inven-
tion” in this span to just the Pāṇḍavas. One of the fascinations of Wulff ’s thesis (2008,
81–92. 102, 205–24) is that the Mahābhārata poets could have begun their reworking
of the Greek epic repertoire as one that unfolds from a water goddess who, like Gaṅgā,
gives birth to a mortal son over whom she will eventually grieve.
78 On the importance of this Magadha episode in the Mahābhārata, see Hiltebeitel
2006c and chapters 18 and 19 of this book.
CHAPTER FIVE
THE ARCHETYPAL DESIGN OF THE TWO SANSKRIT EPICS
Thanks to the Critical Editions of the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa,
it is, I believe, possible to demonstrate that they have been pulled
into a similar archetypal design.1 My view of the Critical Editions is
that, despite complaints from all sides, they are more dispositive of an
archetype than has been appreciated.2
A related matter is the status of the substories in each epic, which
the Critical Editions show to be integral. Among Mahābhārata substo-
ries, the Rāmopākhyāna has special implications for thinking through
the relation between the two archetypes, since this “Rāma Story” does
not have the structural design the two epics share.
Taking in these three texts, I propose that one of our best oppor-
tunities to assess the relations between them, and the hands of their
“authors,” may lie in their treatments of the chief heroines Draupadī
and Sītā. Having explored this suggestion in some detail, I will turn to
some intertextual implications beyond the epics.
A. Common Archetype
I begin by outlining the epics’ common archetypal design by “Books”
(the Mahābhārata’s eighteen parvans; the Rāmāyaṇa’s seven kāṇḍas)
with reference to the roles of the two heroines, limiting myself to
Books 1 and 3, since they will be the focus of this essay.
1 This chapter keeps much to the oral form in which its was presented in 2008 at
the 5th Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas.
2 In this chapter, I approach the baseline integrity of this archetypal Mahābhārata
mainly in terms of themes and content, commenting on recensional history only at
footnote 9 to reject the idea that what we have in the Critical Edition results from a
second (or as some would put it, only from a late) Gupta recension, and in my closing
discussion of Mahadevan 2008. On what I consider to be the pre-Gupta recensional
history of the Mahābhārata that can be identified, following Mahadevan 2008 and
2010, by looking at early modifications of the Southern Recension, see chapter 7 below,
Hiltebeitel 2010b, and Hiltebeitel forthcoming, chapter 1, which critiques some of the
Critical Edition’s best known critics.
112 chapter five
In each epic, Book 1 introduces Frame Stories involving the poem’s
Composition and Transmission. Draupadī is not prominent in the
Mahābhārata’s Frame, but Sītā is in the Rāmāyaṇa’s. The Rāmāyaṇa
uses the term carita (which I will translate “adventure”) four times to
describe itself in its short upodghāta or “preamble,” the second of which
calls “the whole Rāmāyaṇa poem the great adventure of Sītā” (1.4.6).
Once past the Frames, each epic introduces Dynastic Origins connected
with Vedic names, and turns to the Youthful Lives and Marriages of
the heroes. Each heroine marries, and one learns about their births.
Draupadī bears one son with each Pāṇḍava. Sītā as yet has no issue.
Book 3 is in each case about Forest Exile marked by monstrous
encounters as the heroes and heroines enter the Forests and leave
them. I will call these episodes the Forest Books’ bookends. Unen-
cumbered by children, the couples undergo Forest Trials and continue
to receive Instructive Guidance from Great Ṛsịs. Toward the begin-
ning of these Books, each heroine sounds words of concern: Draupadī,
speaking as a lady pandit, tries to prod Yudhisṭḥ ira to action (Malinar
2007a); Sītā cautions Rāma that he should not give way to excessive
violence in hunting deer. But each is at one point left unprotected, and
is abducted—Sītā after Rāma has gone out chasing a magical golden
deer she asked him to bring her as a pet, or if he kills it, which he
does, to bring its hide. Draupadī’s abduction is brief, and when her
husbands recover her, they all sit down to hear the Rāmopākhyāna.
In Sītā’s case, insofar as it provides the provocation that makes the
Great War inevitable, her abduction is the counterpart to the outrage
against Draupadī during the dice match in Book 2. Subsequently, both
heroines are absent during their husbands’ Forest-exiting transforma-
tive encounters with a benign monster, which signals their return to
society (in the Rāmāyaṇa, a society of monkeys).
Compared with their husbands, the two female leads get more stag-
gered attention at different points and with more contrasting accents.
The defining outrage against Draupadī occurs in Book 2, that of Sītā
in Book 3. Draupadī has children early, Sītā very late, bearing twins in
Vālmīki’s hermitage who, like Vālmīki himself, are never mentioned
in the Rāmopākhyāna. As fuller discussion would show, the Rāmāyaṇa
works the common blueprint along most carefully through Books 1–5.3
Such a design cannot be accidental. One epic must have had it first.
3 For fuller book-by-book comparisons and discussion of other authors’ work in
this direction, see Hiltebeitel 2005a, 460–61 (= chapter 6 below); 2006b.
the archetypal design of the two sanskrit epics 113
This study presents matters from the standpoint of the likely prior-
ity of the Mahābhārata, with the corollaries that Rāmāyaṇa Books 1
and 7 are integral to its earliest design and that the Rāmāyaṇa poet
is familiar with the Mahābhārata’s archetypal design and intent upon
refining and working from it. Further, if, as the Mahābhārata’s Critical
Edition shows, its subtales (upākhyānas) too are part of its archetypal
design (Hiltebeitel 2005a), and if the Rāmāyaṇa is composed with that
design in view, then the Rāmopākhyāna, which lacks that design, would
have to be considered a source (let me add: not the only one) that the
Rāmāyaṇa poet shapes to the familiar archetypal pattern.
These considerations are especially relevant to Vālmīki’s portrayal
of Sītā, for where she is concerned the innovations are most salient. I
mention only as background a “poet”-and-”path” theme I have devel-
oped elsewhere (Hiltebeitel 2009): that the two heroines’ “paths,”
which set the heroes’ course, involve meetings with important Ṛsịs,
who in Sītā’s case include especially Vedic ones, most of whom make
no appearance in the Rāmopākhyāna; and that whereas Draupadī’s
path begins with the author-poet vouching for her purity where it
would otherwise be doubted in marrying five men, Sītā’s path ends
when the poet-author removes public doubt of her purity before she
reenters the earth from which she was born.
Keeping all this in mind, I will concentrate mainly on the construc-
tion of the heroines’ narratives first around their births, and second
around their marriages. Third, I look at the monstrous encounters that
provide Bookends to their husbands’ lives in the Forests.
B. Birth and Family Background
Draupadī and Sītā begin their lives as extraordinary females who are
ayonijā, “not born from a womb,” with both, it seems, being born
from the earth. Draupadī takes birth from a vedi; Sītā from a “furrow”
(sītā), from which she gets her name (Rām 1.65.14). Despite widely
popular vernaculars and folklores it does not appear that Draupadī
was born from fire. Of the few things we know about the rite from
which she is born, we can mention the following: It implies a Brah-
manicide, since her father Drupada wants a son who will avenge him
against the Brahmin Droṇa (155.1–30); his queen is summoned “at
the end of the offering (havanasya-ante)” but is told the rite is effi-
cacious no matter what she does; Dhṛsṭạ dyumna, incarnation of the
Fire god Agni, then rises armed from a sacrificial fire and rides forth
114 chapter five
on a chariot. As the thrilled Pañcālas roar approval, a heavenly voice
announces that Dhṛsṭạ dyumna will kill Droṇa (33–40). The rite’s pur-
pose has thus been fulfilled at “the end of the offering.” But imme-
diately, beyond the stated end (purpose or completion) of the rite,
Drupada has a daughter:
And also a Pāñcālī girl arose from the middle of the vedi, . . . And just as
that full-hipped one was born, a disembodied voice said: “Best among all
women, Kṛsṇ ̣ā will lead the Ksạ tra to destruction. The fair-waisted one
will in time accomplish the work of the gods (surakāryam). Because of
her, a great fear will arise for the Ksạ triyas.” Having heard all this, the
Pañcālas roared like a pride of lions. . . . (155.41—46)
Subsequent descriptions seem to keep the brother’s fire-birth and the
sister’s altar-birth distinct. For instance, in the account of “partial
incarnations,”
So too was Dhṛsṭạ dyumna born from Fire, visibly having the same lus-
ter as Agni, when a rite had been spread—a hero for the destruction of
Droṇa, . . ; and so too was Kṛsṇ ̣ā born even on [or in] a vedi (vedyām),
effulgent, auspicious, shining wide with beauty, bearing a consummate
form. (1.57.91–92; cf. 1.153.10; 175.7–10)
But here her “dark” name Kṛsṇ ̣ā, which would seem to link her with
the earth, is accompanied by implications of fiery radiance. It appears
that Draupadī is born from the earth, but with a dark luminosity that
is like fire, or like dark fire, and that the simile is ready to take on a life
of its own. Meanwhile, the notion of dark fire is there too in an epithet
for Agni, who is kṛsṇ ̣avartman, “he whose path is dark,” particularly
in contexts that allude to the dark smoke that rises as a path to heaven
from animal sacrifices (Mbh 1.50.10; 217.11–16; 223.19; 13.126.30) or
from the sacrificial fires of war (5.32.27; 47.13; 10.7–9).
Just as it took a sacrificial rite to produce Draupadī, Rāmāyaṇa com-
mentators suggest that Sītā’s birth may have occurred as an outcome
of a less explicit sacrificial activity. Where Sītā’s father Janaka first
describes Sītā’s birth—“I found her as I was clearing the field” (Rām
1.65.14)—the word translated as “clearing” (śodhayatā) literally means
“cleaning or purifying,” and has been taken to refer to a plowing done
“for the laying of the fire of the sacrifice” (Goldman 1984, 385). The
Rāmāyaṇa, however, does not link Sītā’s birth with any Vedic sacrifi-
cial narrative. Indeed, unlike Draupadī’s birth, which is described by
the epic’s main narrator, Sītā’s birth is never directly told in Vālmīki’s
narration, but only in his characters’ recollections. First, as just cited,
Janaka recalls it to Rāma. Second, it is a question of a “story” (kathā)
the archetypal design of the two sanskrit epics 115
that Sītā is asked to recount in the Forest by Atri’s wife Anasūyā, who
had heard the “story” but wants to hear it from its lovely subject her-
self (110.22; 23; 111.1). Third, Hanumān recalls it when he is telling
Sītā her own story to reassure her that she can trust him (5.14.16). A
fourth and last reference, however, complicates our picture.
After Rāma has slain Rāvaṇa, the same Ṛsị Agastya can finally tell
Rāma who Sītā was in her previous life. She was Vedavatī, daughter of
the Brahmarsị Kuśadhvaja, son of Bṛhaspati. Vedavatī gets her name
from being born from her father’s constant Vedic recitation (Rām
7.17.8). Much sought by gods, demons and other celestials, her father
had chosen her for Visṇ ̣u, and because of this the demon king Śumbhu
killed her father while he slept—whereupon her mother joined the
father on the pyre. Making her father’s will to marry Visṇ ̣u her own,
Vedavatī did tapas to win Nārāyaṇa as her husband (7.17.1–17). She
told all this to Rāvaṇa, who found her in her Himalayan retreat. When
Rāvaṇa grabbed her hair, she avoided him by cutting it off and entering
fire, uttering her dying words as an act of truth by which she sought to
be reborn as “a female not born from a womb, a good woman (ayonijā
sādhvī), the daughter of a virtuous man” (27). It is by this means, says
Agastya to Rāma, that Vedavatī was able to bring about Rāvaṇa’s death
by appealing to “your inhuman manliness” (vīryam amānusạ m; 29)
when she was “reborn among mortals on a field that was turned by the
blade of a plow, like a crest of fire on a vedi (vedyām agniśikhopamā)”
(30). That is, without it quite being Vedavatī’s stated intent, she could
kill Rāvaṇa in her next birth by inspiring Rāma. Moreover, now that
Rāvaṇa is slain, Rāma can understand what Agastya means by his
vīryam amānusạ m: “amānusạ m” here means not just “extraordinary”;
it implies “divine.” Until Rāma slew Rāvaṇa, he had thought he was
human. But he learned thereafter that he was Visṇ ̣u, whose birth as a
man was necessary to counteract Rāvaṇa’s boon (7.10.13–18; see Pol-
lock 1984). Sītā’s birth thus results from a rite: one of self-immolation.
Vedavatī’s stated intent is purely noble. Even though eventually, as Sītā,
she does want Rāvaṇa’s death, her birth stories never make it explicit
that she is being born into the Rāmāyaṇa’s divine plan. Indeed, nei-
ther Vedavatī nor her father could not have known that Visṇ ̣u would
be born as a man to kill Rāvaṇa. Indeed, in neither epic is killing a
stated intent of the heroine herself. In Draupadī’s case, however, her
father does want someone killed, but not anyone Draupadī will ever
want killed. Draupadī will want many people killed, headed by Duryo-
dhana. But that is not explicitly part of her birth narrative. What is
116 chapter five
explicit is that she is born as the surplus outcropping of a divine plan
that is neither her father’s nor her own.
It is interesting that Agastya says Sītā appeared “like a crest of fire
on a vedi” (7.1 .30d). The Rāmāyaṇa poet would seem to have mag-
nified the vedi in question into a mahāvedi or uttaravedi (he is after
all talking about the earth). But he would also seem to be comparing
Vedavatī’s ayonijā birth from the earth as Sītā with Draupadī’s fire-like
birth from an earthen vedi. Vālmīki has already used this simile to
describe Kaikeyī, who, as she was about to listen to her troublemak-
ing servant Mantharā, “still lay on her luxurious couch like a crest of
fire on a vedi” (Rām 2.9.40). Vālmīki does not get this simile from the
Mahābhārata, which never uses it. Nor does he get his story of Sītā’s
birth from the Rāmopākhyāna, which knows nothing of Sītā being
ayonijā or of her birth in a furrow. The Rāmopākhyāna takes care of
Sītā’s birth and marriage in one and a half verses, with the meager
information that Tvasṭṛ̣ “made” her (cakāra) to be Rāma’s beloved wife
(3.258.9–10)! This would be our first indication that Vālmīki innovates
upon the Rāmopākhyāna with the Mahābhārata heroine in view.
Draupadī and Sītā’s births also relate to portrayals of their fami-
lies. Draupadī’s name Pāñcālī evokes the deep embeddedness of her
Pāñcāla family cycle in the Mahābhārata’s central narrative, where it
recalls a period in middle Vedic culture when Kuru and Pāñcāla kings
ruled the Gangā-Yamunā Doāb, and represented a ritual complemen-
tarity for the codifiers of the Vedic sacrifice. Her Pāñcāla people are
already in evidence when they roar approval, despite having heard that
her birth “will in time accomplish the work of the gods” by bringing
on their own destruction (Hiltebeitel 2001a, 187). In contrast, Sītā’s
family, the Videhas of Mithilā, are of no wider interest to Vālmīki
than for supplying brides to Rāma and his brothers (Rām 1.72.14–23).
Vaidehī and Maithilī are just affectionate names of Sītā.
Putting these matters together, one can say that Vālmīki draws on,
or perhaps constructs, a folkloric birth for Sītā, and leaves the Videhas
out of the complexities of his narration.
C. Marriage and Divine Plan
In mentioning that Draupadī is born to do “the work of the gods” and
that Sītā’s appeals to Rāma’s “inhuman manliness” bring about the
death of Rāvaṇa, I have cited a few of the many understated hints that
each heroine is born into a divine plan that their marriages will be key
the archetypal design of the two sanskrit epics 117
to achieving.4 In each epic, certain gods, foremost among them Visṇ ̣u,
agree to a plan to counteract a demonic surge on earth by taking on
human births. Each heroine is identified with Śrī, but with an impor-
tant difference. Draupadī is an incarnation of Śrī (e.g. Mbh 18.4.9–10),
whereas Sītā is only said to be “like” her (e.g. Rām 1.76.17; 2.39.12;
5.14.6; 6.5.12; 101.43).
From its first mention in the Mahābhārata’s table of contents, the
Parvasaṃgraha, Draupadī’s marriage is called a svayaṃvara or “Self-
choice” (Mbh 1.2.36). This is the celebrated heroic mode of marrying
in which a princess “chooses” a husband in a ceremony that also calls
on suitors to distinguish themselves. Her vivid marriage tale emerges
from the agonistic “work of the gods” that she is born to enable, and
its complexities take in major players.
The Pāṇḍavas hear about both Draupadī’s birth and the plans for
her svayaṃvara together while they are undergoing youthful trials.
Disguised as Brahmin Veda students since Duryodhana had attempted
to kill them, and hunting in various lands, including Pañcāla, they
meet Vyāsa, the “author,” who settles them in a town called Ekacakrā,
predicts Yudhisṭḥ ira’s eventual rule of the earth as Dharmarāja, and
advises them to stay put until he returns (Mbh 1.144.1–20). After they
rid the town of the cannibal Baka, a strict-vowed Brahmin, a great
raconteur, comes and regales them and their mother Kuntī with sto-
ries. One is about the announced svayaṃvara of Draupadī, who was
born not from a womb but from the middle of an altar (1.153.1–10).
The detailed account goes on to tell of Dhṛsṭạ dyumna and Draupadī’s
“twin” birth, as discussed in the previous section.
4 When Yudhisṭḥ ira sees himself and his brothers overwhelmed by Draupadī’s beauty
and decides all five will marry her, he sees that “Pāñcālī’s winsome beauty, ordained by
the Ordainer [Vidhātṛ] himself, surpassed all other women and beguiled all creatures”
(Mbh 1.182.13). At the end, just as he has had his last longing to question her, Indra
breaks in to tell him he cannot because she has already returned to her divine identity:
“O Yudhisṭḥ ira, she is Śrī, who took the form of Draupadī for your sake, becoming
human though not born of a womb, beloved of the world, she who smells good, born
into the line of Drupada and supported by you (plural), fashioned by the Holder of
the Trident (Śiva) for the sake of your (singular) pleasure (rati)” (18.4.9–10). When
Rāvaṇa abducts Sītā, Brahmā speaks of it as something that had to be done, and the
Daṇḍaka Forest’s supreme Ṛsịs are “thrilled” at the sight (Rām 3.50.10–11); or when
Hanumān looks down from a tree upon Sītā, emaciated in her captivity, he reflects
“with uncertainty: for she seemed barely discernible, like some Vedic text once learned
by heart but now nearly lost for lack or recitation” (5.13.36), which one might recall
when Rāma learns that Sītā, in her previous life as Vedavatī, got that name from being
born from her father’s constant Vedic recitation.
118 chapter five
Seeing her sons unsettled by this story “as if they were struck by
spears,” Kuntī says it is a good time to leave Ekacakrā, taking special
note, as her pretext, that although they have received alms (bhaiksạ̄ )
there, their welcome for doing so could be running out, and “the
Pāñcālas are heard to be generous with alms (subhiksạ̄ s)” (Mbh
1.156.1–7). Kuntī’s maternal interest in the food her sons can beg
seems natural enough, but also holds a fatality in store for Draupadī.
Having said farewell to their host, they head for Pañcāla, when Vyāsa
drops in on them again. He regales them with more colorful stories,
coming to this one: an unnamed maiden, “daughter of a great-spirited
seer, with a narrow waist, full hips, and a lovely brow—a girl favored
with all virtues,” once did mortifications to ask Śiva for a husband,
since, because of unnamed acts she had done, she was “ill-fortuned”
and had not found a husband even though she was beautiful and good.
When Śiva granted her request, she repeated it five times, upon which
he favored her to have five husbands at once, but yielded, when she
protested she wanted only one, and postponed her polyandry to her
next life. She is now the daughter of Drupada whom they have been
hearing so much about, “the blameless Kṛsṇ ̣ā Pārsạ tī destined to be
your wife!” Having urged them on, he departs.
One thus meets stories about both Draupadī and Sītā’s previous lives.
Both were “good women,” but each had a problem finding a husband.
Draupadī’s unnamed precursor had the slight flaw of overanxiouos-
ness or insistence, which seems to have followed from some other pre-
vious karma of her own. Vedavatī had no evident flaws, but suffered
from being orphaned, and from being manhandled by Rāvaṇa.
Kings come from all over to Draupadī’s svayaṃvara. While the
Pāṇḍavas sit with the Brahmins and the crowd swells, Draupadī
descends into the arena on the sixteenth day (Mbh 1.176.16–30).
Dhṛsṭạ dyumna announces the challenge and names the Ksạ triyas
who have come, ostensibly as contestants (177). As the rivals begin
to try their hand and celestials of all kinds, including Daityas, watch
from above, Kṛsṇ ̣a, whom Dhṛsṭạ dyumna had mentioned among
the potential contenders (177.16), notices the five Pāṇḍava brothers
and exchanges a gleeful glance with his brother Baladeva (178.6–13).
Finally, after the kings have exhibited their futility, Arjuna rises and in
the twinkling of an eye strings the bow and hits the target, to celestial
applause and a rain of flowers (179.16–17). Drupada is pleased, and
although he is yet to know who has won his daughter, he stands ready
to aid him with his army. Draupadī, smiling, garlands Arjuna, com-
pleting the rite itself, and begins following him as his wife (20–23).
the archetypal design of the two sanskrit epics 119
Now come interventions by Kṛsṇ ̣a, Kuntī, and Vyāsa that compli-
cate this happy outcome by bringing about what Vyāsa has already
seeded in the Pāṇḍavas’ minds. I will mention details only of the first
of these. Kṛsṇ ̣a is now making his first appearance in the Mahābhārata
plot: a modest one that it is tempting to call a cameo, since his repu-
tation obviously precedes him. He has been mentioned as if he were
a potential suitor, but this seems to be a narrative ruse. In elaborated
versions, different heroes compete, but never Kṛsṇ ̣a. As is evident, he
is the first to recognize the Pāṇḍavas. He is familiar with the story of
their divine births, and (consonant with Vyāsa’s prediction) he calls
Yudhisṭḥ ira Dharmarāja before he has ever been king of anything (Mbh
1.180.17–22). Insofar as he might be party to the divine plan (which
gradually becomes indubitable), he is there to see that Draupadī does
not fall into the wrong hands. But it is more to sanction her falling into
the right ones. When there is a lull in the fighting, he makes his first
public statement: “She is won according to dharma (dharmeṇa labdhā)”
(181.32). The Ksạ triyas stop fighting and go home. His words are author-
ative and definitive, and his first word in the epic is “dharma.”
Now Sītā’s marriage to Rāma has a reputation for being a svayaṃvara
too. But just as with her birth, we see evidence of streamlining and
stitching. Moreover, our intertextual hypothesis can now be sharp-
ened. If one of the versions of the Rāma story that the Rāmāyaṇa
poet knows is the Rāmopākhyāna, which takes care of Sītā’s birth and
marriage cursorily without mentioning either her earthen birth or her
svayaṃvara, then the Rāmāyaṇa would be seeking to enhance Sītā’s
story by making it more like Draupadī’s in these early episodes, even
while making Sītā herself unlike Draupadī in ways that have to do
with the purity and morality of their marriages. One can already see
a suggestive point in the way the two Rāma-Sītā narratives treat the
heroine’s part in the divine plan. While the Rāmopākhyāna tells us
little about Sītā’s birth and marriage, it has no hesitation to make Sītā,
like Draupadī, part of the plan in the one thing it does say about them:
that Sītā was “made” for her marriage by Tvasṭṛ̣. On the contrary, in
the Rāmāyaṇa, marrying Rāma certainly draws Sītā into the divine
plan. But unlike Draupadī, she is not part of the gods’ formulation of
that plan, which, in the Rāmāyaṇa, accounts only for incarnations of
male divinities, and routes Sītā into the narrative from her previous
birth as Vedavatī. Otherwise, the Rāmopākhyāna and the Rāmāyaṇa
agree that Visṇ ̣u descends as Rāma and that the gods led by Indra take
birth among monkeys and bears (Mbh 3.260.4–15). All this makes the
Rāmopākhyāna’s non-mention of Sītā’s svayaṃvara interesting.
120 chapter five
Surprisingly, just as Sītā’s birth from the earth is never directly told
in Vālmīki’s narration, but only as a “story” that certain characters
recall, the same applies to Sītā’s marriage being a svayaṃvara. But
whereas the birth story is recalled on four occasions, a “svayaṃvara
story” is recalled only once, during Sītā’s exchange with Anasūyā.5
When Sītā tells the story of her birth, Anasūyā’s question is really
about her having heard that Sītā had a svayaṃvara, whereupon the
two of them become the only persons to use this term for Sītā’s mar-
riage in the Rāmāyaṇa:
Anasūyā put a question to her about a certain story she was fond of. “It
was at a svayaṃvara, they say, that glorious Rāghava obtained you, Sītā.
This is at least the story that has reached my ears. I should like to hear
that story in full, Maithilī, exactly as it happened, in its entirety. Would
you tell it to me, please?” (Rām 2.110.23–24)
Once again, it would seem that Vālmīki is drawing on a folklore for
Sītā, or perhaps constructing it with particular echoes—and in any
case reconstructing Sītā’s story to parallel and rival Draupadī’s.
Continuing from the so-called “story” of her birth, Sītā tells that it
was her not being born from a womb that led her father, after much
worry, to think of holding a svayaṃvara for her. The unstated point
seems to be that, even if such an abnormal birth makes it hard to find a
good match, lords of the land would want to vie for such a bride.6 Sītā
says Janaka had received an immense heavy bow and two quivers with
inexhaustible arrows from Varuṇa (in Janaka’s account, the bow came
to one of his ancestors from Śiva [1.65.8–13]), and invited the kings to
win his daughter by raising and stringing it. But the kings only looked
and left, unable to lift it (in Janaka’s version, they mounted a long siege
[1.65.21–25]). After a long time, one day the Ṛsị Viśvāmitra came with
5 Cf. Brockington 2006, 35–36, 40, making the same observation but with different
conclusions.
6 In his earlier account, Janaka links Sītā’s ayonijā birth with his setting of a
vīryaśulkā as the “price” of winning her [Rām 1.65.151]). In the Rāmāyaṇa, Janaka
never mentions a svayaṃvara either. He says his daughter may be won by a vīryaśulkā,
a “bride-price of heroism” (Rām 1.65.15, 17). This compound seems to denote a certain
kind of svayaṃvara (Jamison 1996, 225; cf. Brockington 2006, 35), and a Mahābhārata
line uses its two components separately to describe the “price” (śulkā) Drupada set by
which a hero (vīra) won Draupadī (Mbh 1.185.23). Yet the basic term śulkā, “price,”
is used in Dharmaśāstra marriage law to describe the purchase of a bride through the
Āsura type of marriage, which is said to be worthy of Vaiśyas, not of Ksạ triyas, since
the usual bride-price is money, dhanaśulkā.
the archetypal design of the two sanskrit epics 121
Rāma and Laksṃ aṇa and told Janaka the two princes were eager to see
the bow; and again Janaka brought it out. Like Arjuna, Rāma strung
and drew it “in the twinkling of an eye,” but more than this (or less,
since he didn’t have to shoot at anything), he broke it (2.110.36–47)!
Says Sītā,
Thereupon my father, true to his agreement, raised up a splendid water
vessel, ready to bestow me on Rāma. But ready though my father was to
bestow me, Raghava would not accept me right away, for he did not know
the will of his father, the lordly king of Ayodhyā. So my father invited my
father-in-law, aged king Daśaratha, and afterwards bestowed me. . . . And
that is how I was bestowed on Rāma, there at the svayaṃvara, and as is
right (dharmena) I love my husband, the best of men. (2.110.48–52)
As Pollock notes, Sītā’s story is known for a certain “simplicity” (1986,
525), but one can also feel the strains in it. If she had a svayaṃvara,
it was an interrupted, disappointing, and even failed one between the
suitors’ departure and Rāma’s arrival long after, with no rivals remain-
ing. Nor is there anything left of the bride’s “Self-choice.” Unlike
Draupadī, who gets to garland Arjuna with a smile, it is not Sītā but
her father who acts for her by lifting a vessel. Unlike Draupadī, who
immediately sets off with Arjuna, Sītā has to wait until approval from
Rāma’s father. Yet oddly, Sītā does get to say, however belatedly, that
it all come out right (dharmeṇa). In the Mahābhārata, Kṛsṇ ̣a makes
that pronouncement.
D. Forest-Book Bookends
I now turn to the monstrous encounters that bookend Forest life in each
epic’s Book 3. The two entry-monsters, Kirmīra in the Mahābhārata
(3.11–12) and Virādha in the Rāmāyaṇa (3.3), merely guard access to
the forests, and have little to do with the larger plot or divine plan.
In contrast, the exit encounters are momentous. Rāma must sub-
due Kabandha to learn about Sugrīva, and thus how to find Sītā. In
Draupadī’s case, while the Pāṇḍavas leave her behind in Mārkaṇḍeya’s
hermitage, they meet Dharma disguised as a murderous Yaksạ , whose
second of three boons is that the Pāṇḍavas (and Draupadī) will be able
to pass their thirteenth year incognito in a place of their choosing.
Yet if the exit-encounters have more to do with the divine plot,
the entry-encounters are the most revealing in terms of a common
archetype. The Rāmāyaṇa’s Virādha episode goes unmentioned in the
122 chapter five
Rāmopākhyāna.7 This means that although the bookend symmetry one
finds in the Rāmāyaṇa could be modeled on the Mahābhārata, it can-
not be modeled on the Rāmopākhyāna (nor could the reverse apply).
Moreover, the Rāmāyaṇa’s forest-entry and forest-exit scenes have far
greater symmetry between themselves than those in the Mahābhārata.
Whereas the Mahābhārata’s Kirmīra and Yaksạ encounters share only
their bookend positions, the two Rāmāyaṇa encounters are virtual
duplicates. Soon after Rāma, Sītā, and Laksṃ aṇa enter the Daṇḍaka
Forest, Virādha (“One Who Thwarts”) looms before them, seizes Sītā,
and challenges the brothers for entering this forest with her. Pained
by seeing Sītā touched, Rāma fills Virādha with arrows and he and
Laksṃ aṇa then each break off an arm to release her. Asking Rāma
and Laksṃ aṇa who they are (3.3. 1), Virādha realizes he has been
slain by Rāma: a long-awaited blessing that relieves him from a curse.
He can now go to heaven, but before that he tells Rāma to go next
to the Ṛsị Śarabhaṅga who “will see to your welfare” (3.22–24). Like
Kabandha, and unlike Kirmīra, he too is benign—up to a point.8 The
obvious difference, though, is that Kabandha cannot grab Sītā, who is
now abducted, and seizes both brothers instead. I believe that Vālmīki
would have had three reasons to invent the Virādha encounter. 1. It
supplies a bookend on the model of the two Monstrous Encounters
in the Mahābhārata. 2. It is a rehearsal for the Kabandha encoun-
ter, which the Rāmopākhyāna does include, quite indispensibly. And
3., most important since it carries forward into Vālmīki’s rehandling,
so different from the Rāmopākhyāna, of Sītā’s two ordeals, in prepar-
ing us for Sītā’s abduction by Rāvaṇa in this same Book 3, it provides
a glimpse of how Rāma reacts to Sītā being touched—something that
bothers Rāma much less in the Rāmopākhyāna, and Yudhisṭḥ ira not
at all (for discussion, see Hiltebeitel 2009).
7 It could easily have been slotted at Mahābhārata 3.26 1.39–40, where, following
Bharata’s return to Ayodhyā, Rāma enters the Daṇḍaka Forest with Sīta and Laksṃ aṇa
by the hermitage of Śarabhaṅga because he fears his townsfolk and countrymen may
return to bother them.
8 For from there, Rāma is relayed by Ṛsịs from one forest site to another until Sītā
is abducted, whereupon Rāma and Laksṃ aṇa start looking for her and happen upon
Kabandha. A suggestive piece of evidence that Vālmīki has imported features of the
Kabandha story back into his Virādha story is that Virādha is a former Gandharva
named Tumburu (Rām 3.3.8), just as Kabandha is a former Gandharva named Viśvāvasu
in the Rāmopākhyāna (Mbh 3.63,38). In the Rāmāyaṇa Vālmīki upgrades Kabandha
into a former unnamed Dānava (Rām 3.66.8).
the archetypal design of the two sanskrit epics 123
E. Implications
Now to some implications. Are the two epics’ archetypal similari-
ties the work of late overlay, or do they get us back to similarities in
underlying conception? The former has been the usual argument, but
those who have advocated it have not examined the close details relat-
ing the two epics and the Rāmopākhyāna, or answered what would
have drawn the two larger works into similar formations other than
the alleged lateness of bhakti. If, then, the two epics have a similar
underlying conception modeled on the Mahābhārata, what would
have motivated a second deployment toward similar but different
ends? My short answer is threefold. It takes in bhakti as a thoroughly
imbricated yet subtle feature of both works, and the two epics’ dif-
ferent treatments of dharma and their understandings of poetry. In
brief, the Rāmāyaṇa streamlines bhakti, disambiguates dharma, and
proclaims itself the ādikāvya. Since I have made these arguments else-
where (Hiltebeitel 2009; 2010a), I must go on to further points. My
present intent is to take up intertextual implications beyond the epics
themselves. Let me raise one set of considerations in each of these
three areas, beginning in each case from a touchstone among the pas-
sages I have discussed. In each case I will raise the possibility that our
considerations imply termini ante or post quem for the epics’ compo-
sition. Let me just mention that I have offered many reasons to reject
a “second Gupta redaction” of the Mahābhārata,9 which has served
mainly to fuel fancies of a pre-bhakti ‘Bhārata’ ” and has never had a
convincing Gupta rationale.
I have mentioned the term dharma only a few times in this essay,
but often enough to indicate that the two epics, as they are, are incon-
ceivable without it. Many other citations of dharma could have been
cited in the sequences discussed, but it will suffice to recall that Kṛsṇ ̣a’s
first word in the epic is “dharma,” which I regard as no more an acci-
dent than that it is the first word of the Bhagavad Gītā. Now there is
always the question of oral precursors to the Sanskrit epics. Suffice it
to say about prior “bardic” and “oral epic” “proto”-forms that vari-
ous scholars have imagined as forerunners of these two epics: These
bardic oral versions could not have been about dharma to anything
9 See Hiltebeitel 2001a, 25–30; 2004c, 205–6, 213, 220; 2005a, 458–61, 486–93; 2005c,
87; 2005d, 242–46; 2006a, 227–33, 249–53.
124 chapter five
near the extent that the epics in their archetypal written forms are
about it, since both texts speak of dharma in ways that show them
participating in dharmaśāstric discourses that, if Patrick Olivelle is
right, as I believe he is, cannot be traced back earlier than Aśoka or
the early Mauryas.10 Indeed, it follows from the absence of Kuśa and
Lava in the Rāmopākhyāna that they are an invention of Vālmīki to
fit bards into the Rāmāyaṇa frame to match Ugraśravas’s part in the
Mahābhārata frame—with the proviso that whereas the Mahābhārata
pulls its “bards” into the mixed-caste discourse of varṇasaṃkara that
takes off only after the Āpastamba Dharmasūtra (Olivelle 1999, xxxi),
Vālmīki draws the Kuśīlavas11 into his story only indirectly or implic-
itly, since they would not descend biologically from two pure Ksạ triya
princes. Both epics are Brahmanical as we have them and “bardic”
only in stories of their transmission.
As to bhakti, my touchstone is the passage where Agastya tells Rāma
that Vedavatī was able to bring about Rāvaṇa’s death through Rāma’s
“inhuman manliness.” Granted there are other ways to read this phrase,
my point is that a bhakti reading is a legitimate one. The same goes
for something Agastya says earlier when he first greets Rāma into his
āśrama. Last of the great Vedic Ṛsịs to mark out Rāma and Sītā’s path,
Agastya welcomes Rāma with joined hands, saying:
King of the whole world, dharmacarī, a great chariot warrior, a man
offered reverence and esteem, you have come as my beloved guest
(pūjanīyaś ca mānyaś ca bhavān prāptaḥ priyātithiḥ). (Rām 3.11.27)
Although Rāma would not yet be able to fully understand why Agastya
is using such reverent yet knowing terms for him, Agastya is “doing
the gods’ work” in receiving the trio, and will likewise be doing it when
he points their way to Pañcavatị̄, where Sītā will be abducted. Like all
the great Vedic Ṛsịs and Nārada in the Rāmāyaṇa, and like Nārada,
10 See Olivelle 1999, xxviii–xxxiv, placing Āpastamba first, in the early 3rd century
B.C.E. and thus roughly contemporary with or even prior to Aśoka’s edicts; Gautama
second, in the mid-3rd century B.C.E.; Baudhāyana third in the mid-2nd century B.C.E.;
and Vasisṭḥ a last, bringing us down to the 1st or 2nd century C.E.; 2005a, 20–21 and
n. 32, holding to the same sequence and finding these dates “still . . . reasonable,” but
“inclined now to place them somewhat later.” Recently, he writes, “The very creation
of a Brahmanical genre of literature dedicated to dharma was possibly due to the
elevation of this word to the level of imperial ideology by Aśoka” (2005a, 39; cf. 2005b;
cf. 2004a, 506).
11 Kuśīlavas are mentioned at BDhS 1.5.10.24; VDhS 3.3; 14.12; MDhS 8.65; 8.102;
9.225; and twenty-three times in the Arthaśāstra.
the archetypal design of the two sanskrit epics 125
Mārkaṇḍeya and other Paramarsịs in the Mahābhārata, Agastya is hip
to the divine plan.12 Now, along with the fact that the Sanskrit epics
make their divine plans intelligible within what Madeleine Biardeau
calls the “universe of bhakti,” three points can be made about its nar-
ration. One is that the poets do not always hit us over the head with
bhakti, like, say, Tulsī Dās in his Hindi version of the Rāma story. It
can be alluded to subtly as in the instances just mentioned. A second
is that the great Ṛsịs take consistent delight in witnessing how the
divine plan is working itself out and, occasionally, in helping it along.
Third, the divine plan is variously narrated and involves the interplay
of more than one god. Those who emphasize the fragmentary or epi-
sodic treatment of the divine plan to support notions of textual strata
often tell us that its disclosures occur only intermittently, and without
“a coherent theistic ‘red thread’ ”;13 others tell us that certain passages
describing the divine plan lack rhetorical plausibility because they are
silly,14 or, which amounts to the same thing, because they do not per-
suade us, even though they persuade, say, Drupada or Dhṛtarāsṭṛa.15
But should we expect “Hindu epics” to be Greek or monotheistic, or
their poets to be convincing when they work out their reality effects?
In the same vein we find a recent argument about yugas: that that
Mahābhārata would not originally take place between yugas because
one finds that “late” notion referred to only nine times (González-
Reimann 2002, 86 and passim)! These are all arguments that have made
the glass half empty. Many important things are said in the epics just
once. The important thing is that both epics have such divine plans.
This may point us to another post quem intertextual terminus for both
12 See Wulff Alonso 2007, 114–37, noting the contrast between the Iliad and the
Mahābhārata on the point that only in the Indian epic do Ṛsịs and gods cooperate
in the divine plan.
13 Malinar 2007b, 3: “There are speculations concerning divine scheming in some
passages” of the Mahābhārata, the latter are not made the overarching framework, as is
the case, for instance, in Homer’s Iliad. The redactors of the epic, in its ‘final redaction,’
did not weave a coherent theistic ‘red thread’ into the manuscripts they produced, nor
is there just one major god presiding over or pervading all the epic events.”
14 “Van Buitenen 1973, xix–xx; cf. Winternitz 1993–34, 174; Bigger 1998, 200, 259—
all cited and discussed for their allegations of “fluff ” in Hiltebeitel 2001, 164 n. 118.
15 Emily Hudson wants to caution those who see a “cosmic explanation” of the
Mahābhārata war as “all-encompassing” (2006, 128 n. 45) and finds Vyāsa’s expla-
nation to Dhṛtarāsṭṛa that he has lost his sons by a “divine design” to unburden the
earth (11.8) less persuasive than others by Saṃjaya and Vidura that she finds more
“satisfying” (2006, 148–59).
126 chapter five
epics.16 No text in India has such a notion before the Iliad, which Alex-
ander the Great introduced under his pillow (Hiltebeitel 2001a, 6)—a
topic on which Fernando Wulff now has much more tell us (see Wulff
Alonso 2008, 81–146). As Michael Witzel now half allows, “An Indian
Homer, however, who would have put all of this together with an inge-
nious framework still is not in sight,—unless one wants to accept, with
tradition, Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana Vyāsa as such” (2005, 55–56).
Finally, let me recall that Vedavatī is born from her father’s Vedic
recitation (Rām 7.17.8), which may remind us that when Hanumān
looks down from a tree upon Sītā, emaciated in her captivity, he
reflects “with uncertainty: for she seemed barely discernible, like some
Vedic text once learned by heart but now nearly lost for lack of reci-
tation” (5.13.36). I cite this to recall that both epics are beholden to
the Veda and Vedic poetics in complex and also distinctive ways that
scholars have only begun to explore—one of them, with some fresh
twists, being T. P. Mahadevan in his landmark article, “On the South-
ern Recension of the Mahābhārata, Brahman Migrations, and Brāhmī
Paleography” (2008). This study should stimulate us, among other
things, for its identification of a “tri-Vedic axis” of Pūrvaśikhā Śrauta
Brahmins,17 with cooperating “branches” from all three liturgical
Vedas (16–17), positioned to have written the Mahābhārata archetype
in the Kuru-Pañcāla area sometime between 300–100 B.C.E. (11–15,
18–19; 101–2 nn. 9 and 10). According to Mahadevan, this archetype
would lie behind the Śāradā and Kaśmīrī manuscripts that anchor the
Pune Critical Edition. Around the turn of the millennium if not before
(4), this trifecta of Vedic Śrautins, coming from the Mathurā area (6),
would have transported an early written text like the Śāradā one, and
close to the archetype, south (103 n. 17). There, this “p arvan-based”
manuscript (85–88) would have served as a “template” for the first
Southern Recension text, being submitted to a “makeover” in the
Southern Brāhmī script while its redacting community interacted
with and contributed to Tamil Sangam culture18 (circa 100 B.C.E.–
200 C.E.) (7–9, 15, 84–92). This earliest southern “makeover” would
16 And first, of course, the Mahābhārata where it is probably not only earlier but
more variously articulated.
17 Most active of the possible Pūrvaśikhā Veda śākhā axes was the combination of
Kausị̄tạ ki Rg̣ Veda, Baudhāyana Yajurveda, and Jaiminīya Sāmaveda (Mahadevan 2008,
18–19). See 102 n. 12 on the inclusion of Jaimini among Vyāsa’s disciple-transmitters.
Cf. further 105 n. 31 on Jaiminīyas and southern migration of the Mahābhārata.
18 See Mahadevan’s discussion of the kutụ mi (2008, 25–27).
the archetypal design of the two sanskrit epics 127
then have had two destinations: one, after being kept up in the Tamil
country by Pūrvaśikhā groups who come to be called Cōli̱ya Brah-
mins, it would serve as the host version of the expanded Southern
Recension when it comes to be mixed with changes since made in the
Northern Recension that were brought south by the second wave of
Brahmins, now mostly Aparaśikhās, who came south first under the
Pallavas; second, it would have been sequestered into Kerala by other
Pūrvaśikhās keeping up their śrauta praxis while fleeing the Kalạ bhra
interregnum (ca 4th–7th century C.E.) (100 n. 3)—those who would
come to be known as the Nambudiris, who would eventually repro-
duce their Mahābhārata manuscripts in Malayālam and keep them in
Nambudiri libraries, where they would await their twentieth-century
summons to Pune (8–16). As Mahadevan hints, the early editors of
the Baroda Critical Edition of the Rāmāyaṇa ignored the implications
of the similar relative brevity of Malayālam Rāmāyaṇa manuscripts,
making it impossible for the last editors involved in the project to do
any more than acknowledge the seriousness of the oversight (99–100,
n. 2). Elsewhere, I have cited Mahadevan’s findings to make the point
that such an early reworking of the Mahābhārata not only included the
Nārāyaṇīya, but found it important enough—in its Malayālam branch
only—to try to simplify it by reducing its dialogue level from the outer
Ugraśravas-Śaunaka frame to the more regular inner frame involving
Vaiśampāyana and Janamejaya (Hiltebeitel 2006a, 254–55). For the
Nārāyaṇīya to be an important part of the Mahābhārata archetype
has, of course, implications for thinking about dharma and bhakti. But
here I cite it in recollection of one of my favorite conversations with
Madeleine Biardeau. When she was finishing her two-volume study
of the Mahābhārata (2002), she told me she had decided to conclude
it with some thoughts on what she had learned. When I asked her,
“What have you learned, Madeleine?” she paused for a long smile and
replied, “You have to read the whole thing.” Well, I took her to be
referring to the Mahābhārata, though I’ve since realized she could
have been referring to her own book. Either way, the lesson stands.
Let me close on some wider intertextual implications of reading “the
whole thing.”
In her chapter on “The Ugra[-Paripṛcchā Sūtrā] as a Historical
Source: Methodological Considerations” ([2003] 2005, 48–72), Jan
Nattier writes: “The fact that many—perhaps most—Buddhist sūtras
contain passages that were added after the initial composition of the text
has long been recognized by specialists in the field. Yet what constitutes
128 chapter five
a valid procedure for identifying such interpolations has been far from
clear. In many cases scholars have simply followed their own intu-
ition, employing a method that could be characterized (only somewhat
facetiously) as ‘If I like it, it’s early; if I specialize in it it’s very early;
if I don’t like it at all, but it’s in my text, it’s an interpolation.’ ” She
continues: “Referring to attempts by various scholars to stratify the
texts in the Pāli canon, Rupert Gethin aptly observes: ‘Many of the
criteria employed by Winternitz, Law, and Pande only work if one
is already prejudiced as to the nature of early Buddhism. If one feels
at the outset that the Buddha, being, as it were, a reasonable sort of
chap, taught a simple ethical doctrine uncluttered by myth, legend,
and magic, then it is a fairly straightforward matter to stratify the
Nikāyas accordingly . . .” (Nattier [2003] 2005, 49, citing Gethin 1992,
11). Nattier goes on to make Edward Conze an exemplar for excising
passages from the Asṭ ạ sāhasrikā-Prajñāpāramitā in which the Bud-
dha Aksọ bhya appears, and comments, “. . . it is clear that his principal
basis for declaring those passages to be interpolations is the nature of
their content, and not their presence or absence in another text. In
Conze’s mind, it would seem, such ‘devotional’ passages simply could
not have been composed by the same person who was responsible for
the more philosophical sections of the text, those that deal (in Conze’s
terminology) with the ‘Absolute,’ and with emptiness” (Nattier [2003]
2005, 50–51, discussing Conze 1967).19 Meanwhile, Gethin has shown
the value of reading certain Nikāya texts whole around the theme of
“cosmology” or “mythology as meditation” (1997, 2006). Gethin cred-
its Steven Collins on “understanding these suttas as redacted wholes”
(2006, 81, 86).20 For Collins, the Aggañña Sutta “as we have it is a
coherent and continuous whole, with lexical, semantic, and thematic
elements common to both the parable of origins and its frame” (1993,
324). Meanwhile, let me conclude with an apparently new idea that I
19 As Nattier has shown, Aksọ bhya’s paradise, Abhiratī, is an important precursor
to Amitābhā’s Pure Land, the primary destination of early Indian Buddhist bhakti
(2000, 2003).
20 In approaching the Aggañña Sutta, Collins eschews the chop-and-block methodol-
ogy that licenses scholars to dismantle texts by divining their “original” components
and detecting later interpolations and additions, among which wrap-around frame
stories are inevitably the easiest things to spot and dismiss. We should appreciate the
gains made by this literary approach, with its hermeneutic of reading the AS whole,
its frame included, even presuming an initially oral composition; see Collins 1993,
312: “the mania—which is what I think it is—for an ‘Ur-text’ is entirely misplaced.”
See further 324; cf. 331, 378.
the archetypal design of the two sanskrit epics 129
was pleased to find from another of our colleagues working on the PāIi
canon. The industrious translator-scholar Bhikkhu Bodhi, in his Intro-
duction to the Saṃyutta Nikāya, poses a new way to “think whole”
about the tradition that the Buddha’s disciples recalled and arranged
the Buddha’s Suttas and the Vinaya at the First Buddhist Council
shortly after his death: “It is much more likely,” writes Bodhi, “that
what took place at the First Council was the drafting of a comprehen-
sive scheme for classifying the suttas (preserved only in the memory
banks of the monks) and the appointment of an editorial committee
(perhaps several) to review the material available and cast it into a
format conducive to easy memorization and oral transmission” (Bodhi
2000, 30: my italics). To envision such a “comprehensive scheme” for
the four Nikāyas might provide a good model for “thinking whole”
about the four anthologies of the Mahābhārata’s Śānti- and Anuśāsana
Parvans (cf. Fitzgerald 2004a, 2006; Hiltebeitel 2005d).

CHAPTER SIX
NOT WITHOUT SUBTALES:
TELLING LAWS AND TRUTHS IN THE SANSKRIT EPICS
This chapter on India’s two Sanskrit epics, the Mahābhārata and
Rāmāyaṇa, will address four topics:1 how they have been defined by
scholars and by themselves; how each conceptualizes the relationship
between its whole and its parts, and particularly its subtales;2 how sub-
tales figure in their main stories; and how each creates grand narra-
tive out of this configuration. This article favors the priority of the
Mahābhārata and will be presented from that standpoint.3
Epic Cues and Scholarly Views
The Mahābhārata describes itself as “sprung from the oceanic mind
(manasāgarasambhūtam)” (1.53.34a) of its author Vyāsa and to be
his “entire thought” (1.1.23; 1,55,2) in a text of a hundred thousand
couplets (ślokas) (1.56.13). Although no known edition reaches that
number, when the Mahābhārata describes texts of that size it denotes
their originary vastness. As one lost prototype,4 it mentions that aeons
ago seven sages known as the Citraśikhaṇḍins, “having become of a
single thought, promulgated5 a supreme treatise (tair ekamatibhir
bhūtvāyatproktaṃ śāstram uttamam) consisting of a hundred thou-
sand verses, from which proceeds dharma for the entire loom6 of the
1 Many of the ideas in this chapter, along with fuller synopses of both epics, appear
as separate entries on each epic in Hiltebeitel 2006b. I thank the editors for permission
to develop that material further for this article.
2 I will favor the translation “subtale” for upākhyāna, with perhaps a hint of subtext.
3 I agree with Madeleine Biardeau’s chronological positioning of the Mahābhārata
as older than the Rāmāyaṇa (2002, 1, 700–1 and ff., 726; 1999, xxxiii–xxxv), though I
see a shorter time between them. See Hiltebeitel 2001a, 15–31, 165; 2004c.
4 It was destined to be lost after the golden age reign of King Vasu Uparicara
(12.322.48).
5 For proktam, see Minkowski 1989, 402, 411–12 concerning pra + vac/proktaḥ
as having Vedic overtones, with “the sense of an original utterance”; cf. Hiltebeitel
2001a, 98–99.
6 “Loom” for tantra, or more prosaically, perhaps, “course.”
132 chapter six
worlds (kṛtaṃ śatasahasraṃ hi ślokānām idam uttamam/lokatantra-
sya kṛtsnasya yasmād dharmaḥ pravartate)” (12.322.26d and 36). Even
grander, it recalls a “treatise” (śāstra) by Brahmā of originally one
hundred thousand adhyāyas or chapters (12.59.29)—there are about
2000 adhyāyas in the Mahābhārata7—that underwent four abridg-
ments: by Śiva to 10,000 chapters, Indra to five thousand, Bṛhaspati
to three thousand, and Kāvya Uśanas to one thousand (59.86–91).
Indeed, amid a wider discussion of abridgments in classical Indian
literature, Sylvain Lévi points out that in claiming 100,000–verses,8 the
Mahābhārata would have come into “competition with Buddhism,”
since the designation “inevitably calls to our mind . . . the Śatasahasrikā
Prajñāpāramitā. For passing into current usage the [latter] work
must have been submitted to successive reductions to 25,000, 8000
(asṭ ạ sahasrikā, which is the classical form of the treatise), 700 and
500” ([1917] 1918–20, 18–49; slightly modified).9
To describe the Mahābhārata’s magnitude, many also cite a verse
that occurs twice—once near its beginning and once near its end—that
claims, “Whatever is here may be found elsewhere; what is not here
does not exist anywhere” (1.56.33; 18.5.38). One strain of scholarship
takes this verse to suggest that by the time the Mahābhārata reached
its “extant” mass, it would have grown from oral origins into a mas-
sive “encyclopedia”—a text of such monumental self-sufficiency that
it could have considered itself to have absorbed everything that would
have haphazardly come its way as a reflex of its snowball descent
7 The Pune Critical Edition has 1995 “chapters” or “lessons” (adhyāyas).
8 Lévi seems to suggest that the designation “hundred thousand-versed” “had been
consecrated since the fifth century,” citing its appearance on a fifth century inscription.
But that inscription would be quoting Mbh 1.56.13 and 12.331.2, where the claim is
made in the epic itself. There is no reason to think that the Mahābhārata number was
reached only by the fifth century and announced at that point.
9 Lévi’s Prajñāpāramitā sequencing is uncertain; see Conze (1960). My view would
be that his instinct is likelier for the Mahābhārata, with which the Buddhist texts would
have “caught up.” On Lévi’s hypothesis, the Śatasahasrika would have “lent itself to
this process without difficulty: it was only necessary to cut down the tautologies, the
redundancies, and the repetitions which swelled it and gave it an enormous bulk . . . .
In its steady effort for the beautiful [or perfect], India has manifestly passed through
the intermediate stage of the colossal. Before relishing and realizing the beauty that
consists in a harmonious equilibrium of lines, the mind of man first permits itself to
be carried away by mere mass” ([1917] 1918 20 19). Evolutionary claims aside, Lévi’s
conclusion could be said to anticipate what this article has to say about the more local
stance of Vālmīki vis à vis Vyāsa.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 133
through centuries.10 Many such scholars cite another verse in support
of this theory, which says that Vyāsa “composed a Bhārata-collection
(saṃhitā) of 24,000 couplets without the subtales (upākhyānair vinā);
so much is called Bhārata by the wise” (1.1.61).11 Although a 100,000
verse Bhārata is also mentioned (12.331.2), translators have sought to
help the developmental argument along by adding that Vyāsa com-
posed this shorter version “first” (van Buitenen, 1973, 1, 22; cf. Ghosh,
1991, 9) or “originally” (Ganguli [1884 96] 1970, I, 6). But the verse
says nothing about anything coming first. Since “without” implies a
subtraction, and since the passage describes Vyāsa’s afterthoughts, the
24,000 verse Bhārata would probably be a digest or abridgment12 that
knowers of the Mahābhārata could consult or cite for purposes of
performance from a written text.13 Another passage tells us that the
10 This approach gained authoritative status in Hopkins ([1901] 1969) and has
recently been slightly refined (bardic background, a post-Aśokan first written redac-
tion, and a normative redaction under the Guptas yielding a “library”) in Fitzgerald
2004a, 152–55, 68–70. For counter-arguments, see Hiltebeitel 2001a: that the epic
would have been composed over a shorter period (1–31), with nothing required from
the Guptas (2001a, 25–26); and that the term “encyclopedia” has been misleadingly
applied to the Mahābhārata, particularly with reference to the “Whatever is here may
be found elsewhere . . .” verse, which, rather than defining the exhaustiveness of the
text, is pitched toward an “ontological debate” (162–163).
11 Sukthankar illustrates the lengths to which scholars have gone in fitting the 24,000
verse “Bhārata without upākhyanas” into their theories of the text, notably his theory
of Bhṛguization: “in my opinion we should have no hesitation in concluding that in
our version of the Mahābhārata there is a conscious—nay deliberate—stitching together
of the Bhārata legends with the Bhārgava stories (author’s italics). The question how
precisely this Bhārgava element, which we find concentrated mostly in the upākhyānas
came into the cycle of the Bhārata legends . . . is largely a matter of speculation. Even
according to the traditional view, it was not the work of Vyāsa, the reputed author of
the Mahābhārata, because the diaskeuasts have been fortunately frank enough to admit
that his work, the Bhārata, which originally consisted merely of 24,000 stanzas, had no
episodes to speak of ” (1936, 70). There is nothing demonstrably “traditional” about
this view of Vyāsa, and the frankness of the diaskeuasts is a fancy. On “Bhṛguization,”
see Hiltebeitel (2001a, 105–118).
12 Shulman ([l991] 2001), 25, seeing the fallacy of arguing that the 24,000–verse
“Bhārata” came first, takes the verse to imply that Vyāsa “compressed” the 100,000 verses
“by eliminating the various minor stories (upākhyāna) into a mere 24,000 verses.” But
first credit on this recognition may go to Sastri 1931, x–xi, who states that the verses
in question in his attempt to critically edit the Southern Recension “unmistakeably
state that the computation of the Mahābhārata is 100,000 verses if counted along with
the minor narratives, and only 24,000 verses if the minor narratives are excluded. It is
not at all meant that 24,000 verses alone were originally composed and the remaining
76,000 verses were added later to complete the 100,000 verses.”
13 Fitzgerald still asks “at what stage was a putative Bhārata story recast as the
‘Mahā’ Bhārata . . , ?” (2006, 272), and in a footnote to this continuing question cites
“the purported historical observation of Vyāsa at 1.1 .61 . . . [as] evidence that at least
134 chapter six
divine Seers (surarsịs) once gathered to weigh the “Bhārata” on a scale
against the Four Vedas; when the “Bhārata” proved heavier in both
size and weight, the Seers dubbed it the “Mahābhārata” (1.1.208–9),
thereby providing a double “etymology” (nirukta) for one and the
same huge text.14 Yet despite nothing surviving of this shorter Bhārata,
scholars have used it to argue for an originally oral bardic and heroic
story that would have lacked not only subtales but frame stories, tales
about the author both in the frames and elsewhere, didactic additions,
and devotional passages with “divinized” heroes. Some have assumed
that Kṛsṇ ̣a would have been “divinized” before the introduction of
still “later” passages glorifying Śiva and even the Goddess; and there
were even those who wanted to argue that Kṛsṇ ̣a was not original to
the earliest bardic version. Although these ideas dominated West-
ern scholarship only in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, they
are still vigorous. It is, however, no longer possible to find a serious
scholar who wants to argue for an originally Kṛsṇ ̣a-less epic, and there
are now those who see principles of ongoing design as guiding the
Mahābhārata’s agglutination rather than historical accident.
New developments have thus complicated this profile. These include
intertextual studies positioning the Mahābhārata in relation to both
Indo-European and Indian texts; genre study, including the history of
kāvya or Sanskrit “poetry” composed according to classical aesthetic
some in ancient India distinguished larger and smaller versions of this epic” (272
n. 19). While not claiming directly the shorter Bhārata’s precedence, he implies it (it
would be no use to his developmental argument were it not earlier). Suggesting by the
move to a footnote that this Bhārata might be the same as “a putative Bhārata story”
that would have this priority over the Mahābhārata, he ignores the question of what
kind of text it would be “without the upākhyanas.” But that element of the verse in
question is where one must begin (as Sukthankar did, claiming that the original “had
no episodes to speak of”; see n. 11 above) in considering how the epic “distinguished
larger and smaller versions of ” itself (rather than gratuitously attributing the distinction
to “some in ancient India,” implying “some Brahmans,” whom Fitzgerald frequently
invokes with the suggestion that sociological divisions would have produced the tex-
tual variations in which he usually sees additions). Fitzgerald tries to relate 1.1.61 to
his argument for centuries of sequential development in the composition of Books 12
and 13, and to explain “sectors” of the Bhārgava Rāma dossier by associating the
Vaiśampāyana and Ugraśravas frames with two of “four, or more, distinct poetic or
redactional efforts” (2002, 115; 99–100, 104–107, 112–113)—an opportunistic (I believe)
association between frames and redactions also made by Sukthankar and some others
(see Hiltebeitel, 2001a, 105 n. 47 and above n. 11).
14 Cf. 1.56.31: “The Mahābhārata, they say, is the great Birth of the Bhāratas
(bhāratānām mahoj janma): he who knows this etymology (nirukta) is rid of all his
sins.”
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 135
norms; debate on the likely period of the Mahābhārata’s composition
in written form; and the completion of the Pune Critical Edition, along
with wider recognition of the Mahābhārata’s design. For a signal result
of the Mahābhārata’s Pune Critical Edition is its establishment of a
textual “archetype.” There remains debate as to whether this archetype
takes us back to the text’s first composition, or to a later redaction that
would put a final stamp on centuries of cumulative growth. This essay
favors the first option. In either case, this archetype includes a design
of eighteen Books or parvans,15 nearly all the epic’s one hundred “little
books” or upaparvans (the list of these at 1.2.30–70 problematically
includes as numbers 99 and 100 parts of the Harivaṃśa as the last
two), and its often adroit adhyāya breaks. Similar developments apply
to Rāmāyaṇa studies.
Traditional Rāmāyaṇa scholarship has been marked by what Robert
Goldman calls a “zeal” (1984, 63) to demonstrate that most or all of
this epic’s first book is late. Books 2–6 are taken to supply most or all
of the poem’s “‘genuine’ portions,” and the closing Book 7 is taken as
axiomatically late. For such scholars, Books 2–6 have presented the
15 Schlinghoff ’s contrary claims (1969) about the Mahābhārata’s “oldest extant
parvan-list” based on the Kusạ̄ ṇa period “Spitzer manuscript” found in east Turkestan
have been revived by Franco (2004), with some additional information and sugges-
tions: that it may have come from “the Great Gandhara area” and been written using
a broad-nibbed copper pen (vol. 1, 11); that it is probably a Sarvāstivādin text (19)
from “around the second half of the third century” (33); that it included a refutation of
God in one fragment (18–19); and that its reference to some Mahābhārata units and
brief encapsulation of the Rāmāyaṇa “may have been occasioned by a discussion of
the Buddha’s omniscience” (17). If the last two things are true, it hardly seems that the
Buddha’s omniscience was directed toward the “extant” totality of either epic. Indeed,
not knowing the context, we cannot know what the units were listed for, why both
parvans and subparvans were selected, why in some cases they are apparently listed
out of sequence and in others with one inclusive of another, why the Mahābhārata is
digested by (selected) components and the Rāmāyaṇa as a (minimalist) consecutive
narrative, or even that the four fragments mentioning these features were all on the
same page. No Mahābhārata scholar using the find as evidence of a once-shorter text
(see Brockington, 1998, 131–132; Fitzgerald 2006, 270–21, nn. 15 and 17 has tried to
explain what kind of “Bhārata” it would have been with the odd assortment of units
mentioned. With such uncertainties, notions that the Virātạ - and Anuśāsana-Parvans
would not yet have been extant (Schlinghoff, 338; Franco, vol. 1, 10; Brockington
and Fitzgerald as cited) must be taken cum grano salis. Regarding Book 4, the only
evidence is that no Virātạ parvan is mentioned between a unit beginning with a or
ā, for which Schlinghoff (338) proposes a(raṇeyaṃ) “or perhaps a(jagara)”—both
sub-parvans of Book 3—and (ni)ryyaṇaṃ for the Abhiniryāṇa sub-parvan of Book 5.
But a could provide a(jñātavāsa), the “residence incognito” widely used to describe
the Virātạ parvan (see Hiltebeitel, 1980b, 148 n. 4), or a(bhimanyu-vivāha), the main
adhyāya name (4.66–67) in Book 4’s concluding sub-parvan.
136 chapter six
possibility of making a case that they narrate a largely consecutive
heroic story of a man who is for the most part not yet “divinized.”
This view has also been challenged over the last several decades.
Pivotal to this rethinking has been the completion of the Rāmāyaṇa’s
Baroda Critical Edition (1960–1975). Most of the key passages that
speak of Rāma as an incarnation of Visṇ ̣u make the Critical Edition’s
cut. The lateness of Rāma’s “divinization” has thus been challenged by
Sheldon Pollock (1984) and supported by Goldman and Sally Suther-
land Goldman (1996). Pollock’s argument is that Rāma’s seeming
humanity is a structural piece of the story threaded into the poem
along with a boon obtained by Rāvaṇa from Brahmā: that of invulner-
ability to death from all different classes of beings other than humans,
whom he omitted because he disdained them. Rāma must thus be born
as a man to slay Rāvaṇa; more than this, he must think he is a man
until he accomplishes this goal. The fact that Rāma keeps fairly well to
this sense of himself until he has killed Rāvaṇa would then be a feature
of the narrative rather than a way of disqualifying the boon passage,
which occurs in Book 7, and the passage in Book 6 where, after killing
Rāvaṇa, Rāma’s divinity is finally revealed to him by Brahmā.
Pollock (1986, 38–42) and Biardeau (1997a, 77 119) have also intro-
duced a consideration based on comparison with the Mahābhārata
and the fruits of its Pune Critical Edition. Up to Book 2, each epic fol-
lows a similar archetypal design, with (in partly my terms) each Book 1
introducing Frames, Origins, and the Youths of the Heroes, and each
Book 2 describing a pivotal Court Intrigue. This approach can be car-
ried further: Book 3: Forest (in the title of both epics’ third books);
Book 4: Inversions (the Pāṇḍavas’ topsy turvy disguises in Virātạ ’s
kingdom of Matsya, “Fish”; Rāma’s engagement with the topsy turvy
world of monkeys, in whose capital, Kisḳ indhā, the lead monkeys play
out a reverse image of Rāma’s own story); Book 5: “Effort” (udyoga;
Rām 5.10.24; 33.66 uses this Mahābhārata term) made in Prepara-
tion for War (by both sides in the Mahābhārata; by Hanumān and all
the monkeys in the Rāmāyaṇa) with Kṛsṇ ̣a and Hanumān going as
Divine Messengers into the Enemy Camp where there are Attempts
to Capture Them; War Books (Rāmāyaṇa 6; Mahābhārata 6–11), and
Denouments (Rāmāyaṇa 7; Mahābhārata 12–18). As we shall see, this
is only bare bones that can be further fleshed out. The Rāmāyaṇa’s
term for its Books is kāṇḍa, meaning a “section” of a stalk of a plant,
such as bamboo, between its joints; the Mahābhārata’s is parvan, which
can mean the joints themselves of such a plant. Together they could
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 137
describe a complete stalk of a noded plant. Such closeness of design
cannot be accidental. In favoring the priority of the Mahābhārata, this
article holds that Rāmāyaṇa Books 1 and 7 are integral to its earli-
est design and that the Rāmāyaṇa poet is not only familiar with the
Mahābhārata’s design but intent upon refining it.
Such a relation can be exemplified by the two epics’ frame stories,
which are opened at the beginning of the first Books and left pending
into the denouments. In both epics the frames are three-tiered. In the
Mahābhārata, there are in fact three frames. Initially, Vyāsa recites
the epic to his five Brahman disciples, first to his son Śuka and
then to the other four, including Vaiśampāyana (1.1.63). Second,
Vaiśampāyana recites it at Vyāsa’s bidding to King Janamejaya, a
descendant of the Pāṇḍavas, at his snake sacrifice so that he can hear
the story of his ancestors. And third, the Bard Ugraśravas, who over-
heard Vaiśampāyana’s narration, brings it to Śaunaka and the Ṛsịs of
the Naimisạ Forest and recites it there in 18 Books (2.3.71).16 Unlike
the Mahābhārata’s three frame stories, which present a serial layering
of the first three recitals of supposedly the same text that are scat-
tered over its first 56 chapters and resumed in late portions of its 12th
Book, the Rāmāyaṇa frame, in only its first four chapters known as
the upodghāta or preamble, presents two progressive unfoldings of the
story—the first by the sage Nārada to the hermit Vālmīki; the second
by Vālmīki himself, now a poet—that trace its ripening into the third
full unfolding, the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa itself.
In the first, in answer to Vālmīki’s opening question whether there
is an ideal man in the world today (1.1.2–5), Nārada satisfies the ques-
tion with a brief and entirely laudatory account of Rāma’s virtues and
adult life, presumably to date (1.1.7–76). Saying the minimum about
Rāma’s killing of the monkey Vālin (1.1.49, 55), Nārada hardly hints
at anything problematic in Rāma’s life and omits both Sītā’s fire ordeal
and her banishment. Among the great Ṛsịs or seers Rāma encounters,
he mentions only Vasisṭḥ a (29) and Agastya (33–34).
In the second sarga, once Nārada has left, Vālmīki witnesses the cries
of grief of a female Krauñca bird (probably the large monogamous
sarus crane (see Leslie, 1998) over the slaying of her mate by a “cruel
16 The 18 parvans are mentioned again at 1.2.244ab toward the end of the
Parvasaṃgraha or “Summaries of the Books”—as if to say that what we get is this
Naimisạ Forest edition.
138 chapter six
hunter,” and is provoked into the spontaneous utterance that creates
“verse” (and thus poetry) out of “grief ” (śloka out of śoka; 1.2.9–15).
As this verse is said to mark the origins of poetry, the Rāmāyaṇa is
called the ādikāvya or “first poem”—a term that does not occur in the
Baroda Critical Edition, though it probably should since it occurs in a
universally attested sarga where, after Sītā has vanished into the earth,
the god Brahmā encourages Rāma to hear the rest of this ādikāvya
(7, Appendix I, No. 13, lines 31–39). Now, however, the same Brahmā
appears (22–36) to prompt Vālmīki to tell the story he has just heard
from Nārada, and gives him the insight to see what he did not know
and what is still yet to happen—with, moreover, the confirmation that
his poem will endure so long as the rivers and mountains last on earth
and that it will all be true (1.2.33–35). Brahmā thus assures Vālmīki
that he will know things omitted from Nārada’s encomium. Upon
Brahmā’s vanishing, Vālmīki now conceives the idea of composing
“the entire Rāmāyaṇa poem (kāvya) in verses such as these” (1.2.40d)
that is, such as the śloka he has just uttered.
In the third sarga, Vālmīki meditatively enters into this project for
the first time (1.3.2) and has a sort of preview of the story (3 28):
not a retrospective table of contents like the Parvasaṃgraha (PS)—
the lengthy “Summaries of the Books” that forms the Mahābhārata’s
second adhyāya and second upaparvan—but a kind of first glimpse
and unfolding of what his poem will contain. Here he provides the
first reference to some of Rāma’s encounters with important Ṛsịs (he
will hear Viśvāmitra’s stories [4], face Rāma Jāmadagnya [5], and hear
Bharadvāja’s instructions [8]). Most important, while adding nothing
problematic on the slaying of Vālin (15–16) and without having men-
tioned Sītā’s fire ordeal, he closes with Sītā’s banishment (28).
Then, looking back upon the poem’s completion, the fourth sarga
hints at the context in which Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa will finally be told
by the twins Kuśa and Lava to their father Rāma. Just as information
on the Mahābhārata’s frame is resumed with further revelations about
Vyāsa, Śuka and his co-disciples, and the Naimisạ Forest is in Book 12,17
the Rāmāyaṇa’s frame will be picked up in Book 7 when Kuśa and
Lava do just that: pick up the frame in the Naimisạ Forest (Rām
17 In stories about Śuka including the Śukotpatti or “Birth of Śuka” (12.310–20),
and in the Nārāyaṇīya (12.321–39); see Section E of this chapter.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 139
7.82,14b)!18 The main difference is that when the Rāmāyaṇa frame is
reentered in Book 7, it is not just a matter of further revelations about
the composition that are difficult to relate to the main story. Vālmīki’s
dramatic entry into the main story presents the occasion to reveal the
poetic heart of the whole poem through its effects on its hero and
its heroine. Nonetheless, in both epics there is a moment where the
author emerges from the frames to speak directly to the epic’s main
listener. In the Rāmāyaṇa this occurs at this climactic moment when
Vālmīki addresses Rāma and confirms Sītā’s veracity before she enters
the earth. In the Mahābhārata, in a much less noticed but still quite
dramatic passage, it occurs in the one time that Vyāsa addresses Jana-
mejaya directly to tell the subtale (upākhyāna) of the Horse’s Head in
answer to a culminating question of the Nārāyaṇīya (see Hiltebeitel
2006a).
Vālmīki thus gets a triple inspiration—from Nārada, the krauñcī,
and Brahmā. Yet the upodghāta leaves us in suspense as to when Sītā
came to his āśrama. Was it before or after the Krauñca bird incident?
The poem never tells whether Vālmīki’s response to the female bird
comes before or after his familiarity with Sītā’s grief at her banish-
ment. But in either case, now that Vālmīki knows the whole story
from Brahmā, he could connect Sītā’s banishment with the cry of the
krauñcī whenever she arrived. What we do know is that, having had
pity (karuṇā; 1.2.11d) for the female bird, Vālmīki will compose his
poem with pity as its predominant aesthetic flavor (aṅgīrasa) in rela-
tion to grief (śoka) as its underlying sthāyibhāva or “stable aesthetic
emotion.” The Mahābhārata provides no such developmental inspira-
tion story for its author Vyāsa, although I believe the father-son story
of Vyāsa and Śuka is its analogue.19 Even though Ugraśravas seems to
tell the Pauloma and Āstīka subparvans on his own, there is no sug-
gestion that they are anything but the “entire thought” of Vyāsa, and
there is no hint at any growth process either in the poet’s mind or in
18 The site where the twins recite the Rāmāyaṇa at Rāma’s Aśvamedha sacrifice.
On the coincidence of the sites for the third narrations, which suggests a nod to
Mahābhārata precedence, see Hiltebeitel (2001a, 285–286).
19 Both include poignant bird stories (see Hiltebeitel, 2001a, 279–322; 2005d). As in
the Rāmāyaṇa, the Śuka story is presented in a way that appears disjointed from the
main story, and in the Mahābhārata’s denouement rather than its preamble. It is thus
much more difficult to trace into the main story.
140 chapter six
the performances by either of the narrators.20 The Rāmāyaṇa frame is
thus shorter, more developmental, more focused, and more poetically
traceable into the main narrative and the whole poem.
Indeed, once past the upodghāta, the Rāmāyaṇa’s main story begins
immediately with a brief praise of the Rāmāyaṇa itself and the Iksṿ āku
dynasty (Rāma’s ancestors) that quickly narrows down to the country
of Kosala, its capital city of Ayodhyā, and the current reign there of
Rāma’s father Daśaratha (1.5.1–9), all presumably as it was composed
by Vālmīki and imparted to be recited by Kuśa and Lava to Rāma. So
it continues to its end—again, unlike the Mahābhārata, which has the
overriding device of presenting its multiple frame stories as intertwin-
ing dialogues between its narrators and their listeners (see Shulman
[1991] 2001, 28–33). Although the upodghāta concludes with Rāma,
as chief-auditor-to-be, inviting his brothers to join him in listening to
Kuśa and Lava, whom he is yet to recognize as his sons, he interrupts
their narration to question them only once: when, having listened for
some time, he asks them who authored this poem (kāvya) (7.85.19).
Otherwise, until he recognizes them soon after this and wants to see
their banished mother (86.2–6), he is the rapt and silent listener. Yet
note the concluding words of the upodghāta with which he launches
their recital: “Moreover, it is said that the profound adventure
(mahānubhāvaṃ caritam) they tell is highly beneficial even for me.
Listen to it” (1.4.26d). Who has said this? Why beneficial to Rāma?
The preamble leaves us with such implicit and subtle questions. The
point seems to be that listening to Vālmīki’s poem will awaken Rāma
to recall Sītā after he has banished her.
Wholes, Parts, and Terms of Identification
In these passages, we see two of the three leading terms by which the
Rāmāyaṇa describes itself: kāvya (poem) and carita (adventure), the
third being ākhyāna (tale, narrative). Let us look at how these and
other terms are used by each epic to identify itself and to define the
relationship of its whole to its parts.
20 See Hiltebeitel (2001a, 99–105). Ugraśravas recital in eighteen parvans (see above
at n. 16) would not add anything but rather be his way of arranging the “whole” to
meet the sacrificial timetable of the Naimisạ Forest Ṛsịs’ 12-year sattra (1.1.1–2).
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 141
Most frequently, the Mahābhārata characterizes itself fourteen
times as a “narrative” (ākhyāna: 1.1.16a; 1.2.29b, 235c, 238a, 239b,
240b, and 241b; 1.53.31d and 32a; 1.56.1c, 30c, 32c; 12.337.10a,
18.45.53a) and eight times as a “history” (itihāsa: 1.1.17a, 24d, 52c;
1.2.237a, 1.51.16c, 1.56.18c and 19a, 1.93.46c).21 But it also calls itself
a work of “ancient lore” (purāṇa: 1.1.15b, 1.56.15d), a “story” (kathā:
1.56.2a), a “collection” (saṃhitā: 1.1.19.1c and 61b), a “fifth Veda”
(1.57.74ab, 12.327.18ab), the “Veda that pertains to Kṛsṇ ̣a” (Kārsṇ ̣a
Veda, probably referring primarily to Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana Vyāsa—
1.1.205a, 1.56.17c), a “great knowledge” (mahaj-jñāna: 1.1.25b and
49a), a “treatise” (śāstra: 1.56.21: indeed, in this verse, a dharṃaśāstra,
arthaśāstra, and moksạ śāstra; and probably 12.238.13c),22 an upanisạ d
(1.1.191a), a “biography” or “adventure” (carita: 1.56.1d),23 a “victory”
(jaya: 1.56.19a), and, surprisingly, a “subtale” (upākhyāna: 1.2.236a)!
In addition, while not calling itself one as a whole, the epic is also a
de facto “dialogue” (saṃvāda), for it sustains the dialogical interlac-
ing of each of its three dialogical frame levels, not to mention the
multiple dialogues that the frame narrators and other narrators report
like the Bhagavad Gītā, which Saṃjaya can report to Dhṛtarāsṭra “by
the grace of Vyāsa” (BhG 18.73 and 75 = Mbh 6.40.73 and 75) thanks
to Vyāsa’s having given him the divine eye (6.2.9–13; see Hiltebeitel
2001a, 56–59).
Indeed, most of these terms are used doubly. The more “didactic” (veda,
saṃhitā, upanisạ d, and śāstra) not only describe the Mahābhārata as a
whole, but, far more often, refer to sources outside of it that the epic’s
narrators cite as authoritative and sometimes quote in part or digest,
particularly the many śāstras or “treatises” mentioned by Bhīsṃ a in
Book 12. But the more “narrative” terms (saṃvāda, ākhyāna, itihāsa,
purāṇa, carita, kathā, and upākhyāna) can also be cited as authorita-
tive tales. In this way the Mahābhārata sustains itself as a multigenre
work both in terms of its multiple self-designations for the whole and
in the interreferentiality between the whole and its parts. This contrasts
with the Rāmāyaṇa, whose poet Vālmīki composes his work under the
21 That is, in its frames. See now chapter 4 above.
22 See the discussion of this reference in Section E below.
23 Although there is constant overlap in the use of the main narrative terms, there is
also sometimes a helpful distinction, such as at 13.107.141 where four narrative genres
are mentioned as each to be always heard: purāṇa, itihāsa, whatever ākhyānas there
are, and “biography of the great-souled” (mahātmanāṃ ca caritam).
142 chapter six
single-genre title of kāvya. The Mahābhārata is not called a kāvya until
a famous interpolation, probably introduced by 400 C.E., in which the
god Brahmā appears to Vyāsa to pronounce on the genre question:
Says Vyāsa, “O Blessed one, I have created this highly venerated kāvya
(kāvyaṃ paramapūjitam) in which I have proclaimed the secret of
the Vedas (vedarahasyam) and other topics” (Vulgate 1.1.61–62; Pune
Critical Edition 1, App. I, lines 13–14), to which Brahmā replies, “I
know that since your birth you have truthfully given voice to the brah-
man. You have called this a kāvya, and therefore a kāvya it shall be.
No poets (kavayo) are equal to the excellence of this kāvya” (Vulgate
1.1.72–73b; Critical Ed. 1, App. I, lines 33–35). In a second and later
interpolation that reads now as part of the same passage, Brahmā then
recommends that Gaṇeśa be Vyāsa’s scribe (Vulgate 1.1.74 83; Critical
Ed. 1, App. I, apud line 36).
One striking thing about the Mahābhārata’s “narrative” terms
for itself and its parts, including carita24 and eventually kāvya25—
that is, the terms themselves, even though the genres they describe
all develop, change, and overlap by classical times, is that they are
all but one Vedic. Indeed, the Vedic resonances of three of them—
ākhyāna, itihāsa, and saṃvāda26—are so strong that they were once
at the heart of long debates centered on an “ākhyāna theory” of the
origins of Vedic poetry itself (see Patton 1996, 195–214). The one non-
Vedic exception seems to be upākhyāna—a term that may have been
given its first life by the authors of the Mahābhārata.27 They present a
24 Lubotsky (1997, 527), cites 1.110.2.
25 See e.g. ṚV 8.79.1 describing Soma as “a sage and a seer inspired by poetry (ṛsịr
vipraḥ kāvyena).”
26 See Patton (1996, 197–198) on early appearances of ākhyāna, itihāsa, and
purāṇa in the Aitareya and Śatapatha Brāhmaṇas, with the use of itihāsa to interpret
Ṛg Vedic saṃvāda hymns, leading to an aitihāsika “school” of interpretation; mention
of ākhyānavids as “those who know the stories”; Chāndogya Upanisạ d 7.1.2 where
itihāsapurāṇa refers to a fifth Veda; and 202 on the question of the coherence of
Ṛg Vedic saṃvādas independent of ākhyānas and itihāsas. See now also Jamison 2007,
120–50 on Ṛgvedic usages of kāvya in relation to later ones.
27 That is, as far as I can ascertain it is a non-Vedic term: see Monier-Williams
([1899] 1964, 212), citing nothing earlier than the Mahābhārata. Barbara Gomhach
introduces some uncertainty here. While positing throughout her dissertation that
the Mahābhārata’s “ancillary stories make the epic a Veda” and “Vedicize” the main
story (Gombach, 2000, 1, 345 and passim)—as if the main story were not filled with
Vedic allusions itself—she lists upākhyāna among terms “known from earlier Vedic
literature” along with itihāsa, ākhyāna, gāthā, and saṃvāda (346). But this is without
citation. Gombach has done immensely valuable work in mapping the number and
variety of the epic’s interior sub-narratives, but the term “ancillary” carries for her the
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 143
topic whose significance—for both epics—has not been sufficiently
appreciated.28
As observed, the upākhyānas are precisely the units mentioned as
omitted in the “Bhārata.” But what are the upākhyānas and, first of all,
how many are there? Although one could arrive at shorter lists, I will
count 67 upākhyānas in the Mahābhārata, as listed:
Mahābhārata Upākhyānas:
1. Śakuntalā-Upākhyāna 1.62–69
2. Yayāti-Upākhyāna 1.70–80
3. Mahābhisạ -Upākhyāna 1.91
4. Aṇimāṇḍavya-Upākhyāna 1.101
5. Vyusịtāsṿ a-Upākhyāna 1.112
6. Tapatī-Upākhyāna 1.160–163
7. Vasisṭḥ a-Upākhyāna 1.164–68, 173
8. Aurva-Upākhyāna 1.169–172
9. Pañcendra-Upākhyāna 1.189
10. Sunda-Upasunda-Upākhyāna 1.201–4
11. Śārṅgaka-Upākhyāna 1.220–25
12. Saubhavadha-Upākhyāna 3.15–23
13. Nala-Upākhyāna 3.50–78
14. Agastya-Upākhyāna 3.94–108
15. Ṛśyaśṛṅga-Upākhyāna 3.110–13
16. Kārtavīrya/Jāmadagnya-Upākhyāna 3.115–17
17. Śukanyā-Upākhyāna 3.122–25
general imputation of “addition” and “interpolation” (24, 184, 319) through “centuries
of compilation” (302), in particular with the suggestion that the clustering of stories
in Books 1, 3, 12, and 13 “might help explain different degrees of interpolation” (24).
All this is said while granting “that some of the ancillary material was inspired by the
epic itself” (165).
28 Sukthankar partially tracked the Mahābhārata’s upākhyānas (those that have
something to do with Bhārgavas) with the assumption that upākhyānas are not only
“episodes” but “digressions” (1936, 14, 17, 33, 35, 44, 65; see n. 11 above); Dange
(1969) brings a Frazerian comparative folklore approach to many upākhyānas among
the legends he discusses; van Buitenen (1975, 111, 182) also introduces the “episodes”
in Book 3 as more “pious” than those in Book 1, and “extraneous to the main story”
yet “preserved in the library that is The Mahābhārata” because they each have “their
own interest”—a view he extends elsewhere, as will be noted. Sri Aurobindo claimed
to be able to identify two upākhyānas—Sāvitrī and Nala—as Vyāsa’s by “the ultimate
test of style” (Ghosh, 1991, 12, 44–54), Richest are Jamison’s (1996) and Parida’s (2004,
47–172) treatments of numerous upākhyānas mainly around the theme of hospitality:
Jamison discussing nineteen of those listed below (numbers 1, 2, 6, 7, 13–15, 29, 31,
34–35, 40, 48, 50–51, 55, 57, 62, and 67), and Parida twenty-one of them (numbers
1, 2, 7, 10, 13–15, 17, 20, 29–33, 42, 47, 48, 50, 55, 64, and 67)—the latter, while still
bracketing them among “interesting episodes” that were “inserted” as “this Epic grew
to a great extent” (2004, 76).
144 chapter six
18. Māndhātṛ-Upākhyāna 3.126
19. Jantu-Upākhyāna 3.127–128
20. Śyena-Kapotīya-Upākhyāna 3.130–131
21. Asṭạ̄ vakrīya-Upākhyāna 3.132–134
22. Yavakrīta-Upākhyāna 3.135–139
23. Vainya-Upākhyāna 3.183
24. Matsya-Upākhyāna 3.185
25. Maṇḍūka-Upākhyāna 3.190
26. Indradyumna-Upākhyāna 3.191
27. Dhundhumāra-Upākhyāna 3.192–195
28. Pativratā-Upākhyāna 3.196–206
29. Mudgala-Upākhyāna 3.246–247
30. Rāma-Upākhyāna 3.257–276
31. Sāvitrī-Upākhyāna 3.277–283
32. Āraṇeyam upākhyānam yatra dharmo ‘nvaśāt sutam 3.295–299
33. Indravijaya-Upākhyāna 5.9–18
34. Dambhodbhava-Upākhyāna 5.94
35. Ambā-Upākhyāna 5.170–193
36. Viśva-Upākhyāna 6.61–64
37. Tripura-Upākhyāna; Tripura-Vadha-Upākhyāna 8.24
38. [Karṇa-Śalya-Saṃvāda] Haṃsa-Kākīya-Upākhyāna 8.28
39. Indra-Namuci-Upākhyāna 9.42
40. Vṛddha-Kumārī-Upākhyāna 9.51
41. Ṣoḍaśarāj[ik]a-Upākhyāna 12.29
42. Nārada-Pārvata-Upākhyāna 12.30
43. Rāma-Upākhyāna 12.48–49
44. Mucukunda-Upākhyāna 12.75
45. Usṭṛ agrīva-Upākhyāna 12.113
46. Daṇḍa-Utpatti-kathana-(Upākhyāna) 12.122
47. Ṛsạ bha-Gitā/ Sumitra-Upākhyāna 12.125–126
48. Kapota-Upākhyāna 12.141–45
49. Kṛtaghna-Upākhyāna 12.162–67
50. Jāpaka-Upākhyāna 12.189–93
51. Cirakāri-Upākhyāna 12.258
52. Kuṇḍadhāra-Upākhyāna 12.263
53. Nārāyaṇīye Hayaśira-Upākhyāna 12.335
54. Uñchavṛtty-Upākhyāna 12.340–353
55. Sudarśana-Upākhyāna 13.2
56. Viśvāmitra-Upākhyāna 13.3–4
57. Bhaṅgāśvana-Upākhyāna 13.12
58. Upamanyu-Upākhyāna 13.14–18
59. Mataṅga-Upākhyāna 13.28–30
60. Vītahavya-Upākhyāna 13.31
61. Vipula-Upākhyāna 13.39–43
62. Cyavana-Upākhyāna 13.50–51
63. Nṛga-Upākhyāna 13.69
64. Nāciketa-Upākhyāna 13.70
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 145
65. Kītạ -Upākhyāna 13.118–120
66. Ut[t]aṅka-Upākhyāna 14.52–57
67. Nakula-Upākhyāna 14.92–96
This number is reached by including all units that are mentioned to
be upākhyānas either in passing in the text,29 cited as upākhyānas in
the PS,30 or called upākhyānas in the colophons and/or the running
heads for units in the Pune Critical Edition. In assessing instances
mentioned only in the colophons, I err toward generosity and count
anything as an upākhyāna that appears to be called such as the promi-
nent title in either the Northern (N) or Southern (S) Recension.31 In
treating this number for special attention, it should thus be clear it is
not a boundaried group without overlap with other “ancillary story”
material (see Gombach, 2000). Rather, I wish to take the 67 and the
reverberations between them as a kind of sonar with which to plumb
the epic’s depths.
It is not evident how certain subtales came to be called upākhyānas
and others by other genre terms. But there does not seem to be any-
thing to discourage the view that traditional unit titles would have
been part of the text’s earliest self-conception, since both the North-
ern and Southern Recensions provide intelligible patterns, in what
one could call a colophon discourse, of giving common, similar, and
sometimes alternate upākhyāna and other names for adhyāyas and
larger narrative units. This is not the case in the Rāmāyaṇa, for which
I consider the number of upākhyānas to be zero. The Rāmāyaṇa
29 There are three of these: numbers 27 (see 3.195.37c); 33 (see 5.18.16a), and 39 (see
9.42.28a). The first two are also named upākhyānas in the colophons and headings;
the third only in passing.
30 The PS mentions two in Book I: numbers 9 (at 1.2.87) and 10 (at verse 90); four
in Book 3: numbers 20 (115ab), 21 (auddalakīya = Asṭạ̄ vakrīyam) and 23 as two cited
together (126ab), and 32 (127ed); and one in Book 5: number 35 (mentioned twice at 54a
and 150f). Curiously, the PS’s description of the Rāma-Upākhyāna is “the very detailed
Rāmāyaṇa upākhyāna” (rāmāyaṇam upākhyānam . . . bahuvistaram; 1.2.126ed).
31 While highlighting some of those discussed below, those with the best upākhyāna
credentials for both N and S are numbers 7 (Vasisṭḥ a), 8, 10 (Sunda-Upasunda), 11,
13 (Nala), 15 (Ṛśyaśrṅga), 27, 28, 30 (Rāma, usually as Rāmāyaṇa-Upākhyāna in S),
31 (Savitṛ), 34, 49 (Kṛtaghna), 50 (Japaka, on which see Bedekar 1963), 51 (Cirakāri;
on which see Bedekar, 1962; Gombach, 2000, 1, 209–317; Fitzgerald, 2002, 112), 52,
54 (Uñchavṛtti), 60, 61, 66, and 67 (Nakula); those called upākhyānas only in N are
numbers 3 (Mahābhisạ ), 9 (Pañcendra), 12, 16 (Kārtavirya), 18, 20, 36, 37, 43 (Rāma
[-Jāmadagnya]), 45, 46, and 65; those only in S, numbers 29 (Mudgala), 47 (Sumitra,
called Ṛsạ bha-Gītā in N), 48, 53 (Hayaśiras), and 59. Mudgala has an apparent descen-
dent named Mavutkalliyar (Maudgalya) Muni̠ who, in Tamil Draupadī cult stories, was
married to Draupadī in her previous life; see Hiltebeitel (1991a, 484–485).
146 chapter six
mentions no upākhyānas in passing or in the upodghāta, which would
be the closest analogue to the PS; and the practice of giving names
to sargas and larger units differs from that for adhyāyas and larger
units in the Mahābhārata in one important respect. The Rāmāyaṇa’s
Baroda Critical Edition shows that while Northern Recension colo-
phons do name a few units primarily as upākhyānas,32 the Southern
Recension gives none as either primary or secondary names. In fact, the
Southern Recension gives hardly any sarga or larger unit names at all.33
The extensive absence of Southern Recension sarga names, especially
the total absence with regard to the few units called upākhyānas in the
Northern Recension, confirms that there would he no upākhyānas in
the Rāmāyaṇa insofar as they could be counted as such in the Baroda
Critical Edition, which would require some parity across recensions. I
take this as evidence that the few instances of naming units upākhyānas
in Northern Rāmāyaṇa manuscripts is late and probably affected by
the usage in the Mahābhārata. Indeed, it would appear that whereas
the Mahābhārata’s names for adhyāyas and larger units tend to be
genre-related, the Rāmāyaṇa’s names for sargas and larger units tend
to be mainly descriptive of events that transpire in the sarga. Most
important, the Rāmāyaṇa has neither a colophon discourse about
upākhyānas nor a practice of using the term in passing that could
have given rise to the few Northern usages one finds.
Ākhyāna and upākhyāna are thus both among the multigenre terms
by which the Mahābhārata characterizes itself and its varied com-
ponents. If ākhyāna—even ahead of itihāsa—is the term used most
frequently to describe the Mahābhārata as a whole, and upākhyāna,
perhaps bizarrely, one of the least to do so (the Mahābhārata would
32 These are the Ṛśyaśṛṅga-Upākhyāna (1.8–10), Vedavatī-Upākhyāna (7.17),
Saudāsa/ Mitrosaha-Upākhyāna (7.57), Mandhātr-̣Upākhyāna (7.59), Śveta-Upākhyāna
(7.69), and Idā/ Ila-Upākhyāna (7.78 79). Rṣ́ yaśrṇ ġ a and Mandhātr ̣also give their names
to Mahābhārata upākhyānas. Seven units are also given upākhyāna as a secondary
title: Surabhī-Upākhyāna (2.68), Sugrīva-Vaira-Upākhyāna (4.10), Dundubhi(bher)—
Upākhyāna (4.11), Pusp̣ aka-Upākhyāna (6.109), Daṇḍa/Daṇḍaka-Upākhyāna (7.70–72),
Vṛtra-Vadha-Upākhyāna (7.75–76), and Yajn̄a-Upākhyāna (7.77)—again, only in the
Northern Recension, as with minor usages in the collophons to 2.58, 6.79, and 7.81.
Likewise, amid Northern variants for 1.52, one reads Śatānanda-Upākhyāne [Vasisṭḥ a]-
Viśvāmitra-Saṃvādaḥ as a secondary title using upākhyāna with reference to the tale’s
narrator rather than its topic.
33 An intelligible exception occurs from 6.97 to 100, from the death of Rāvaṇa to the
consecration of Vibhīsạ ṇa. Here southern manuscripts begin a short display of interest
in naming sargas, evidently because they concern a succession in this southern royal
line. Cf. 6.116, with a flourish of southern interest in titling Rāma’s consecration.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 147
be a subtale to what? the Veda?), a first order of business would be to
distinguish uses of ākhyāna from upākhyāna. Clearly, there would be
an analogy between the usages of ākhyāna: upa-ākhyāna and parvan:
upa-parvan. In both cases upa- implies “subordinate” and “lesser” (as
in upa-purāṇa for “lesser purāṇas”), but also denotes ways of breaking
the Mahābhārata down by terms that relate its whole to its parts: the
totality of its parts in the case of the upaparvans; some of its parts in the
case of the upākhyānas. Ākhyāna and upākhyāna are frequently used
interchangeably (as indeed with the other “narrative” terms mentioned
above). Sometimes, especially in the PS, it would seem that metrical
fit is all that has decided which of the two terms was used.34 But the
first usage of ākhyāna to self-describe a sub-narrative in passing may
provide a clue as to a useful distinction. The first ākhyāna narrated
in its entirety (1.12.5cd), “the great Āstīka ākhyāna (mahadākhyānam
āstīkam)” (1.13.4a), is the oft-interrupted Astīkaparvan (1.13 53),
the epic’s fifth upaparvan. Like the oft-interrupted [Mahā]bhārata-
Ākhyāna, it brims with substories of its own.35 It is delivered by the
bard Ugraśravas to the Sages (Ṛsịs) of the Naimisạ Forest as the main
introductory piece to entertain that audience in the epic’s outer frame.
In contrast, upākhyāna designates major uninterrupted36 subtales told to
rapt audiences usually composed of the epic’s heroes and heroines, or
alternately to one or the other of the audiences in its frame stories.
As to upākhyāna narrators, Vaiśampāyana addresses ten to Jana-
mejaya (1–4, 11, 32, 39–40, 66–67); Bhīsṃ a narrates twenty-three: 21
(44–52, 54–65) to Yudhisṭḥ ira and the Pāṇḍavas and two (35–36) to
Duryodhana; Lomaśa Ṛsị tells eight of nine (from numbers 14–22) to
the Pāṇḍavas, Mārkaṇḍeya Ṛsi also tells them eight (23–28 and 30–31),
and Kṛsṇ ̣a four (12, 41–42); Citraratha narrates three (6–8) to Arjuna
34 See e.g. 1.2.124c–125d, where, after reference to “the series or upākhyānas” told in
“the encounter with Mārkaṇḍeya,” one finds one of them, Indradyumna Upākhyāna,
referred to as an ākhyāna.
35 By Gombach’s count (2000, 1, 10–22), it has 6 “ancillary stories,” with the fifth
having its own substory about the two Jaratkārus, male and female, on which see
Hiltebeitel 2001a, 174–176, with a suggestion that this story offers a key as to how the
Mahābhārata’s tales and subtales “fit.”
36 One could make an exception for the inclusion of the Aurva-Upākhyāna (1.169–
172) within the Vasisṭḥ a-Upākhyāna (1.164–173), on which, see Sukthankar (1936,
14): “a digression within a digression.” But I would stress as overriding factors the
close thematic relation between the two stories and the uninterrupted character of the
upākhyāna material itself, which includes Vasisṭḥ a not only in these two upākhyānas
but in the Tapati-Upākhyāna that immediately precedes them (1.160–163).
148 chapter six
and the Pāṇḍavas; Śalya tells two: one (33) to Yudhisṭḥ ira, the other
(38) to Karṇa and Duryodhana; Vyāsa tells one to Draupadī’s father
Drupada (9) and another to the Pāṇḍavas (29); and six are told by
single-time speakers: Kuntī to Pāṇḍu (5, the only upākhyāna spoken
by a woman), Nārada to the Pāṇḍavas (10); Bṛhadaśva to the Pāṇḍavas
(13); Akṛtavraṇa to the Pāṇḍavas (15, interrupting Lomaśa’s skein);
Rāma Jāmadagnya to the Kauravas (34); and Duryodhana to Karṇa
and Śalya (47). As to auditors, of the 56 that are addressed to main
characters, 49 are told primarily to Yudhisṭḥ ira, 48 of these to him
and his Pāṇḍava brothers, and 44 of these also to their wife Draupadī
(all of these told once the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī are in the forest).
On the Kaurava side, three are addressed to Duryodhana and two to
Karṇa. Adding the 10 told to Janamejaya and one narrated to Pāṇḍu
by Kuntī, one finds that 65 of the 67 upākhyānas are addressed directly
to members of the larger Kaurava household to which all these lis-
teners belong, and of which Yudhisṭḥ ira is clearly the chief listener.
Not irrelevant to this pattern is the one in which King Drupada hears
upākhyāna 9 as an explanation of how his daughter can marry into that
household. And likewise not irrelevant would be the last upākhyāna
in this tally, the anomalous number 53 known in S colophons (see
n. 31 as the Nārāyaṇīye Hayaśiras-Upākhyāna. Here the primary nar-
rator is Ugraśravas, who answers a question by Śaunaka (speaking for
the Naimisạ Forest Ṛsịs) about the Horse’s Head, a form of Visṇ ̣u,
by quoting what Vyāsa told Janamejaya about that subject.37 With
Janamejaya as one of the two listeners, one can now say that all the
upākhyānas are addressed in one way or another to those with ties to
the Kaurava household. Moreover, with Vyāsa, author of the outer-
most frame, addressing Janamejaya for once in the inner frame, where
he otherwise sits silently and leaves the recitation to Vaiśampāyana,
and to have all this further reported by Ugraśravas to the Naimisạ
Forest Ṛsịs, means that this upākhyāna cuts across the Mahābhārata’s
three frames.38 Further, that the Naimisạ Forest Ṛsịs are, this one and
only time, an interested party to a subtale suggests their proximity to
this mysterious Veda-reciting form of Visṇ ̣u that resides in the “great
37 The Critical Edition has suppressed this anomalous feature, overriding the pre-
ponderant manuscript evidence at 12.335.1 and 9 to have Janamejaya cite Yudhisṭḥ ira
as the one addressed by Vyāsa. See Hiltebeitel (press-b).
38 On the Narāyaṇīya context of this exchange, see Hiltebeitel 2006a.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 149
northern” or milky ocean, which seems to be somewhere, like the
Naimisạ (“Twinkling”) Forest itself, in the heavenly night sky.39
Another approach to the upākhyānas is to think about volume and
proportion. Taking the Mahābhārata’s own numbers, on the face of
it, if the epic has 100,000 couplets and Vyāsa composed a version of it
in 24,000 couplets “without the upākhyānas” (1.1.61), the upākhyānas
should constitute 76% of the whole. That proportion is not to be found.
Calculating from the roughly 73,900 couplets in the Critical Edition,40
the full total for the 67 upākhyānas is 10,521 couplets or 13.87%; and
if one adds certain sequels41 to four of the upākhyānas totaling 780
verses to reach the most generous count of 11,031 verses, one could say
that, at most, 14.93% of the Mahābhārata is composed of upākhyāna
material. While we are nowhere near 76%, these proportions are not
insignificant. Moreover, one can get a bit closer to 76% if one keeps
in mind the interchangeability of the epic’s terms for narrative units
and calculates from the totality of its substory material. According
to Barbara Gombach, “nearly fifty percent” of the Mahābhārata is
“represented by ancillary stories,” with Books 1, 3, 12, and 13 cited
as the four in which “the stories cluster more densely” than in the
other Books (2000, 1, 5 and 24). Gombach (1, 194; 225) gives 68%
for the ancillary stories in the Śāntiparvan (Book 12), which has 14
upākhyānas; 65% for those in the Anuśāsanaparvan (Book 13), with
eleven upākhyānas; 55% for those in the Āraṇyakaparvan (Book 3),
with 21 upākhyānas; and I calculate 44% for the Ādiparvan (Book 1),
with eleven upākhyānas. Of other Books that contain more than one
upākhyāna, the Āśvamedhika- (Book 14) with two, Śalya- (Book 9)
with two, and Udyogaparvan (Book 5) with three are comprised of
54%,42 28%, and 17% ancillary story material respectively.
39 See Hiltebeitel (2001a, 158) and passim: naimisạ , “twinkling,” seems to evoke the
heavenly night sky, at least in the Mahābhārata. On the Horse’s Head and its location,
see Mbh 12.330.36–39; 335.3, 27, and 34, and Hiltebeitel 2006a.
40 Van Nooten (1971, 50): “about 73,900”; Brockington 1998, 4: “nearly 75,000.” A
count has to be approximate because the Mahābhārata contains prose passages. One
also has to count all couplets as “ślokas.”
41 These are the 151–verse Uttara-Yayāta (1.81–88), which continues upākhyāna
number 2; the 368–verse continuation of no. 24 at 3.186–188; the 203–verse sequel to
no. 62 in the Cyavana-Nahusạ -Saṃvāda (13.51–56); and the 58–verse Maitreya-Bhiksạ̄
(13.121–123) which, rather more loosely than the other cases, continues no. 65. I con-
sider it more meaningful to add upākhyāna-sequels than their prequels.
42 This is by Gombach’s account which, I think, dubiously—includes the Anugītā
(14. 16.12–19.60).
150 chapter six
Fifty-seven of the sixty-seven upākhyānas thus occur in parvans 1,
3, 12, and 13 where “stories cluster” most densely. There are, how-
ever, two major differences in the ways upākhyānas are presented in
the two early Books from the two later ones. Whereas Books 1 and 3
provide multiple narrators for their 32 upākhyānas, all but 3 of the 25 in
Books 12 and 13 are spoken by one narrator, Bhīsṃ a (who has told two
upākhyānas earlier, one each in Books 5 and 6 [numbers 35 and 36], to
Duryodhana). And whereas Books 1 and especially 3 show a tendency
to cluster their upākhyānas (two in a row are told by Vaiśampāyana
and three in a row by the Gandharva Citraratha in Book 1; nine, five,
and two in a row by Ṛsịs whom the Pāṇḍavas encounter while pilgrim-
aging in Book 3), in Bhīsṃ a’s run of four hundred and fifty adhyāyas
in Books 12 and 13, he tends to present his twenty-one upākhyānas
there only intermittently. Yet there is one run, from the end of Book 12
through the first third of Book 13, where he concentrates nine of them.
These two books run together the totality of Bhīsṃ a’s postwar instructions
to Yudhisṭḥ ira in four consecutive upaparvans, which James Fitzgerald
calls “four large anthologies” (2004a, 79–80). Both Books abound in
dialogues (saṃvādas), “ancient accounts” (itihāsam purātanam),43 and
other genres. Why then does Bhīsṃ a intensify his upākhyānas at this
juncture? This question will be taken up in Section C.
The upākhyānas’ content should also be important, and allow us
to identify certain themes that recur in them in meaningful patterns.
But for now, the best way to register their content would be by their
primary personages or protagonists. This approach makes it possible
to break the 67 down into no less than ten groupings: 17 about lead-
ing lights of the great Brahman lineages,44 fifteen about heroic kings of
43 Two pre-war upākhyānas, numbers 10 (1.201.1) and 33 (5.9.2), cite this phrase to
describe their content, as do fourteen post-war ones: nos. 41 (12.29.12), 44 (75.3), 46
(12.122.1), 49 (162.28), 50 (189.6, 192.2), 52 (263.2), 55 (13.2.4), 57 (12.2), 59 (28.6),
61 (40.2), 64 (70.2), and 67 (14.95.4).
44 Numbers 7, 8, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 22, 23, 43, 50, 51, 58, 61, 62, 64, 66. All eight
of the major Brahman lineages are featured at least once: fifteen (2, 8, 16, 17, 18, 26,
34, 35, 43, 56, 60, 61, 62, 66, 67) feature Bhārgavas; nine (3, 6, 7, 8, 30, 44, 53, 56, 65)
feature Vasisṭḥ as, including Vyāsa); six (1, 22, 28, 50, 56, 62) feature Vaiśvāmitras; four
(1, 15, 16, 43) feature Kāśyapas; three (14, 33, 67) feature Agastya; three (23, 47, 49, 51)
feature Gautamas; two (22, 60) feature Bharadvāja; and two (23, 54) feature Ātreyas
(the latter, apparently, as suggested by somānraye at 12.341.2). The number featuring
Bhārgavas could be raised to 22 if we note, as Sukthankar does (1936, 28–29), that
Mārkaṇḍeya is a Bhārgava. But these numbers would not suggest that the upākhyānas
are primarily Bhārgava material. See n. 11 above.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 151
varied dynasties,45 eleven about animals (some divine),46 seven about
gods and demons,47 four (including the first two) about early kings of
the main dynasty,48 four about women,49 three about the inviolability
of worthy Brahmans and hurdles to attaining that status,50 three about
revelations concerning Kṛsṇ ̣a,51 two about current background to the
epic’s main events,52 and one about the Pāṇḍavas as part of the main
story.53 From this, the only useful generalization would seem to be
that such content is represented as being of interest to the rapt audi-
ences that listen to these tales. But here an important point has been
conceded by certain scholars who have been prone to correlate such
variety with lateness and textual strata. Regarding the most famous
of all the Mahābhārata’s upākhyānas, the Nala-Upākhyāna, Fitzger-
ald regards “Nala” and some other non-upākhyāna stories as “good
examples of passages that do exhibit an inventive freedom suggestive
of ‘fiction.’ ”54 More pointedly, Gombach credits Madeleine Biardeau’s
study of “Nala” (1984, 1985) as a “case for regarding this upākhyāna
as a story composed in and for the epic to deepen its symbolic reso-
nances” (2000, 1, 73). Allowing “that some of the ancillary material
45 Numbers 13, 18, 19, 20, 26, 27, 29, 30, 41, 42, 44, 46, 47, 55, 57.
46 Numbers 11, 24, 25, 38, 45, 48, 49, 53, 54, 65, 67.
47 Numbers 4, 9, 10, 33, 37, 39, 52. Most frequently mentioned are: Indra in 26
upākhyānas (5, 6, 9, 10, 13, 14, 20, 21, 29, 33, 39, 41, 42, 43, 46, 48, 49, 50, 51, 54, 55,
57, 59, 61, 66, 67); Agni in 12 (11, 13, 27, 30, 33, 41, 43, 46, 48, 55, 57, 66); Brahmā
in 12 (9, 10, 14, 24, 27, 29, 30, 45, 46, 49, 50, 53); Dharma in eight (4, 9, 32, 47, 50,
55, 66, 67); Visṇ ̣u in eight (9, 14, 27, 30, 33, 46, 50, 53); Śiva in six (9, 10, 14, 35, 46,
58); Yama in five (9, 13, 31, 46, 50); Varuṇa in five (13, 23, 30, 33, 46); Kubera in five
(13, 33, 35, 44, 46); Bṛhaspati in five (2, 33, 41, 46, 67); Hayaśiras in three (46, 47, 53);
Soma in three (5, 33, 46); four gods in two each: Sūrya (6, 54), Gaṅgā (9, 41), Mṛtyu
(46, 50), Krodha (50, 67); and numerous gods in one: Vāyu (30), Śrī (9), Śacī (33),
Viśvakarman (10), Aśvins (17), Tvasṭṛ̣ (33), Upaśruti (33), Earth (43), Sarasvatī (46),
Skanda (46), Nirṛti (46), Kāla (50), Vedamāta Sāvitri (50), Svarga (50), Kāma (50),
Kuṇḍadhāra (52).
48 Numbers 1, 2, 3, 6.
49 Numbers 5, 28, 31, 40. But women figure centrally in at least 10 others, notably
1, 6, 17, and 35 which feature women in their titles and could have been counted in
this category.
50 Numbers 56, 59, 60.
51 Numbers 34, 36, 63.
52 Numbers 12, 35. These are the only two upākhyānas where a character in the
main story tells about other characters in the main story. But cf. 11.27.6–11, Kuntī’s
short account of Karṇa’s mysterious birth, called an ākhyāna in the Parvasaṃgraha
at 1.2.188a.
53 Number 32. On this anomaly, see below.
54 Fitzgerald (2003a), discussing Hiltebeitel (2001a, chap. 6) on “Nala,” and men-
tioning the Śuka story as well.
152 chapter six
was inspired by the epic itself,” Gombach settles for a middle position:
that some ancillary stories are interpolated does not mean that all are
interpolated (2000, 1, 164–165). But this renders the notion of inter-
polation and the distinction between authors on the one hand and
redactors, editors, and compilers on the other as rather whimsical.55
“Nala” is what Biardeau now calls one of Book 3’s three “mirror sto-
ries” (2002, 1, 412–413)—tales that mirror the listeners’ (the Pāṇḍavas
and Draupadī’s) current trials. We shall note some other upākhyānas
that merit this term, and also propose “puzzle stories” as another cat-
egory of interactive subtale. Once one admits that one story is com-
posed to fit one or another feature of the epic’s wider surroundings,
the principle cannot be easily shut off, as we shall observe.
As to the Rāmāyaṇa, we noticed at the beginning of this section
that the three terms kāvya, carita, and ākhyāna are woven through the
upodghāta. Kathā (story) is also used there, but with less specificity.
And we have observed that upākhyāna is not used at all for the whole
and, technically speaking, also not used for parts. It is, moreover, note-
worthy that itihāsa (history), which along with ākhyāna is one of the
two main terms to describe the Mahābhārata, is not only unused to
describe the Rāmāyaṇa but, excepting two interpolations,56 absent from
its entire Critical Edition text. In this, it is like the absence of kāvya
in the Mahābhārata’s Critical Edition; as if the two texts were in early
agreement to yield one of these terms to the other. Neither does purāṇa
(ancient lore) describe the Rāmāyaṇa,57 which evidently places itself
outside the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition that Chāndogya Upanisạ d 7.1.2
55 With his test of style (see n. 28), Sri Aurobindo sought to salvage the Nala- and
Sāvitrī-Upākhyānas for Vyāsa as works of “the very morning of Vyāsa’s genius, when
he was young and ardent” (Ghosh, 1991, 44). On compilers and redactors, see my dis-
cussion of this point with regard to Nārāyaṇiya scholarship in Hiltebeitel (2006a), and
Gombach’s formulation that “the Mbh’s editors and redactors took pains to archaicize
the epic” (1300) through the ancillary stories, as if “interpolators” were editors and
redactors and compilers who came along later than authors, and as if there were not
such archaizing as well in the presumably prior “epic.”
56 1, Appendix 1 line 4; 6.3709*. I thank Pathak (2005, 50) for these references and
for making available to me her further charting of the two epics’ terms for themselves
in the star passages and appendices of their critical editions.
57 Though, curiously, the only instance where purāṇa describes a story of any kind
occurs when Rāma hears from the fallen vulture Sampāti how the Ṛsi Niśakara once
told him that, “in an ancient legend (purāṇe)” he once heard (4.61.3), Rāma’s life was
foretold with some strange and exceptional twists (4–13).
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 153
links with Nārada as a fifth Veda.58 Similarly, upākhyāna, “subtale,” is
used only in the Mahābhārata, although there is an interpolated verse
in the Rāmāyaṇa’s Aśvamedha recital scene where the twins begin
singing the poem and tell Rāma that the Rāmāyaṇa has 24 thousand
verses and a hundred upākhyānas (7.1328*, following 7.85.20)—sug-
gesting Mahābhārata influence. Other words the Mahābhārata uses
to define itself such as śāstra (treatise) do not define the Rāmāyaṇa
at all.
A distinctive point about the usage of kāvya is that it is used only at
the Rāmāyaṇa’s two framing points:59 nine times in the upodghāta, four
in the two chapters of the Aśvamedha recital scene (7.84–85) where the
hints left at the end of the upodghāta are picked up as the frame finally
enters the story (or where the story finally returns to the frame). It thus
has a kind of bookend function of describing the work as poetry, most
notably that “it is replete with” all the “poetic sentiments” or rasas
(1.4.8).60 In contrast to kāvya, carita implies the “movement” (√car) of
the main narrative. Of its four usages in the upodghāta to characterize
the Rāmāyaṇa, two present a juxtaposition. The first has Brahmā enjoin
Vālmīki to “compose the whole adventure of Rāma (rāmasya caritaṃ
kṛtsnaṃ kuru)” (1.2.30cd). The second, once it is implied that Vālmīki
has composed it, calls “the whole Rāmāyaṇa poem (kāvya) the great
adventure of Sītā (sītāyāś carītam mahat)” (1.4.6). This suggests that
although Rāma’s adventure is Vālmīki’s starting point the complete
poem is also about Sītā’s adventure. The “profound adventure” that
Rāma prepares himself to hear at the end of the upodghāta would thus
include the two adventures intertwined (4.26). This sense of carita as
ongoing double adventure carries through the narrative. For instance,
when Hanumān begins to tell Bharata about “Rāma’s whole adventure
in the forest (sarvaṃ rāmasya caritaṃ vane)” (6.114.4cd) near the end
of Book 6, he tells mainly of the separate adventures of Rāma and Sītā
58 Clearly the Mahābhārata does not do this. I would even suggest that Vālmīki might
be registering a distrust of this tradition, which the Rāmāyaṇa puts under question
right at the beginning when Nārada describes Rāma as the ideal man. Note that in the
Mahābhārata, Nārada includes Rāma among the sixteen great kings of old whose past
glories he recounts (twice) in the soḍaśarājakīya, the second version being upākhyāna
number 41, as quoted by Kṛsṇ ̣a.
59 Aside from kāvya, the only other words to describe the Rāmāyaṇa at the Aśvamedha
recital are carita and, as the twins now sing it, gītā: “Having heard the sweetness of the
song (gītāmādhuryam), he [Rāma] returned to the sacrificial pavilion” (7.85.23).
60 On the rasas in the upodghāta, see the rich discussion in Pathak (2005); similarly,
in the Sundarakāṇḍa, see Goldman and Sutherland Goldman (1996, 35–37).
154 chapter six
once the latter is abducted (cf. 2.54.18). Carita is also the main word
to describe the Rāmāyaṇa’s adventures in course (2.54.18; 6.114.4)—
and even in the course of hearing it. When the twins begin reciting
the poem and Rāma asks who composed it, they reply, “The blessed
Vālmīki, who has reached the presence of the sacrifice, is the author
(kartā) by whom this adventure is disclosed to you without remainder
(yena idaṃ caritaṃ tubhyam aśesạ ṃ sampradarśitam)” (7.85.19).
Meanwhile, ākhyāna is used four times in the upodghāta. It describes
the benefits of hearing the tale’s recital (1.1.78), that it is “unsurpassed”
as a “tale exemplary of righteousness (dharmyam ākhyānam uttamam)”
(1.4.11), that it is a “wondrous tale told by the sage” that he “com-
pleted in perfect sequence” as “the great source of inspiration for poets
(kavīnām)” (1.4.20), and that Rāma urged his brothers to “listen to this
tale whose words and meanings alike are wonderful as it is sweetly
sung by these two godlike men” (1.4.25). It is also the first term to
describe the Rāmāyaṇa as the recital of its main story begins: “Of these
kings of illustrious lineage, the Iksṿ ākus, this great tale is known as the
Rāmāyaṇa. I will recite it from the beginning in its entirety, omitting
nothing. It is in keeping with the goals of righteousness, profit, and
pleasure and should be listened to with faith” (1.5.3–4). Ākhyāna can
also be used for tales told in course, most notably for the “glad tid-
ings” that Hanumān brings at various points to others (5.57.1, 59.6,
6.101.17, 1.13.40).61 It is thus complementary to both kāvya and carita.
It links the narrative to poetry and the inspiration of poets while also
bringing listeners into the unfolding of the hero and heroine’s double
adventure, the reiterations of that adventure by Hanumān, and the
blessings that it brings when heard with faith.
The Rāmāyaṇa thus makes very selective use of limited terms. In
contrast to the Mahābhārata, they are used strategically rather than
definitionally, and are not used to emphasize the interplay between
the Rāmāyaṇa’s parts and its whole. Emerging from and flowing back
into the passages that frame the Rāmāyaṇa (the upodghāta and the
Aśvamedha recital scene), side-stories fall within a single poetic nar-
rative that is portrayed as being addressed uninterruptedly (the one
61 In contrast to these four consistent usages and the four in the upodghāta, it is
certainly in a minor key that ākhyāna is used just once—for the “tale of the descent
of the Gaṅgā” (1.43.30)—for a unit within the whole.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 155
exception noted) to Rāma. The Rāmāyaṇa does not have multiple
audiences in a thrice-told stacking of dialogical frames.
We must now see how these findings relate to the different manners
in which subtales figure in the two epics’ main stories.
Upākhyānas in the Mahābhārata
To summarize the Mahābhārata, we have now seen that it should no
longer be enough to tell its main story, especially with the suggestion
that its main story would have been an original “Bhārata” with the rest
making it a “Mahābhārata.” Even though it must require shortcuts,
one owes it to this grand text to attempt to block out the main story
against the backdrop of its archetypal design, which includes its frame
stories, upaparvans, upākhyānas, and the enigma of the author. For
present purposes, touching only lightly on the upaparvans but keep-
ing the frames and the author in view, it must suffice to focus on the
upākhyānas—especially where they are woven into their Books’ struc-
tures. Our attention will thus be given only to Books 1, 3, 5, 8, 12, 13,
and 14. Book 1, the Ādi Parvan, takes its first five upaparvans to intro-
duce the three frames around related matter. Its sixth, on “The Descent
of the First Generations,” runs from the birth of Vyāsa (son of the seer
Parāśara and the ferryboat girl Satyavatī) and the gods’ descent to res-
cue the goddess Earth to an account of the origins of gods, demons,
and other beings. From there, upaparvan seven pauses over the epic’s
first two upākhyānas, the Śakuntalā- and Yayāti-Upakhyānas, about
Lunar Dynasty ancestors (Śakuntalā was the mother of Bharata, one of
the line’s eponyms),62 to introduce that dynasty’s early genealogy down
to the youths of the main heroes, with heightened attention to the
three generations before them. This narrative widening begins with the
62 See now Hiltebeitel in press-c on the importance of the Śakuntalā story’s primacy
among upākhyānas, though only in the Northern Recension, and its considerable
(and probably early) rehandling in this and other regards in the Southern Recension.
Although I neglected to reread Biardeau 1979 on the Śakuntalā-Upākhyāna in research-
ing this chapter, I find now that this study is returning to an argument she makes there
about upākhyānas in the Mahābhārata: “the apparently secondary accounts with which
the epic is stuffed, far from being what one lately calls interpolations, are the reprise
under a symbolic form of the dominant message of the principal account, which they
thus aide to decipher, all while contributing to the progression of the intrigue” (1979,
120, my translation).
156 chapter six
Mahābhisạ -Upākhyāna (number 3),63 about how Mahābhisạ , a royal
sage residing in heaven, boldly gazes up the windblown skirt of the
heavenly river Gaṅgā and is cursed to earthly birth, whereupon, as
King Śantanu, he marries Gaṅgā,64 their union resulting in the birth
of Bhīsṃ a as their ninth and sole surviving son and Gaṅgā’s depar-
ture once Śantanu asks why she drowned the first eight leading to
Śantanu’s second marriage to Satyavatī, now a fisher-princess, upon
her father’s obtaining Bhīsṃ a’s double vow to renounce kingship and
women, for which Śantanu gives Bhīsṃ a the boon to be able to choose
his moment of death; Bhīsṃ a’s abduction of three sisters, two as brides
for Śantanu and Satyavatī’s second son, who dies soon after becoming
king, leaving the two as widows, and the third, the unwedded Ambā,
with thoughts of revenge against Bhīsṃ a; Satyavatī’s determination to
save the line by getting the two widowed queens pregnant, first by
asking Bhīsṃ a, who refuses to break his vow of celibacy, and then,
admitting her premarital affair, recalling her first son Vyāsa; Vyāsa’s
unions with the two widowed sisters, cursing the first to bear a blind
son because she had closed her eyes at his hideous ascetic ugliness and
the second to bear a pale son because she had blanched; the births of
the blind Dhṛtarāstra, the pale Pāṇḍu, plus a third son, Vidura, sired
with the first widow’s low caste maidservant—and behind Vidura’s
birth, the Aṇimāṇḍavya-Upākhyāna (the fourth), named after a sage
who learns that he was impaled as the result of a childhood sin in his
previous life and curses the god Dharma—lord of post-mortem pun-
ishments and thus “functionally”65 tantamount in this, his virtual epic
debut, to Yama, god of the dead—to suffer Vidura’s low-caste human
birth. From here, one enters upon the generation of the main heroes.
Dhṛtarāsṭṛa’s marriage to Gāndhārī yields the hundred Kauravas,
incarnate demons headed by Duryodhana. And once Pāṇḍu becomes
impotent after his marriages to Kuntī and Mādrī, Kuntī tells him the
Vyusịtāsṿ a-Upākhyāna (number five) about a queen made pregnant
by her husband even after he was dead as part of the build-up to her
disclosure that she has the means to induce pregnancy by gods, which
63 One of the epic’s “three beginnings” (see 1.1.50); these are probably recommended
for performance purposes like the 24,000 verse Bhārata.
64 See Custodi (2004, 155–203) on the theme of the gaze in this upākhyāna.
65 On this episode, see Hiltebeitel (2001a, 192–195). As Kantawala says, Dharma,
seated on his throne and meting out “justice,” is here “a functional name given to
Yama” (1995, 104–105).
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 157
results in Pāṇḍu choosing Dharma to sire his first son, Yudhisṭḥ ira,
and so on. Already we see how impoverished the Mahābhārata would
be “without upākhyānas,” the first five of which tie in with the main
story through a train of curses and boons having to do with sex and
with death, identify dharma/Dharma as death/Yama, and, while stir-
ring up such undercurrents below the surface, lay the groundwork for
the birth of Dharma’s son, Dharmarāja Yudhisṭḥ ira.
After some youthful trials, the Paṇḍavas must conceal their survival
from the Kauravas, which they do disguised as Brahmans, and Vyāsa
appears to direct them to Pañcāla where they will meet their destined
bride. On the way Arjuna defeats the Gandharva Citraratha who had
challenged him. Citraratha tells the Pāṇḍavas they are vulnerable with-
out keeping a priest and holy fires, and then relates three upākhyānas in
succession: the Tapati-Upākhyāna (about another of their ancestresses
Tapatī, daughter of the Sun and mother of the eponymous Kuru), and
the Vasisṭ ḥ a- and Aurva-Upākhyānas (about Brahmans), all three of
which prepare them for forthcoming adventures while imparting some
positive and negative information on marriage and sexuality.66 Then,
when the five Pāṇḍavas, still disguised as Brahmans, marry Draupadī,
Vyāsa, who “by chance arrived” (1.187.32d), sanctions the marriage by
telling Draupadī’s father Drupada the Pañcendra-Upākhyāna. At a sac-
rifice performed by the gods at Naimisạ Forest, Yama was consecrated
as the śamitṛ priest assigned to putting victims to death, which detained
him from killing humans for the rite’s duration, making the gods edgy
until they learned from Brahmā that the rite would strengthen Yama
for this job once it was done. As one of the attendees, Indra then saw
golden lotuses floating down the Gaṅgā and traced them upriver to the
tears of the goddess Śrī, who was weeping at the river’s source over the
fall of four former Indras, her former husbands, into a cave as the result
of their arrogance toward Śiva. Once the current Indra has suffered the
same fate, Vyāsa reveals that the Pāṇḍavas are the five Indras, cursed
by Śiva to become mortals and marry Draupadī, who is Śrī incarnate,
which gives the marriage a resemblance of monogamy; they will regain
Indroloka only after performing “unbearable” (avisạ hya) and lethal
karma. Further, Kṛsṇ ̣a and Balarāma have joined them incarnated
66 Said in correspondence to the point made by Sutherland Goldman (2004, 72)
cited below in connection with Rāma and Laksṃ aṇa’s approach to Mithilā. Tapatī is
a positive ancestress of the Pāṇḍavas, mother of Kuru: Vasisṭḥ a’s encounter with the
cannibal Kalmāsạ pāda builds up to the latter’s near attack of a pregnant woman.
158 chapter six
from two hairs of Visṇ ̣u. The Pañcendra-Upākhyāna thus shifts the
emphasis from the five gods who sire the Pāṇḍavas, beginning with
Dharma, to the Pāṇḍavas being additionally five Indras. Vyāsa says
nothing explicit to indicate that Yama’s death-dealing mission is to be
carried out in the person of Yudhisṭḥ ira at the battle of Kuruksẹ tra.
But if Dharma and Yama are “functionally” the same, this conclu-
sion would be inevitable (see Hiltebeitel, 2001a, 119–120). The ninth
upākhyāna, spoken by the author himself, thus deftly knots together
threads we detected in the first five.67
After some amends are made between the two camps, the seer
Nārada arrives at the Pāṇḍavas’ new capital, Indraprastha, to tell the
Sunda-Upasunda-Upākhyāna about two demonic brothers who kill
each other over a woman, thereby warning the Pāṇḍavas to regulate
their time with Draupadī and providing them with an inverse mirror
story to their own situation—and the very rule that will send Arjuna
into a period of exile in which he will marry three other women.
Two upākhyānas in a row are thus concerned with the marriage of
Draupadī: through the first, Vyāsa tells Draupadī’s father Drupada the
divine secret that makes it legal, and through the second Nārada tells
the Pāṇḍavas how to regulate it. Finally, when Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a burn
the Khāṇḍava Forest to satisfy Agni and clear the ground for the con-
struction of Indraprastha, Book 1 closes with the Śārṅgaka-Upākhyāna
about some precocious birds reminiscent of the four Vedas (Biardeau
1971–72, 140–141) who escape the blaze.
Book 3, the Āraṇyakaparvan, relates 21 upākhyānas during the
Pāṇḍavas’ residence in the forest. Early on, Kṛsṇ ̣a tells its first
upākhyāna—the Saubhavadha-Upākhyāna—to explain his absence
from the dice match. Thereafter, most of the upākhyānas relate to events
in the Book’s second through fifth upaparvans and its final three. The
opening sequence tells of the Pāṇḍavas’ forest-entering encounter with
the monstrous Rāksạ sa Kirmīra, killed by Bhīma; Arjuna’s encoun-
ter with Śiva on Mount Kailāsa to obtain divine weapons; and Arju-
na’s further adventures in the heaven of his father Indra. In Arjuna’s
absence, the other Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī then go on pilgrimage and
hear numerous stories, many billed as upākhyānas. Thus nine—the
67 Van Buitenen’s view of it as a “silly” case of “inept mythification” (1973, xix–xx),
itself a restatement of some earlier salvos of Moriz Winternitz (see Hiltebeitel, 2001a,
164 and n. 118), could not be farther from the case.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 159
Agastya-, Ṛśyaśṛṅga-, Kārtavīrya-, Śukanyā-, Māndhātṛ-, Jantu-, Śyena-
Kapotīya-, Asṭ ạ̄ vakrīya-, and Yavakrīta-Upākhyānas—are told during
the “Tour of the Sacred Fords” to the pilgrimaging Pāṇḍavas minus
Arjuna, with all but one of these, Kārtavīrya, narrated by the group’s
sage travelling companion Lomaśa. And once Arjuna has rejoined
them, the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī hear six more upākhyānas narrated
by the ageless sage Mārkaṇḍeya: the Vainya- (a story of King Vainya
and the Ṛsịs Atri and Gautama), Matsya-, Maṇḍūka-, Indradyumna-,
Dhundhumāra-, and Pativratā-Upākhyānas. Then, after further forest
adventures, Vyāsa comes “desirous of seeing” (3.245,8c) the Pāṇḍavas
to tell them the Mudgala-Upākhyāna, a tale illustrative of the superi-
ority of giving over asceticism and the first of several upākhyānas to
emphasize the merits of uñchavṛtti Brahmans who practice the vow
of living only on gleaning (uñcha)—that is, eating only grains left
over from the harvest—and, more than this, who willingly give their
meager fare to demanding hungry guests, in this case, the chronically
famished Ṛsị Durvāsas.68 Immediately after Vyāsa’s visit, the closing
three upaparvans then tell of the following episodes: first, Draupadī
is abducted by the Kauravas’ brother-in-law Jayadratha, after which
Mārkaṇḍeya tells two more upākhyānas (the ones about Rāma and
Sāvitrī); next, Karṇa gives Indra his natural-born golden armor and
earrings; and, in closing, Vaiśampāyana recounts “ ‘The Fire-Sticks
Subtale’ in which Dharma instructs his son (āraṇeyam upākhyānaṃ
yatra dharmo ‘nvaṣāt sutam)” (1.2.127cd).
As noted, three upākhyānas in Book 3 stand out as what Biardeau
calls “mirror stories”: the Nala-Upākhyāna—the love story about Nala
and Damayantī told by the seer Bṛhadaśva while Arjuna is visiting
Śiva and Indra and Draupadī misses this favorite of her husbands; the
68 Durvāsas also appears three other times in this role. He is a cranky and demand-
ing guest in the household of Kuntibhoja, who leaves Durvāsas’s high maintenance to
his adopted daughter Kuntī (1.104; 1.113–114; 5.142.19). In the Durvāsa-Māhātmya
(13.144), Yudhisṭḥ ira directs a question about honoring Brahmans to Krṣ ṇ ̣a rather than
Bhīsṃ a and learns how, when no one else would invite Durvāsas as he went about
uttering a verse proclaiming his troublesome reputation, he came to stay with Krṣ ṇ ̣a and
Rukmiṇī and ate voraciously and harassed them in other ways until he finally granted
them boons for keeping their temper. And in a Northern passage justly rejected by the
Critical Edition, he grants Duryodhana, after being well fed, the boon of appearing with
his horde of ten thousand disciples before Draupadī to demand food just after she has
fed the Pāṇḍavas and gone to take rest, whereupon Kṛsṇ ̣a comes to her rescue, filling
the horde’s bellies from one gram of leftover rice, whence Durvāsas withdraws lest he
provoke the Pāṇḍavas by not finishing the meal provided (3, App, I, No. 25).
160 chapter six
Rāma-Upākhyāna—a “Mahābhārata-sensitive” version of the Rāma
story (see Hiltebeitel 2009) focused on Sītā’s abduction and told to
all five Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī by Mārkaṇḍeya just after Draupadī’s
abduction; and the Sāvitrī-Upākhyāna—the story of a heroine who
saved her husband from Yama, told by Mārkaṇḍeya just after the
Rāma-Upākhyāna when Yudhisṭḥ ira asks, having already heard about
Sītā, if there ever was a woman as devoted to her husband(s) as
Draupadī (this implicit slighting of Sītā is rather curious). Finally, the
“Firesticks Subtale” then closes Book 3 as it began with the encoun-
ter of a monster who appears first as a speaking crane and for the
moment “kills” the four youngest Pāṇḍavas at a lake where they have
gone to slake their thirst. But whereas the first monster, Kirmīra, was
a Rāksạ sa, this crane turns into a one-eyed Yaksạ before he reveals
himself, after questioning Yudhisṭḥ ira, to be Yudhisṭḥ ira’s own father
Dharma in disguise. Gratified at his son’s subtle answers to his puz-
zling questions, Dharma revives Dharmarāja Yudhisṭḥ ira’s brothers
and promises him success in disguising himself in Book 4 during the
thirteenth year in exile, which soon inspires Yudhisṭḥ ira to take on
the name “Heron” (an “eater of fish,” like the first “crane” disguise
of his father) and to introduce himself to King Virāta of Matsya (the
kingdom of “Fish”) as a dicing master thanks to his having received
the boon of “the heart of the dice” after hearing how this skill saved
Nala in the Nala-Upākhyāna.69 One may also suspect that a subcur-
rent runs between the Sāvitrī-Upākhyāna in which Yama restores life
to Sāvitrī’s husband Satyavan and the “Firesticks Subtale” in which
Yudhisṭḥ ira restores life to his brothers, for such a parallel between
Yama and Yudhisṭḥ ira would not only hark back to their already estab-
lished connections through Dharma, but anticipate Book 4, which will
speak of the Pāṇḍavas’ year in concealment in Matsya as a rebirth
from the womb (4.66.10cd). We shall find later support for reasoning
that the PS calls the “Firesticks Subtale” an upākhyāna, even though
it is the only one that is part of the main story, just because so many
upākhyāna cross-currents run through it.
Looked at from the standpoint of its three upākhyānas, Book 5, the
Udyogaparvan, presents surprising symmetries and asymmetries. The
69 Moreover, all five Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī adopt disguises that could be cued from
the Nala-Upākhyāna; see Hiltebeitel (2001a, 228–229). On Yudhisṭḥ ira-Kaṅka and the
Matsyas, see ibid., 197 and n. 562; Biardeau (1978, 99–101), 107, 1997b, 44–47. The
foregoing sentence corrects an error in 2005a, 484, before n. 67.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 161
initial upaparvan traces how both sides try to secure alliances. Arjuna
and Duryodhana come to Dvārakā to seek aide from Kṛsṇ ̣a, who says
bafflingly that his relation to each is equal. But since he saw Arjuna
first he gives him the first choice of two options: Kṛsṇ ̣a as a noncom-
batant charioteer, or a whole army division. Arjuna chooses Kṛsṇ ̣a and
Duryodhana departs content. Then the Madra king Śalya, brother of
the twins’ mother Mādrī, sets out to join the Pāṇḍavas but has his
mind turned after he finds elegant way-stations en route prepared for
him by Duryodhana. Travelling on, he tells Yudhisṭḥ ira that he has
sided with Duryodhana, and Yudhisṭḥ ira, foreseeing that Śalya will be
Karṇa’s charioteer, asks him to destroy Karṇa’s confidence (tejas) in
combat. Telling Yudhisṭḥ ira that even Indra had ups and downs, Śalya
consoles him with Book 5’s first upākhyāna, a cycle of three ultimately
triumphant Indra stories called the Indravijaya-Upākhyāna (5.9–18):
both a rear-view mirror story comparing Draupadī’s sufferings with
Damayantī’s (58.34cd) and Yudhisṭḥ ira and Draupadī’s tribulations
in Book 4 with those of Indra and Sāci, and a prophetic lens through
which to see aspects of Yudhisṭḥ ira’s war conduct anticipated by
Indra’s.70
As negotiations proceed, events come to center on the lengthy mid-
dle upaparvan 54, titled “The Coming of the Lord,” in which Kṛsṇ ̣a
as divine messenger comes as the Pāṇḍavas’ last negotiator with the
Kauravas while a host of celestial seers descend to watch the proceed-
ings and tell stories: one of them an upākhyāna about the arrogant
king Dambhodbhava that Rāma Jāmadagnya tells to warn Duryodhana
that Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a are the ancient indomitable seers Nara and
Nārāyāṇa.71 Arbitrations break down when Duryodhana tries, futilely
to capture Kṛsṇ ̣a, and end when the Kauravas send Śakuni’s son Ulūka
(Duryodhana’s mother’s brother’s son who thus has the same relation
to Duryodhana that Kṛsṇ ̣a has to the first three Pāṇḍavas) with a last
abusive message to the Pāṇḍavas. Book 5 then closes with the Ambā-
Upākhyāna-Parvan, most of which, from its beginning, comprises
Book 5’s third upākhyāna, the Ambā-Upākhyāna, in which Bhīsṃ a
70 Parallel themes in the Indravijaya-Upākhyāna and the Mahābhārata war include
destruction of opponent’s tejas, breach of friendship (sakhya), reliance on stratagems
supplied by Visṇ ̣u/ Kṛsṇ ̣a, and concluding sin-cleansing Aśvamedhas.
71 Other important stories related here are Kaṇva’s story of Mātali (95–103) and
Nārada’s about Gālava (104–121), the latter called the Gālava-Carita and “this great
incomparable ākhyāna (idam rnahākhyanam anuttamam)” (5.121.22a) in closing.
162 chapter six
tells Duryodhana how Ambā, determined to destroy him, came to be
reborn as Draupadī’s brother Śikhaṇḍin, and why Bhīsṃ a won’t fight
Śikhaṇḍin because he was formerly a woman.72 Surrounding a reve-
latory middle upākhyāna that compares Duryodhana to an ancient
tyrant who defied Nara and Nārāyaṇa, Book 5 thus has one upākhyāna
in its first upaparvan that leaves its listener Yudhisṭḥ ira with a fateful
secret about Karṇa that will advantage Yudhisṭḥ ira in the war, and
another in its last upaparvan that leaves its listener Duryodhana with
a fateful secret about Bhīsṃ a that will disadvantage Duryodhana in
the war.73
Book 8, the Karṇaparvan, is the only war book with upākhyānas
woven into its structure. On the war’s seventeenth day, Karṇa promises
Duryodhana the death of Arjuna, and Arjuna promises Yudhisṭḥ ira—by
now obsessed about Karṇa—to finish off Karṇa. Regarding Śalya as
the only match for Kṛsṇ ̣a’s charioteering, Karṇa requests that Śalya
be his charioteer, and Duryodhana, to convince Śalya, recounts the
Tripura-Upākhyāna about how Brahmā came to drive Śiva’s chariot
in Śiva’s conquest of the Triple City of the demons.74 Śalya then agrees
on condition that he can say what he pleases, and engages Karṇa in a
duel of insults that includes the Haṃsa-Kākīya-Upākhyāna in which
he compares Karṇa’s challenge to Arjuna to a crow challenging a gan-
der. These subtales recall that the events of this parvan could not occur
without those that preface the Indravijaya-Upākhyāna, in which Śalya
72 See Custodi (2004, 204–263) on the constraints on gender transformation in this
upākhyāna.
73 Albeit charmingly, van Buitenen, typically (see nn. 28 and 67 above) finds this
upākhyāna “epigonic” and “absurd” (1978, 175, 178). While offering the convincing
formulation “I assume that it developed within the Mahābhārata” (176), he takes it
to have been added as “instant tradition” toward the end of the epic’s “half millen-
nium of . . . composition” (178). Along with his own “monologue intérieur” to account
for such a belated creation (177), he offers such erroneous or misleading statements
and details as: Rāma Jāmadagnya’s appearance in the story is “posthumous” (175);
King Drupada is “once more . . . sonless” (far more likely, Śikhaṇḍin is enough older
than Dhṛsṭạ dyumna and Draupadī to be among the “accursed brood” (dhig bandhūn;
1.155.3b; van Buitenen 1973, 316) of sons Drupada speaks of when he desires one who
will be up to killing Droṇa; and with five references to it elsewhere in the epic, the story
of Śikhaṇḍin’s sex change is “astonishingly underplayed” (1978, 176).
74 See Hiltebeitel (1984, 15 and n. 42), where I tried for the last time to develop
the notion of “background story” as a way to handle some of the issues raised by this
chapter: in particular, the relation of certain myths (mostly, however, not upākhyānas)
to certain parvans.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 163
promised Yudhisṭḥ ira that when Karṇa asked him to be his charioteer,
Śalya would undermine Karṇa’s confidence.
Book 12, the Śāntiparvan, begins to tell how Yudhisṭḥ ira, beset by
grief over all the warriors slain so that he could rule, is persuaded
by his family, counsellors (including Kṛsṇ ̣a, Nārada, and Vyāsa), and
Bhīsṃ a to give up his guilt-ridden aspirations to renunciation and
accept his royal duties. In its early going, Kṛsṇ ̣a contributes the Book’s
first three upākhyānas. At the capital, he recites two in a row: first,
a string of sixteen vignettes about ancient kings whose deaths were
also lamented, and then he and Nārada combine to deliver a death-
and-revival tale about a boy named “Excretor of Gold,” son of the lis-
tener to the sixteen vignettes, that briefly lightens Yudhisṭḥ ira’s mood.75
On the way to joining Bhīsṃ a at Kuruksẹ tra, Kṛsṇ ̣a then describes
Rāma Jāmadagnya’s 21 massacres of the Ksạ triyas there, answering
Yudhisṭḥ ira’s curiosity about how the warrior class kept regenerating.
For the rest, ten upākhyānas are dispersed through Bhīsṃ a’s multi-
genre instructions in the three anthologies on Rājadharma, “laws for
kings,” Āpaddharma, “law for times of distress,” and Moksạ dharma,
“norms concerning liberation” (upaparvans 84–86). Bhīsṃ a never
recites two in a row; in the Moksạ dharma one finds intervals of as
many as 64 (12.194 257) and 76 (12.264–339) adhyāyas between them.
Yet there is a striking pattern. Four of these upākhyānas confront the
Dharma King Yudhisṭḥ ira with “puzzle pieces” about dharma in which
lead characters are either his own father, the god Dharma, in disguise,
or figures who bear the word dharman/dharma in their names. More-
over, one such tale occurs as the last upākhyāna in each anthology.
Thus Dharma himself appears disguised in the Sumitra-Upākhyāna
or Ṛsạ bha Gītā near the end of the Rājadharma; a magnificent crane
bears the name Rājadharman in “The Story of the Ungrateful Brahman”
(Kṛtaghna-Upākhyāna) that ends the Āpaddharma; and, after Dharma
appears in another disguise in the Moksạ dharma’s first upākhyāna (the
Jāpaka-Upākhyāna), that subparvan ends with the story of a ques-
tioning Brahman named Dharmāraṇya, “Forest of Dharma,” who,
like Yudhisṭḥ ira at this juncture, has questions about the best prac-
tice to pursue toward gaining heaven—which turns out to be eating
only what is gleaned after grains and other food have been harvested
75 The way Vaiśampāyana sets the scene is remarkable, as are Kṛsṇ ̣a’s use of humor
(hāsyarasa) and Yudhisṭḥ ira’s momentary openness to it; see Hiltebeitel 2005d.
164 chapter six
(Uñchavṛtti-Upākhyāna). Yudhisṭḥ ira (and other careful listeners)
would be able to recall that Vyāsa himself had exalted the same prac-
tice, along with the merits of giving that meager fare to guests, toward
the end of Book 3 in the Mudgala-Upākhyāna. Moreover, since Book 3
ends with the “Firesticks Subtale” in which Dharma appears disguised
as a crane and a puzzle-posing Yaksạ , it would appear that one strain of
the epic’s upākhyānas carries a major subcurrent through such puzzle
pieces, especially in that they frequently punctuate the ends of major
units. Moreover, with one such story ending the Śāntiparvan, we have
reached the juncture mentioned earlier where Bhīsṃ a is launching his
only concentrated stretch of upākhyānas.
Book 13, the Anuśāsanaparvan, begins with Bhīsṃ a’s fourth anthol-
ogy, on Dānadharma, comprising his closing “further instructions”76
to Yudhisṭḥ ira on “the law of the gift” (upaparvan 87). Here we must
consider Fitzgerald’s hypothesis that the four anthologies demon-
strate decreasing “tautness” and increasing relaxation as the result
of “a progressive loosening of editorial integration” (2004a, 147–48)
over centuries, from the second century B.C.E. down to the fourth-to-
fifth century C.E. (114). Fitzgerald’s point is buttressed by the general
impression scholars have had that the Anuśāsanaparvan is loose and
late. R.N. Dandekar, the Critical Edition editor of this edition’s last-
to-be-completed parvan, perhaps puts it best:
The scope and nature of the contents of this parvan were such that
literally any topic under the sun could be broached and discussed in
it . . . This has resulted in poor Yudhisṭḥ ira being represented as putting
to his grandsire some of the most elementary questions—often without
rhyme or reason. Not infrequently, these questions serve as mere excuses
for introducing a legend or a doctrine fancied by the redactor, no mat-
ter if it has already occurred in an earlier part of the Epic, not once but
several times (1966, xlvii).
Even more pointedly Dandekar remarks, “Yudhisṭḥ ira’s questions are
mostly elementary in character and often show the questioner to be just
a simpleton.”77 No doubt Dandekar had the Bhaṅgāśvana-Upākhyāna
76 The PS makes this connection by calling the Dānadharmaparvan the Ānuśāsanika,
“Further Instruction,” at 1.2.65b.
77 Dandekar is quite insistent, going on: “the redactors must have seen in this parvan
perhaps their last opportunity to introduce into the epic various miscellaneous topics
which had occurred to them at the last moment” (idem, lxxiv–lxxv); and rephrases this
point in his Introduction to the Critical Notes (Anuśāsana vol. 2, 1051): “Some of the
questions put into Yudhisṭḥ ira’s mouth are so elementary that they show the venerable
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 165
principally in mind, in which Yudhisṭḥ ira, seemingly quite out of the
blue, asks, “in the act of coition, who derives the greater pleasure man
or woman” (13.12.1; Dandekar, 1966, lix), and thereby launches his
celibate grandfather Bhīsṃ a into a tale that makes the case that the
luckier ones are women. But Yudhisṭḥ ira is hardly a simpleton. He is
portrayed throughout as having an underlying guilelessness that sus-
tains him. The four anthologies repeatedly reinforce this trope (see
Hiltebeitel 2005d), but nowhere more pivotally than in the transition
from Book 12 to 13, which marks Yudhisṭḥ ira’s revived interest in
stories. He begins Book 13 stating that he is unable to regain peace
of mind, even after Book 12, “out of the conviction that he alone had
been responsible for the tragic catastrophe of the war,” and that he
feels “particularly unhappy at the pitiable condition” of Bhīsṃ a (Dan-
dekar, 1966, lvii–lviii). But once Bhīsṃ a reassures him in the opening
“Dialogue (saṃvāda) Between Death, Gautamī, and Others” that fault
is multiple and, as regards the war, certainly not his alone, Yudhisṭḥ ira
replies, “O grandsire, wisest of men, you who are learned in all the
treatises, I have listened to this great narrative (ākhyāna), O fore-
most of the intelligent. I desire to hear a little more narrated by you
in connection with dharma, O king. You are able to narrate it to me.
Tell me if any householder has ever succeeded in conquering Mṛtyu
(Death) by the practice of dharma” (13.2.1–3). This appeal launches
Book 13’s first upākhyāna, the Sudarśana-Upākhyāna, on how, by fol-
lowing the “the law of treating guests” (atithidharma),78 Death may
indeed be overcome—a tale that reveals that the divine guest through
whom a householder can overcome Death by showing him unstinting
hospitality79—even to the point of offering him his wife—is Dharma
king to be a naive person. They make one wonder if Yudhisṭḥ ira had not learnt even
commonplace things in the course of his long and eventful life.”
78 Dandekar (1966, lviii) supplies this compound. The text speaks of atithipūja,
“honoring or worshiping guests” (13.2.68–69, 91), as does the Uñchavṛtti-Upākhyāna
just before it (12.347.3) ending the Mokṣadharma, and the Kapota-Upākhyāna
(12.142.39–40, 143.8) in the Āpaddharrna. Cf. atithi-vratin, one who is “devoted to
guests,” in the Mudgala-Upākhyāna (3.246.4 and 15).
79 The atithi is not just an ordinary guest (abhyāgata) but, etymologically, “one who
has no fixed day in coming” (Monier-Williams [1899] 1964, 14), that is, an uninvited and
“date-less” (a-tithi) guest. Thus Ganguli’s delightful note on the Uñchavrṭti-Upākhyāna:
“the word ‘atithi’ which is rendered ‘guest’ here and elsewhere, means a person who
enters without invitation the abode of a householder. Such an individual is adorable.
All the deities reside in his person. He is supposed to favor the householder by giving
him an opportunity of performing rites of hospitality. . . . [But] he cannot expect to be
served with food till the householder has done his best for serving him as sumptuously
166 chapter six
himself.80 This would be a clever, beautiful, and relieving—yet also
provocative81—revelation to Dharma’s son Yudhisṭḥ ira, who, just
after hearing the Moksạ dharma on “the norms of liberation,” which
he knows cannot really be for him if he is to rule, hears a story that
points the way to understanding how he can still overcome death by
cultivating the generosity of a gifting royal householder. Indeed, if we
follow Yudhisṭḥ ira’s train of thought from hearing the Sudarśana-
Upākhyāna to his unexpected question, the latter may not be so out
of the blue after all, but a ‘jolt of sexuality” like those centered on the
wife that Jamison (1996, 96, 283 n. 221) finds energizing the struc-
tures of Brahmanic rituals—and a timely reminder to Draupadī of the
pleasures Yudhisṭḥ ira would like to think she once enjoyed and, who
knows, could enjoy again. For what lies ahead for the Pāṇḍavas and
Draupadī but the rest of their householder lives together? Indeed, in a
telling case of what I have elsewhere called pacing (2005c), we do not
learn that Draupadī has been present for Bhīsṃ a’s battlefield oration
until this main run of upākhyānas is over and Draupadī joins the four
younger Pāṇḍavas in voicing approval at Yudhisṭḥ ira’s new determi-
nation to forego asceticism and end his disgust at the householder life
(13.57.42–44).
Why is Bhīsṃ a unbottled like this at this juncture?82 Granted that
the Dānadharmaparvan is relatively loose and likely late to the point
of including entries down to “the last moment,” it need be no later
than its literary unfolding within the Mahābhārata’s primary arche-
as possible. . . . Hence, by the time the food is placed before him, the guest becomes
very hungry” ([1884–96] 1970, vol. 10, 630 n. 1 [second ellipsis Ganguli’s]). My thanks
to Balaji Hebbar for pointing out the abhyāgata/atithi distinction.
80 At the very moment Sudarśana arrives home to hear Dharma’s report from the
bedroom that he is there with his wife, Death (Mṛtyu) is standing over Sudarśana with
a concealed iron mallet (kūtamudgara; 13.2.66) to test his reaction. A study of the inter-
activities between Yama, Mṛtyu, Kāla, and Dharma in the epics would be revealing.
81 Indeed, both discussants might have things to ponder here. Yudhisṭḥ ira would
know that he owes his very birth and rule to the fact that his father Pāṇḍu gave his
mother Kuntī to Dharma first among the gods he selected to sire his sons, and might
also ponder whether he gave his own wife Draupadī to dharma at the dice match;
and Bhīsṃ a now prolongs his life on a bed of arrows, overcoming death to this extent
thanks to a boon given by his father for renouncing marriage—a sort of gift of his wife
to the dharma of his father.
82 For the stretch from 12.340 to 13.51, Bhīsṃ a recounts upākhyānas at a clip of 35
out of 64 adhyāyas or 54.7%. By the same rough measure, that contrasts with 64 out
of 450 adhyāyas or 14.22% over the four anthologies as a whole: about the same clip
as that for upākhyānas in the epic at large (see at nn. 40 and 41).
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 167
typal design. The four anthologies get more and more relaxed from one
to the next because the interlocutors do as well. In the Dānadharma
they are at last beginning to enjoy themselves, to put the war behind
them, to treasure the dwindling light of leisure they still have to raise
questions and delight in stories on the bank of the Gaṅgā before
Gaṅgā’s son Bhīsṃ a puts his learned life behind him. Cutting away
for Vaiśampāyana to describe the scene to Janamejaya, we hear, amid
praise of the Gaṅgā, how 45 celestial seers arrive to tell stories (kathās)
“related to Bhīsṃ a” (13.27.10), stories that cheer one and all—even at
the seers’ parting, when Yudhisṭḥ ira touches Bhīsṃ a’s feet with his
head “at the end of a story (kathānte)” (13.27.17) and returns to his
questioning, which leads Bhīsṃ a to tell him the Mataṅga-Upākhyāna.83
This anticipatory theme of not ending at the end of a story, of keeping
the story going with a new story, comes up again when Bhīsṃ a winds
up the Vipula-Upākhyāna by telling how Mārkaṇḍeya had formerly
told it to him “in the interval of a story (kathāntare) on Gaṅgā’s bank”
(13.43.17). It is as if living in ongoing stories along side the salvific river
is a main current in Yudhisṭḥ ira’s atonement, and that after the rela-
tive dialogical and śāstric stringency of the three Śāntiparvan antholo-
gies, it is good to get back to upākhyānas in “The Book of the Further
Instruction.” This bears further on the matter raised by Dandekar
of returning to stories “no matter if’ they have “already occurred.”
When Bhīsṃ a and Yudhisṭḥ ira return to such stories—most notably
the Viśvāmitra-Upākhyāna (13.3–4) with its familiar cast of revolv-
ing characters (Viśvāmitra, Vasisṭḥ a, Jamadagni, Rāma Jāmadagnya,
etc.)84—it is from a new and different angle and, as always with any
story, from the pleasure of hearing it again. There is thus a stronger
case to be made for reading Books 12 and 13, whole and in sequence,
as part of the Mahābhārata’s total design and earliest inspiration, than
a developmental anthology-by-anthology approach allows. As the return
to upākhyānas indicates, Book 13 goes well beyond the rules of transfor-
mation that Fitzgerald offers as explanation for such a progression.
With Book 14, the Āśvamedhikaparvan, Yudhisṭḥ ira, now adding
Bhīsṃ a’s demise to his guilt over the war, agrees to perform a sin-
cleansing Horse Sacrifice at Vyāsa and Kṛsṇ ̣a’s bidding. While the
83 On which see the discussion below at nn. 97–98 in connection with the
Rāmāyaṇa.
84 See Sukthankar (1936, 45): “the third repetition of the birth of Jamadagni,” etc.
168 chapter six
Pāṇḍavas prepare for it, Kṛsṇ ̣a wants to see his people at Dvārakā,
and on the way meets the sage Uttaṅka for the multistoried Uttaṅka-
Upākhyāna. Arjuna then has many adventures guarding the horse. But
immediately upon the rite’s completion an angry half-golden blue-eyed
mongoose appears from his hole to disparage the grand ceremony as
inferior to a gleaner’s hospitality to a ravenous guest. With this incident
comes the Mahābhārata’s final upākhyāna: this time a double puzzle
piece that reveals the mongoose to have been Dharma in disguise
when testing the “pure gift” (śuddha dāna; 14.93.57) of the gleaner,
an uñchavṛtti Brahman; but before that, Dharma had been Anger
(Krodha) as a mysterious guest who tested the absence of anger in
the Ṛsị Jamadagni and been cursed by the latter’s ancestors to become
the mongoose. It addresses the question of whether a king’s giving to
Brahmans and others in sacrifice is comparable to the gleaner’s “pure
gift,” done with devotion and faith and without anger, to Dharma,
that ever-demanding guest who would harbor not only this trace of
anger but, from his Mahābhārata debut, the “functional” identity of
Yama. Again, a major unit ends with an upākhyāna puzzle piece on
this theme of dharma’s disguises. Moreover, it brings to culmination
the cycle of substories about gleaners with the hungry guest finally
being not just Durvāsas but Dharma—who will have one remaining
disguise by which to test Yudhisṭḥ ira in the last adhyāya of the epic’s
penultimate Book 17: that of the dog whom Yudhisṭḥ ira, because of
his “non-cruelty” (ānṛśaṃsyam; 17.3.7d), will refuse to abandon even
at the cost of heaven. Yet this last lesson is not really finished until
Yudhisṭḥ ira curses dharma/Dharma out of anger (18.2.42–45) at see-
ing Duryodhana in heaven, which brings home the mongoose’s last
lesson about how even Dharma leaves his anger behind him. Just so,
as Yudhisṭḥ ira puts his human feelings behind him, he bathes in the
heavenly Gaṅgā and becomes “freed of enmity” (18.3.26–27, 38–40).
Here Dharma, finally in his own form, reveals in this final third test
of Yudhisṭḥ ira’s human heart that he had earlier been the one testing
him as the Yaksạ and the dog.85
Clearly this beginning of a thematic analysis of the underlying val-
ues or messages of the Mahābhārata’s upākhyānas takes us beyond
our earlier classification of their content by their primary protagonists.
Although a fuller discussion of such values is beyond the scope of
85 See Hiltebeitel (2001a, 272–275) on this sequence.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 169
this chapter, it is possible, at least as regards that chief and raptest of
upākhyāna aficionados, Yudhisṭḥ ira, to make the following observa-
tion. Ānṛśaṃsya, non-cruelty, is a value that he hears a good deal about
in the upākhyānas of Book 3,86 but not in the upākhyānas of Books 12
and 13 until Bhīsṃ a mentions it to him again in the Sudarśana
Upākhyāna (13.2.16) at the beginning of Book 13. There, where it is
related through one of Dharma’s disguises to the values of hospital-
ity and the angerless generosity of the pure gift, I would propose that
we have a tying together of an important value nexus from which we
could consider such other important upākhyāna themes as friendship,87
hospitality,88 and ingratitude (no. 49) that this chapter has largely left
aside, and further, begin to explore the question of how this nexus
might relate to bhakti in ways that would help us to differentiate the
Mahābhārata from the Rāmāyaṇa in, among other things, the ways
they use subtales.
Subtale Material in the Rāmāyaṇa
From the Rāmāyaṇa’s seven books, only a few matters bear sum-
mary in any detail: the stories of great Ṛsịs who are the subject of
upākhyānas in the Mahābhārata; and the relation of these Ṛsịs to
other Ṛsịs, including Vālmīki. Attention will thus be restricted to por-
tions of Books 1–4, 6 and 7.
Book 1, the Bālakaṇḍa, opens, as we have seen, with the upodghāta,
which leads into a description of the Iksṿ āku dynasty, narrowing
down to the one defect in the long reign of its current monarch,
Daśaratha: he is sonless. At this time the Gods and Ṛsịs are alarmed
by Rāvaṇa, who harasses the Ṛsịs in their hermitages. With the help
of a descendant of the sage Kaśyapa named Ṛśyaśṛṅga (whose story is
told in the Mahābhārata’s Ṛśyaśṛṅga-Upākhyāna), Daśaratha’s three
wives bear four sons, all partial incarnations of Visṇ ̣u. Once the boys
86 In Nala at 367.15; in the Pativratā-Upākhyāna at 3.198.87, 203.41, and 206.33;
and in the “Firesticks-Subtale” at 3.297.55, 71 (doubly), and 74, and 298. See Hiltebeitel
(2001a, 202–214, 230–231, 268–270).
87 Notable in upākhyānas 48 (Kapota) and 49 (Kṛtaghna).
88 See nn. 78 and 79 above. The guest/hospitality theme figures prominently in
the upākhyānas of Books 12 and 13: notably in numbers 48 (Kapota), 49 (Kṛtaghna),
51 (Cirakāri), 54 (Uñchavṛtti), 55 (Sudarśana) and 65 (Kitạ ), as also in number 67
(Nakula) in Book 14. For its still wider range, see Jamison (1996) and Parida (2004,
as cited in n. 27 above.
170 chapter six
start their Vedic education, the Ṛsị Viśvāmitra (whose story is told
in the Mahābhārata’s Vasisṭ ḥ a- and Viśvāmitra-Upākhyānas and is
mentioned in the Vītahavya-Upākhyāna) arrives. He demands that
Daśaratha allow Rāma and Laksṃ aṇa to accompany him into the for-
est, and is supported by the Ṛsị Vasisṭḥ a. Viśvāmitra teaches the pair
divine weapons and prepares them for a Rāksạ sa encounter. Viśvāmitra
then mentions that King Janaka of Mithilā will be performing a sacri-
fice at which a great bow will be presented as a test of strength.
Along the way to Mithilā, Viśvāmitra tells stories: the last of
them about Ahalyā. Cursed by her husband, the Ṛsị Gautama, for
being seduced by Indra (a story told in the Mahābhārata’s Cirakāri-
Upākhyāna and alluded to in its Indravijaya-Upākhyāna at 5.2.6), she
is redeemed by Rāma’s arrival at their hermitage—a cautionary tale
about marriage and sexuality (Sutherland Goldman, 2004, 72) before
Rāma learns more about Janaka’s sacrifice. Janaka’s minister Śatānanda
then tells Rāma the story of Viśvāmitra’s former rivalry with Vasisṭḥ a—
how Viśvāmitra elevated himself from Ksạ triya to Brahman after being
shamed by the bad results of trying to steal Vasisṭḥ a’s cow (a topic,
again, of the Māhābhārata’s Vasisṭ ḥ a-Upākhyāna [Mbh 1.165]).
Janaka’s sacrifice turns out to be Sītā’s “self-choice” of a h usband,
where Rāma wins Sītā by breaking a bow of Śiva. To unite the houses
further, Janaka provides wives for Rāma’s brothers. Viśvāmitra departs
and along the way back to Ayodhyā Rāma is confronted by Rāma
Jāmadagnya, who appears repeatedly in the Mahābhārata, notably in the
Kārtavīrya-[Mbh 3.115–117],89 Rāma-(Jāmadagnya),90 and Viśvāmitra-
Upākhyānas. Indeed, the Rāmāyaṇa knows the Mahābhārata story of
Rāma Jāmadagnya’s effacement of the Ksạ triyas as something that hap-
pened “long ago” (pūrvam), which worries Vasisṭḥ a and other sages in
the return party in case he has come to eliminate Rāma Dāśarathi as
well (1.73.19–20). This older Brahman Rāma blocks the new Ksạ triya
Rāma’s path and demands that he break a bow of Visṇ ̣u—which Rāma
does, making the older Rāma yield. The young couples then return to
Ayodhyā.
Ṛśyaśṛṅga’s contribution to the four brothers’ births, the stories told
along the way by and about Viśvāmitra, and the encounter with Rāma
89 Also called the Jāmadagnya-Upākhyāna.
90 12.48–49; I insert “Jāmadagnya” in parentheses to distinguish this upākhyāna
from the Rāma-Upākhyāna about Rāma Dāśarathi, but the colophons give both of
them the name Rāma-Upākhyāna.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 171
Jāmadagnya, have, like other Ṛsị stories in the Rāmāyaṇa, often been
viewed as “purāṇa”-style (i.e., late) “digressions” or “interpolations”
because they depart from a straightforward Rāma saga.91 But this view
overlooks an emerging pattern. The sequence of Ṛsịs—Ṛśyaśṛṅga (a
descendant of Kaśyapa), Vasisṭḥ a, Viśvāmitra, Gautama (with Ahalyā),92
and Rāma Jāmadagnya (son of Jamadagni)—has linked Rāma’s early
years to sages from five of the eight great Brahman gotras or lineages
whose eponymous ancestors are connected with the composition of
the older books of the Ṛg Veda and regarded as the main pravara
Ṛsịs—the ones to whom all Brahman families make invocation (pra-
vara) when they give their line of descent.93 Let us note further that
this material is less purāṇa-like than Mahābhārata-like; it often folds
within the Rāmāyaṇa’s one main story material that the Mahābhārata
treats in its upākhyānas.
Book 2, the Ayodhyākāṇḍa, builds up to the forest banishment
of Rāma, accompanied by Sītā and Laksṃ aṇa. Crossing the Gaṅgā,
the trio heads toward their first destination, the hermitage of the Ṛsị
Bharadvāja. When Rāma asks Bharadvāja to “think of some good
site for an āśrama in a secluded place,” the seer directs them to
Mount Citrakūtạ , “a meritorious place frequented by the great Ṛsịs”
(2,48.25).
When Bharata learns what has happened, he affirms the Iksṿ ākus’
custom of primogeniture, tells his deputies that he rather than Rāma
will fulfill the terms of exile, and orders them to prepare an army to
help him bring Rāma back. Following the same route, Bharata reaches
Bharadvāja’s ashram. Bharadvāja tests him, conjuring up a feast for the
army and a royal palace for him. Bharata rejects the royal seat, fore-
shadowing his stewardship of Rāma’s throne. Having seen Bharata’s
91 See Goldman (1984, 60) endorsing, especially with reference to the Rṣ́ yaśrṇ ġ a epi-
sode, long held views of the “purānic’ quality of the Bālakaṇda, as contrasted with the
more ‘epic’ quality of Books Two through Six.” Cf. Brockington (1998, 132), for whom
“the Ṛśyaśṛṅga episode probably has an independent origin,” and the Bhārgava Rāma
encounter is an “interpolated” “grotesque story” (478–479). In another Brockington
study, the Bharadvāja and Agastya episodes are “examples of interpolated episodes”
(2000a, 299). Cf. Lefeber (1994, 346 and 349) on the Niśākara episode’s “late” and
“decidedly purāṇic type of story.”
92 Śatānanda is also a Gautama, providing a male presence from this family that the
story told does not provide.
93 See Hiltebeitel 2009 for a fuller treatment of this pattern as a “map” through
the text, with discussion of the substitutions of Ṛśyaśṛṅga for Kaśyapa and Rāma
Jāmadagnya for Jamadagni.
172 chapter six
worthiness, Bharadvāja again gives directions to Citrakūtạ . There, after
long discussion, Bharata agrees to be regent for the duration of Rāma’s
exile.
Soon sensing disquiet among the Citrakūtạ Ṛsịs. Rāma learns that
Rāvaṇa’s younger brother Khara has been cannibalizing ascetics in
nearby Janasthāna. The sages retreat to a safer āśrama and Rāma
moves on to the āśrama of Atri, where Atri’s wife Anasūyā tells Sītā
the duties of a faithful wife and gives her apparel and jewels.94 Rāma
gets his next directions from the ascetics there, who recommend, all
other routes being treacherous, “the path through the forest that the
great Ṛsịs use when they go to gather fruits” (111.19). With this close
of Book 2, adding Bharadvāja and Atri, Rāma has now been linked
with seven of the eight pravara Ṛsịs or their descendants. These origi-
nal seven, who together constitute the northern constellation of the
Seven Ṛsịs (Big Dipper), have pointed Rāma south.
The first line of Book 3, the Araṇyakāṇḍa, finds the trio entering
the “vast wilderness” of Daṇḍaka. As they move on from a circle of
āśramas, the Rāksạ sa Virādha looms before them and seizes Sītā.
Pained by seeing her touched, Rāma fills Virādha with arrows and
the brothers each break off an arm to release her. Virādha realizes
he has been slain by Rāma, which relieves him from a curse. Before
going to heaven, he tells Rāma that the great Ṛsị Śarabhaṅga “will see
to your welfare” (3.3.22–23). Śarabhaṅga relays Rāma to the hermit-
age of Sutīksṇ ̣a, who offers his āśrama as a residence; but Rāma says
he might kill the local game. The trio lives happily for 10 years in
another circle of hermitages before returning to Sutīksṇ ̣a (10.21–26).
Storytellers have now told Rāma about Agastya’s āśrama and he asks
Sutīksṇ ̣a how to find it in so vast a forest (29–30). Sutīksṇ ̣a heads him
due south, and along the way Rāma tells Laksṃ aṇa stories told about
Agastya that also occur in the Mahābhārata’s Agastya-Upākhyāna.
Rāma intends to live out the remainder of his exile with Agastya (Rām
3.10.86), but Agastya, after meditating a moment, says that he knows
Rāma’s true desire and directs him to a lovely forest called Pañcavatị̄
near the Godāvarī River where Sītā will be comfortable and Rāma can
protect her while safeguarding the ascetics (12.12–20). These words of
94 On this theme, see Hiltebeitel 1980–1981. The articles given by Anasūyā are
additional to those given to Sītā by Daśaratha to cover the bark that Kaikeyī has con-
temptuously given Sītā to wear over her silk (2.33.5–12; 34.15–18).
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 173
the eighth, last, and southernmost of the great pravara Ṛsịs resound
with forebodings, as does the trio’s meeting on the way to Pancavatị̄
with the vulture Jatạ̄ yus, who offers to keep watch over Sītā whenever
Rāma and Laksṃ aṇa are away. However kindly, a vulture is normally
a bad omen (3.22.4). At Pañcavatị̄, the trio is soon visited by Rāvaṇa’s
sister Śūrpaṇakhā, and there, after one thing leads to another, Sītā is
carried off by Rāvaṇa while Jātạ yus is sleeping (3.48.1). Once Rāvaṇa
has met Jatạ yus’s challenge and picked Sītā up to continue on his way,
Brahmā, seeing this outrage with his divine eye, says, “What is done
was to be done,” and the Daṇḍaka Forest Ṛsịs are “thrilled” (prahṛsṭ ạ̄ ḥ)
at the same sight (50.10–11).
Jatạ̄ yus, unwinged after his fight with Rāvaṇa, soon tells the brothers
before he dies that Rāvaṇa abducted Sītā and went south. The brothers
head south on an “untrodden path” (3.65.2), passing into the Krauñca
Forest, still hoping to find Sītā. Instead they run into a Dānava-turned-
Rāksạ sa, Kabandha: “Headless trunk,” but also a name for a sacrificial
post. He guards the way past him as Virādha did for the Daṇḍaka
Forest at this Book’s beginning (and as Kirmīra and the Yaksạ do at
the beginning and end of the Mahābhārata’s Book 3). Kabandha is a
headless torso with a single-eyed95 face in his stomach, a huge devour-
ing mouth, and long grabbing arms that suddenly seize the brothers,
who quickly sever them. Realizing that this amputation by Rāma ends
a long curse, Kabandha tells his story, and after Rāma has asked if he
knows anything about Rāvaṇa and has cremated the demon, Kabandha
rises lustrously from his pyre to say that Rāvaṇa’s abode may be found
if Rāma allies with the monkey Sugrīva, whom Rāma should quickly
make a friend and “commiserator” (vayasva). Kabandha then directs
them to Sugrīva’s haunt on Mount Ṛsỵ amūka. This path takes them
through Mataṅga’s Wood to Mataṅga’s āśrama, where all the Ṛsịs
have passed away except the “mendicant woman” Śabarī (“the Tribal
Woman”). As Śabarī soon corroborates, Mataṅga and his disciples
ascended to heaven just when Rāma reached Citrakūtạ , but Śabarī has
awaited Rāma’s arrival so that she can go to heaven after seeing him.
For this, Rāma permits her to enter fire (70.26)—indexing an associa-
tion between fire-entry and purification that will also apply to Sītā.
95 So too Dharma as the Yaksạ . One might connect this with their penetrating
insight into what Rāma and Yudhisṭḥ ira need for their next adventures: friendship
with Sugrīva and the heart of the dice.
174 chapter six
Book 4, the Kisḳ indhākāṇḍa, then begins with Rāma exploring
Mount Ṛsỵ amūka, being met by Hanumān, and making Sugrīva his
friend and commiserator just as Kabandha had advised.96 In offering
to find Sītā, Sugrīva expresses a one-sided willingness to die for his
bond with Rāma (8.9), and begins to give his side of a story that Vālin
wronged him, which Rāma accepts even before fully hearing it and
promises to kill Vālin. The first part of Sugrīva’s tale concerns his fall-
ing out with Vālin after Vālin had killed the demon Māyāvin, which
Rāma accepts without question. But behind this story lies another
by which Sugrīva discloses why Mount Ṛsỵ amūka provides him asy-
lum. Māyāvin opposed Vālin because he had killed Māyāvin’s older
brother, “a buffalo named Dundubhi” (4.11.7), whom Vālin crushed
until blood oozed from his ears, hurling away the carcass. But “blood
drops from the wounds fell out from its mouth and were lifted by the
wind toward Mataṅga’s hermitage” (41). There Mataṅga cursed Vālin
to be unable to enter his Wood on pain of death. Sugrīva now points
to Dundubhi’s bones, which Rāma kicks off to a great distance with
just his big toe. Mataṅga’s departure thus defines his hermitage, along
with Mount Ṛsỵ amūka, as a place cursed for its pollution. Albeit that
Mataṅga is a Ṛsị, he is not a Vedic Ṛsị or even a Brahman. Rather,
just as Śabarī’s name denotes the Tribal, his denotes the Untouchable.
As with the Mahābhārata’s Mataṅga-Upākhyāna,97 Dundubhi’s kill-
ing has behind it a buffalo sacrifice—a quite archaic one, with death
by wrestling rather than the sword—in which this “untouchable Ṛsị”
takes on the pollution of this non-Vedic villagey rite.98
96 In precise detail: Kabandha had advised, “Quickly make him a comrade (vayasya),
having gone there now, Rāghava, sealing your compact in the presence of blazing fire
to shun all trickery” (3.68.13); and now, “Sugrīva and Rāghava entered into vayasya by
reverently circling the blazing fire” (4.5.16). This fairly unusual term vayasya, literally
meaning “contemporary” but used only by Vālmīki in the sense of “commiserator”
or “sympathizer,” will continue to define Rāma and Sugrīva’s bond. I note Vāmīki’s
unique development of Sugrīva’s and Rāma’s friendship around this “sentiment” (which
is not to be found in the Rāmopākhyana) in Hiltebeitel 2010a.
97 There a she-ass discloses the unwelcome news to the young Mataṅga, who thinks
himself a Brahman, that because his Brahman mother slept with a Śūdra barber he is by
birth a Caṇḍāla or Untouchable, and Mataṅga spends the rest of his days doing tapas,
unsuccessfully, to become a Brahman (13.30.13–14). It would seem that he cannot be
the same Mataṅga: being denied brāhmaṇya by Indra, he would likely be denied the
possibility of being a Ṛsị.
98 A myth linked with the village buffalo sacrifice in Karnataka shows that an old
nexus may link the stories of these two Mataṅgas: Back in the Tretā Yuga when all of
south India was under the rule of Rāvaṇa and Brahmans had to perform ceremonies
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 175
Rāma thus forges his friendship with Sugrīva in a place that is both
cursed and beyond the range of the Vedic Ṛsịs, who up to now have
marked his trail. On the one hand, since leaving Agastya, Rāma’s inter-
ventions have brought grace and salvation to Kabandha, Śabarī, and
Vālin, and a timetable for Mataṅga to have vacated his hermitage and
go to heaven before Rāma’s arrival—of these, only Mataṅga is thus
denied Rāma’s saving presence. On the other, since meeting Jatạ̄ yus
and the cannibal-post Kabandha, Rāma has met only impure or inaus-
picious beings, including monkeys (according to Sītā when she first
sees Hanumān and thinks she is dreaming, “a monkey in a dream is
held by all the śāstras to be inauspicious” [5.30.4; similarly 32.21]). This
pattern recurs toward the end of Book 4, where one learns that 8,000
years earlier (4.59.9), the Ṛsị Niśākara (“Night-Maker”) welcomed
Jatạ̄ yus’s vulture brother Sampāti, wingless after a misadventure, to
his āśrama where wild animals—bears, deer, tigers, lions, elephants,
and snakes—surrounded him as they would a benefactor (dātṛ). Like
Mataṅga, he went to heaven rather than wait to see Rāma (61.15), and,
although he could have restored Sampāti’s wings, he left him wingless
so he would have to stay on the spot until it was time to benefit Rāma.
Sampāti is thus there to see the monkey search party that is looking
for Sītā in the south stop and think of fasting to death because they
have failed to find her. Thinking better of eating this tempting prey,
Sampāti tells the monkeys that he and his son saw Rāvaṇa taking Sītā
in secret, a Brāhmaṇī discovered that her husband and his relatives were meat-eating
and liquor-imbibing Untouchables, and that her own two daughters shared their fare.
Before submitting herself to flames and becoming the village goddess, she cut off her
husband’s penis and put it in his mouth, making him the prototype victim of the buffalo
sacrifice at which his maternal uncle would become the Potrāj charged with bearing off
the rite’s pollution, and his younger brother Gavanġ a the chief of the Ranigya musician-
choristers (Āsādis) charged with reviling the goddess with abusive songs—all of which
would take place with participation of Brahmans and local landlords in the place of
Ksạ triyas (see Elliot 1821–1860, vol. 2, 675–681 for this rich and little known version
summarized in Hiltebeitel [1982b], 88–91 and 109 nn. 81–2). The Rāmāyaṇa’s Matanġ a
is thus like the Potrāj a handler of the impurity of a buffalo sacrifice (see Hiltebeitel,
1980c, 200–223). And the Mahābhārata’s Mataṅga becomes a kind of chorister, for
after he fails to become a Brahman, he asks Indra to be able to rove at pleasure through
the heavens honored by Brahmans and Ksạ triyas and able to assume any form at will,
and Indra gives him the boon of becoming Chandodeva, God of chandas verses, and
of being adored by women (Mbh 13.30. 13–14).
176 chapter six
to Laṅkā—a vulture-Ṛsi collaboration that thus cues Hanumān’s leap
to Laṅkā.99
In the Yuddhakāṇḍa (Book 6), Rāvaṇa seems unable to focus
on Rāma or the war until his wise maternal grandfather Mālyavān,
counseling peace with Rāma and Sītā’s return, says the gods and Ṛsịs
desire Rāma’s victory, differentiates dharma and adharma as divine
and demonic, alludes to the Mahābhārata idea (see Biardeau, 1976,
155–171) that the king defines the age (yuga), says that throughout the
regions the Ṛsịs are performing fiery Vedic rites and austerities that are
damaging the Rāksạ sas, foresees the Rāksạ sas’ destruction, and con-
cludes, “I think Rāma is Visṇ ̣u abiding in a human body” (6.26.6–31),
Getting it right, Mālyavān calls attention to the Ṛsịs’ labors to affect
the war’s outcome and provides analogs to features of the Bhagavad
Gītā: a theology for the war about to happen; a prediction of its out-
come; and a disclosure of the hidden divinity behind it—in this case,
hidden so far mainly from himself.
Once the war is won and Rāma has accepted Sītā after her fire ordeal,
after finally learning that he is Visṇ ̣u, everyone (monkeys and Rāksạ sas
included) heads toward Ayodhyā on the Pusp̣ aka chariot, stopping
along the way at Bharadvāja’s āśrama where Bharadvāja recounts the
trio’s whole adventure, which he knows by his penances (6.112.14).
Rāma is at last enthroned in the presence of his rejoicing family and
people and the monkeys, Rāksạ sas, and Ṛsịs. Twice it is said that he
ruled for 10,000 years (82, 90), the second time in this Book’s very last
words—surely sounding like a happy ending, as many western schol-
ars and some Indian vernaculars have taken Book 6 to be.
But the Uttarakāṇḍa (Book 7) opens with Rāma just consecrated
and a series of departures and dismissals. First, the Ṛsịs come to
his palace—Agastya and the original Seven among them (7.1.3–4).
Rāma asks about the Rāksạ sas he conquered, launching their former
near-neighbor Agastya on a lengthy Rāksạ sa genealogy, with tales of
Rāvaṇa’s boon and his violations of women, including what some
99 It is interesting that Nightmaker points the way to Laṅkā, since Hanumān’s leap
to Laṅkā follows a route “adorned with planets, constellations, the moon, the sun, and
all the hosts of stars . . . thronged with hosts of great seers” (Goldman and Sutherland
Goldman, 1996, 112, translating 5.1.161). One wonders whether the animals that went
around (parīvārya upagacchanti; 5.59.15c) Niśākara’s āśrama do not hint at the constel-
lations. Cf. n. 57 above on Niśākara, whose knowledge of Rāma’s future from “of old”
might suggest that it had been “in the stars.” On Lank̇ ā as an “astronomical conundrum”
and location, see Hiltebeitel 1999a, 89–90 and nn. 5 and 6, 93–94 and n. 18.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 177
Northern manuscripts call the Vedavatī-Upākhyāna (7.17) (see above
n. 32). Rāma is repeatedly filled with wonder. Then “all the Ṛsịs went
as they came” (36.46). Rāma also dispatches a hundred kings, and the
Rāksạ sas, monkeys, and bears—Hanumān parting with the famous
words: “As long as I hear Rāma-kathā on the face of the earth, so
long will my breaths reside in my body” (39.16). Next Rāma dismisses
the Pusp̣ aka chariot while keeping it on call. And next he dismisses
Sītā who will not remain on call. All these dismissals subtract down to
a great unraveling.
After some happiness between Rāma and Sītā, there comes the
news that Ayodhyā’s citizens gossip about her time in captivity, and
Rāma banishes her to protect his royal reputation even after she has
announced that she is pregnant. Painfully, Laksṃ ana leaves her at
Vālmīki’s hermitage. Next Rāma hears that there are still some ascetics
who live in fear of a Rāksạ sa named Lavaṇa. Śatrughna goes to tackle
Lavaṇa, and stops over in Vālmīki’s leafy hut on the night Sītā gives
birth to the twins.100 At dawn he resumes his journey,101 kills Lavaṇa,
and establishes a kingdom at Mathurā. Twelve years later he decides
to visit Ayodhyā. On the way, in a passage rejected by the Critical Edi-
tion even though it appears in all the manuscripts collated, he stops at
Vālmīki’s, overhears the twins’ elegant recitals, and promises that he
and his army will keep their birth secret (7, Appendix 1, no. 9; Shah,
1975, 26–27). When Śatrughna sees Rāma, he mentions nothing about
Vālmīki, Sītā, or the twins.
Finding himself once again in Agastya’s hermitage after going by
the Pusp̣ aka to behead the Śūdra Śambūka, Rāma listens to more
of Agastya’s stories,102 and returns to Ayodhyā, again dismissing the
Pusp̣ aka. He now tells Bharata and Laksṃ aṇa he wishes to perform
a Rājasūya sacrifice, but Bharata tells him a horse sacrifice is less
destructive and Laksṃ aṇa that the Aśvamedha removes all sins and
purifies (75.2). Rāma approves the Aśvamedha. He orders Laksṃ aṇa
to make invitations to the monkeys and Rāksạ sas, and to the regional
Ṛsịs and their wives, and to prepare a vast sacrificial enclosure in the
100 Earlier that evening he hears Vālmīki tell what some Northern manuscripts call
the Saudāsa-Upākhyāna (7.57).
101 Stopping at an āśrama on the Yamunā, he hears from Cyavana what some
Northern manuscripts call the Mandhātṛ-Upākhyāna (7.59).
102 Including what some Northern manuscripts call the Śveta-Upākhyāna (7.69),
which builds up to an account of the Daṇḍaka Forest.
178 chapter six
Naimisạ Forest. Bharata is to lead a procession trailed by all the moth-
ers from the inner apartments and “my golden wife (kāñcanīm mama
patnīm) worthy of consecration (dīksạ̄ ) in sacrificial rites” (19). Sītā
thus has a replacement-statue even while still alive.103 With the sac-
rifice proceeding, Vālmīki suddenly arrives with his disciples (84.1)
and directs the twins to sing “the whole Rāmāyaṇa poem at the
gate of Rāma’s dwelling” (3–5)—20 sargas a day (9). Rāma hears the
boys sing the first twenty sargas beginning “from the sight of Nārada
(nārada-darśanāt)” (11)—that is, from the beginning of the upodghāta
on. Once the twins tell Rāma who authored this poem that contains
his whole adventure (19), they offer to continue singing it at inter-
vals in the rite (21). After many days, Rāma recognizes them, misses
Sītā, and summons her to attest to her purity by oath in the midst of
the great Ṛsịs, Rāksạ sas, and monkeys, plus unnamed kings and the
four castes in thousands (87.6–7). But when Vālmīki brings Sītā he
attests to her purity himself (19), and tells Rāma only that “she will
give proof of her fidelity” (15, 20). No longer demanding the oath
just announced, Rāma accepts Vālmīki’s word as tantamount to being
Sītā’s: “Surely I have proof of fidelity in your stainless words. Surely
Vaidehī gave proof of fidelity formerly in the presence of the gods”
(88.2–3)—who by now have also come to witness (5–7). Indeed, in
a phrase that occurs nowhere else in either epic, this conclave occurs
“in the middle of the universe (jagato madhye)” (1, 4). Not demanded
to make an oath, Sītā nonetheless makes one implicitly in her only
and last words: “If I have thought with my mind of none other than
Rāma, let the goddess Mādhavī [Earth] give me an opening . . .” (10).
Rāma, who had hoped for “affection” (priti) from Sītā (4), has thus
accepted the author’s word as Sītā’s only to be overwhelmed with grief
and horror by what her word—and the poet’s—actually is. This is the
moment at which he comes to realize what it means to be caught up
in his own story, which, if he heard it from the frame on, as we are
told, he would know to have also been Sītā’s story and to have been
inspired by the grief of a female bird. Rāma now threatens to destroy
the Earth unless she returns Sītā intact (7, Appendix I, No. 13, lines
18–20) until Brahmā repeats what he told him after Sītā’s fire ordeal,
103 Amid these preparations, Rāma, with a smile, tells Laksṃ aṇa what some Northern
manuscripts call the Iḍa/Ilā-Upākhyāna (7.78–79) about a king who alternates being
male and female. Perhaps in Sītā’s absence, Rāma suggests a curiosity about bisexual
self-sufficiency.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 179
that he is Visṇ ̣u, and invites him to listen with the great Ṛsịs to the rest
of this “first poem,” which will now tell what is still to happen (21–40).
Once Brahmā returns to heaven, the Ṛsịs in Brahmaloka obtain his
permission to return for the rest as well (43–49). The heavenly Ṛsịs of
Brahmaloka thus come to an earthly Naimisạ Forest to hear the end of
the Rāmāyaṇa, whereas in the Mahābhārata the Ṛsịs of the Naimisạ
Forest seem to be in the heavens when they have the Mahābhārata at
last brought to them.104 Though the Critical edition rejects this sarga, it
does so only on the grounds that without it “the continuity of the nar-
ration . . . is not hampered and appears in a better order” (Shah, 1975,
29). For Rāma, the relation between Sītā’s two ordeals seems to be that
whereas his first self-recognition as Visṇ ̣u emerges out of a human
identity crossed with uncertainty and confusion as to his own all-too-
human emotions, his second comes after he has learned of his divinity
and has repeatedly pared his life down to a perfect rule through his
repeated dismissals of others, yet without consideration of what this
has cost him since the banishment of his wife—not to mention what
it has cost her. If so, the poem could be saying that Vālmīki’s initial
question to Nārada—whether there is an ideal man today—was not
really convincingly answered.
Once the Aśvamedha ends, Rāma finds the universe empty with-
out Sītā and again dismisses the kings, bears, monkeys, and Rāksạ sas
(89.1). The Ṛsịs seem to take care of themselves. Rāma never remarries,
but at all his sacrifices there is a golden Sītā (jānakī kāncanī; 4). For
10,000 years he rules a harmonious kingdom. Finally Death or Time
(Kāla) comes to him as a messenger from Brahmā and tells him they
must meet alone; anyone hearing them must be killed. While Rāma
posts Laksṃ aṇa at the door, “Time who destroys all” (94.2) tells Rāma
it is time to return to heaven as Visṇ ̣u. As the two converse, the con-
genitally ravenous “blessed Ṛsị Durvāsas” (95.1b), familiar from the
Mahābhārata’s Mudgala-Upākhyāna,105 tries to barge in, threatening
to curse the kingdom if he is prevented. Laksṃ aṇa chooses his own
death rather than allowing that of others and admits him. Durvāsas
only wants something to eat after a thousand-year fast, which Rāma
happily provides. At Vasisṭḥ a’s advice Rāma then banishes Laksṃ aṇa
as equivalent to death, and Laksṃ aṇa, meditating by the Sarayū River,
104 See above at nn. 20 and 39.
105 And other Mahābhārata stories, as mentioned above (see n. 66).
180 chapter six
is taken up to heaven. After Rāma divides Kosala into two kingdoms
to be ruled by Kuśa and Lava, he enters the Sarayū and resumes his
divine form, followed in this by Bharata and Śatrughna.
Upakhyāna Precedence and the Essence of Them All
The relation between the Rāmāyaṇa and the Mahābhārata’s
Rāmopākhyāna is usually posed as one between just these two San-
skrit Rāma stories, and as a question of whether there is a genetic
relation between them. Which came first? Or do both rely on some
prior Rāmakathā? On these questions, this study’s position is two-
fold. First, the primary relation is not between the Rāmāyaṇa and the
Rāmopākhyāna, but between the Rāmāyaṇa and the Mahābhārata,
which it views as the slightly earlier of the two quite possibly overlap-
ping projects. On this point, it was noted that their similar designs could
not be accidental. It is easier to imagine Vālmīki refining kāvya out of
a multi-genre Mahābhārata than to imagine Vyāsa overlooking this
achievement to spread disarticulation. In this vein, the Rāmopākhyāna
opens with material about Rāvaṇa that the Rāmāyaṇa saves for Book 7.
It thus cannot be explained as an epitome of the Rāmāyaṇa, since it
lacks the structure that the Rāmāyaṇa shares with the Mahābhārata.
Second, this article holds that it is helpful to reflect on how upākhyāna
material is used in both epics. As observed, the Rāmāyaṇa uses this
term only in an interpolation and in Northern Recension colophons.
Rather than having stand-out “subtales,” the Rāmāyaṇa folds all its
secondary narratives into one consecutively unfolding poem. This is
especially noteworthy in its stories about the eight great Ṛsịs encoun-
tered by Rāma, many of which include material that the Mahābhārata
relates in its upākhyānas. Other than mentioning Vasisṭḥ a, a fixture in
the Iksṿ āku house, the Rāmopākhyāna does not know these Ṛsịs. It has
no Ṛśyaśṛṅga, Viśvāmitra, Gautama and Ahalyā, Rāma Jāmadagnya,
or for that matter Vasisṭḥ a involved in the stories from birth through
marriage; just this: “In the course of time [Daśaratha’s] sons grew up
very vigorous, and became fledged in the Vedas and their mysteries
and in the art of archery. They completed their student years, and took
wives” (Mbh 3.261.4–5). It has no Bharadvāja; just this of Bharata: “He
found Rāma and Laksṃ aṇa on Mount Citrakūtạ ” (216.63). And from
Citrakūtạ on, there is not a peep from Atri and Anasūyā or Agastya.
There is also no Vālmīki, Mataṅga, or Niśākara. It is improbable that
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 181
the Rāmopākhyāna would have strained out all these figures and epi-
sodes if it were a Rāmāyaṇa epitome. Vālmīki would seem to have
worked such upākhyāna material into something he claims to be new:
kāvya, “the first poem.” And this would seem to be the best way to think
about what he did with the Rāmopākhyāna: go beyond it to author a
poem in which Rāma and Sītā move through their double adventure
along paths signposted by Ṛsịs who impart Vedic authority to new
values about dharma centered on bhakti as a servant-master relation
of subjects to a divinity-embodying king. These knowing Vedic Ṛsịs
represent “all the Ṛsịs” high and low who motivate this divine incar-
nation to cleanse the world of noxious Rāksạ sas, and ultimately come
to hear out his story to the end. And they in turn are represented by
Vālmīki himself who frames all the paths that Rāma and Sītā take as
ones that begin with his inspiration to tell their adventures in a poem
that will lead them ultimately back to him.
As to the Mahābhārata, we began with the question of what a
“Bhārata” without upākhyānas might have signified, and looked at
how and where upākhyānas are woven into the Mahābhārata. There
is, however, one other reference to the epic’s upākhyānas that is yet to
be plumbed. It occurs toward the end of Book 12 in the highly devo-
tional Nārāyaṇīya, and takes us back where we began: to the “oceanic
mind” of the author, and also to the Āstīkaparvan substory called “The
Churning of the Ocean” (1.15 17).106 One may also recall that on the
last day of the war, Duryodhana, hiding from the Pāṇḍavas to recu-
perate, finds his last relief by magically concealing himself in an oth-
erwise unheard of Dvaipāyana Lake (9.29.53a): that is, a lake bearing
the name of the author.107
About one third through the Nārāyaṇīya, itself an 18-chapter epit-
ome of the Mahābhārata (although the Critical Edition splits a chapter
106 Of which the Rāmāyaṇa has a short version as well (1.44.13–27). The Mahābhārata
provides no genre term or independent title for its “Churning of the Ocean” story; see
Gombach (2000, II, 11, n. 9).
107 Just after Vyāsa suddenly appears on the battlefield to rescue Saṃjaya so that
his all-seeing bard can return to the city and continue narrating events to Dhṛtarāsṭṛa
(9.28.35–39), Saṃjaya meets Duryodhana alone and tells him of his narrow escape
“through the grace of Dvaipāyana” (42–43). When Saṃjaya keeps Duryodhana unin-
formed about his three remaining allies, even though Saṃjaya has just seen them,
Duryodhana tells him to tell his father he has entered a lake (47–49), which he then
does, solidifying the waters by his māyā or power of illusion (52). Eventually, goaded
by Yudhisṭḥ ira, Duryodhana breaks up through the solidified waters shouldering his
iron mace (31.36). See Hiltebeitel (2001a, 59–62).
182 chapter six
and makes it nineteen [12.321–339]),108 Bhīsṃ a says that the story he
has just told Yudhisṭḥ ira about Nārada’s journey to “White Island”
(Śvetadvīpa)—an island somewhere on the northern shore of the
milky ocean109—is a “narrative (ākhyānam) coming from a seer-based
transmission (ārsẹ yam pāramparyāgatam) that should not be given” to
anyone who is not a Visṇ ̣u devotee (12.326.113), and, moreover, that it
is the “essence” of all the “other upākhyānas” he has transmitted:
of those hundreds of other virtuous subtales (anyāni . . . upākhyānaśa
tani . . . dharmyāṇī) that are heard from me, king, this is raised up (or
extracted, ladled out: uddhṛtaḥ) as their essence (sāro); just as nectar was
raised up by the gods and demons, having churned (the ocean), even so
this nectar of story (kathāmṛtam) was formerly raised up by the sages
(12.326. 141–15).
Hearing this, Yudhisṭḥ ira and all the Pāṇḍavas become Nārāyaṇa dev-
otees (326.121). This suggests that one could count the “White Island”
story as a 68th upākhyāna. Furthermore, Bhīsṃ a holds that it is the
essence of them all. He has also used ākhyāna and upākhyāna inter-
changeably with each other and with kathā, story. And when he speaks
of the “hundreds of other virtuous upākhyānas that are heard from
me,” he probably implies not only those he has just told Yudhisṭḥ ira
in the Śāntiparvan, but all the others he has told or will tell elsewhere,
and those that have been recited by others, which Bhīsṃ a, given his
many heavenly and earthly sources,110 would almost certainly know
as well.
Still within the Nārāyaṇiya, just after its next major narrative on
pravṛtti and nivṛtti, Śaunaka111 says to Ugraśravas:
O Sauti, very great is the narrative (ākhyāna) recited by you, having
heard which, the sages are all gone to the highest wonder.112 . . . Surely
108 On this point, which calls for a correction of the Critical Edition, see Hiltebeitel
2006a.
109 12.322.8; 323.21; 326.126, placing it in the general vicinity of the Horse’s Head,
the subject of the upākhyāna narrated later in the Nārāyaṇīya by Ugraśravas to the
Naimisạ Forest Ṛsịs about Visṇ ̣u’s manifestation [12.335]). and also mentioned in two
other upākhyānas (see n. 47 above).
110 See Hiltebeitel (2001b), making the point that Bhīsṃ a’s youth spent with his
mother, the heavenly Ganġ ā, may have provided him a special educational opportunity
to meet celestial sages.
111 Again correcting the Critical Edition, which makes the speaker Vaiśampāyana;
see Hiltebeitel 2006a.
112 The Critical Edition omits a long section here that should probably be restored.
telling laws and truths in the sanskrit epics 183
having churned the supreme ocean of knowledge by this hundred
thousand (verse) Bhārata narrative with the churning of your thought
(idaṃ śatasahasrād hi bhāratākhyāna vistarāt/āmathya matimanthena
jñānodadhim anuttamam)—as butter from milk, as sandal from Mount
Malaya, and as Āraṇyaka (forest instruction) from the Vedas, as nec-
tar from herbs—so is this supreme nectar of story (kathāmṛtam) . . .
raised up [as] spoken by you, which rests on the story of Nārāyaṇa
(nārāyaṇakathāśrayam) (12.331.1–4).
Although Śaunaka commends Ugraśravas for “having churned the
supreme ocean of knowledge by this hundred thousand (verse) Bhārata-
ākhyāna with the churning of your thought” (that is, Ugraśravas’s), we
must remember that Ugraśravas is only said to be transmitting the
Mahābhārata to the Naimisạ Forest Ṛsịs as the “entire thought” of
Vyāsa (1.1.23). This suggests that the full hundred thousand verses—
with the upākhyānas included—of the Bhārata-ākhyāna were churned
first by Vyāsa before they were rechurned by Ugraśravas, with
Vaiśampāyana, their intermediary,113 having also delivered Vyāsa’s
“entire thought” (1.55.2) at Janamejaya’s snake sacrifice, where
Ugraśravas overheard it.
Then, still within the Moksạ dharma anthology of the Śāntiparvan,
before these two passages but leading up to the story of Śuka (12.310–
320), there is a third passage that uses the same metaphor and simi-
les. It occurs within Bhīsṃ a’s account of the lengthy instruction that
Vyāsa gives his firstborn son Śuka (12.224–246), who is not only one
of Vyāsa’s five disciples (Vaiśampāyana being another) to have first
heard the Mahābhārata from him, but the son who will obtain lib-
eration before the Mahābhārata—despite Śuka’s having heard it—can
have fully happened.114 Says Vyāsa,
Untraditional and unprecedented, the secret of all the Vedas, this treatise
(śāstra), of which everyone can convince himself, is further instruction
for my son (putrānuśāsanam). By churning the wealth that is contained
in all the narratives (ākhyānas) about dharma and all the narratives
113 As the Critical Edition registers and actually prefers, some mss. attribute these
words not to Sauti but to Vaiśampāyana.
114 This point is developed in Hiltebeitel 2001a, chapter 8, especially pp. 284–285, 316.
Note that Fitzgerald (2003a) concedes that the Śuka story, like “Nala,” is “suggestive of
‘fiction’ ” (see n. 54). Fitzgerald is on uncertain ground when he says that Vaiśampāyana’s
response to Janamejaya’s questions “cannot be a understood as verbatim repetitions of
Vyāsa’s composition” (2002, 99 n. 23). Logically he is right, but in fiction, not to men-
tion futurist fiction, strange things are possible. The Mahābhārata poets finesse this by
having both Vaiśampāyana and Ugraśravas relate Vyāsa’s “entire thought.”
184 chapter six
about truth, as also the ten thousand Ṛcs,115 this nectar has been raised
(dharmākhyānesụ sarvesụ satyākhyānesụ yad vasu/daśedam ṛsahasrāṇi
nirmathyāmrṭ am uddhrṭ am)—like butter from curds and fire from wood,
as also the knowledge of the wise, even has this been raised for the sake
of my son (putrahetoḥ samuddhṛtam) (12.238.13–15).
The churning metaphor thus finds Vyāsa at its bottom, since he would
be the first to use it—before Bhīsṃ a or Ugraśravas.116 Indeed, Śuka
is born when Vyāsa sees a nymph and ejaculates his semen onto his
churning firesticks (12.311.1–10). Vyāsa’s further instruction to Śuka
would also be churned up from all the ākhyānas—presumably of the
Mahābhārata, which would imply as well the upākhyānas and like-
wise imply that this “treatise” for his son epitomizes the Mahābhārata
itself.117 Śuka’s agenda of seeking liberation (moksạ ) is set here, and
he attains moksạ toward the end of Book 12 as a boy, just before the
Nārāyaṇīya and its sequel: Bhīsṃ a’s grand run of upākhyānas from
the end of Book 12 into Book 13. Taking the passage literally, it seems
to say that Vyāsa churned all the Mahābhārata’s narratives about
dharma and truth for the sake of Śuka’s liberation, the very thing that
Yudhisṭḥ ira, shortly after hearing that story, accepts that he must do
without while asking for further stories.
These churning passages are heightened reflections on at least two
of the purposes of narrative within the Mahābhārata’s overall grand
design: that it all rests on Nārāyaṇa, and that its essence is liberating
instruction on both truth and dharma. They would seem to reflect the
exuberant overview from within of some of those who were involved
in the production of the earliest totality of this work.
115 Presumably Ṛgvedic mantras.
116 Though perhaps not before the ten thousand Rc̣ s or the “sages” (vipras) mentioned
at the end of the passage just quoted from Bhīsṃ a at 12.326.15.
117 See n. 22 above.
ii. major position pieces

CHAPTER SEVEN
THE NĀRĀYAṆĪYA AND EARLY READING COMMUNITIES OF
THE MAHĀBHĀRATA
This chapter discusses a unit of the twelfth book of the Mahābhārata, the
Nārāyaṇīya, for its bearing on the textual and religious history of post-
Vedic and classical India. Although no portion of the Mahābhārata
(henceforth Mbh) has been considered so axiomatically “Gupta” (at least
in part) as the Nārāyaṇīya, the evidence for such dating—furthered most
recently in the collaborative volume Nārāyaṇīya Studien (Schreiner
1997a) and in subsequent essays by two of its authors (Oberlies 1998;
Grünendahl 2002)—is far from convincing.1 Likewise, it has been
argued in that volume and by others before it that no unit of the Mbh
is so at odds with the rest of the text. It has become the axiomatic
interpolation, and would have to be considered the ultimate test for
any argument that the archetype recovered by the Poona Critical Edi-
tion, in which the Nārāyaṇīya is included, could provide access to
the work as it was originally conceived. I have believed, however, for
several years now that just such an argument is worth making (see
Hiltebeitel 2001a: 28–29). For the moment, since no one has found
anything in the Nārāyaṇīya that is inherently and demonstrably later
than the dates I propose for the Mbh’s composition of at most two
generations sometime between 150 B.C.E. and the year zero (idem),
let me begin by urging an open mind on the possibility that there are
reasons to reconsider the Nārāyaṇīya’s late posting.
Thanks mainly to the research of Thomas Oberlies, it is an accepted
premise in Nārāyaṇīya Studien that the Nārāyaṇīya has two parts, one
as a whole older than the other. It seems that such emphasis on their
relative chronology is largely new to that 1997 volume.2 According
to Oberlies, the older Part A was itself inserted into the Mbh after
1 Space prevents discussion of most of the external and internal evidence for late
dating introduced in Nārāyaṇīya Studien, which I presented in the conference version
of this paper (Hiltebeitel 2003a) and must now hope to develop further in another
publication.
2 See Oberlies (1997: 75). A semi-precursor is Belvalkar (1954: 2,006), as discussed
below.
188 chapter seven
its oldest components were revised to make it fit (1997: 84–86), and
what remains of that revision still allows the reconstruction of a semi-
coherent narrative based on those components. Part A’s “construc-
tion resembles . . . many other sections of the Mbh: to a middle main
story others are attached and to varying degrees contribute explica-
tion or commentary. The main story has the following course: Upon
conversing with Nārāyaṇa (322.1–5) Nārada flies off to Mount Meru
(6), from which (7) he sees Śvetadvīpa situated in the NW and to its
north the Milky Ocean. He makes his way to Śvetadvīpa (325.1) and
recites a long stuti (31–171), whereby Nārāyaṇa is shown in a variegated
form (326.1–10). Nārada leaves Śvetadvīpa after a conversation with
Nārāyaṇa. To this ground-scaffolding further narratives are attached.”
(Oberlies 1997: 87; my translation as throughout). Note that Ober-
lies is not concerned with Nārada’s return from Śvetadvīpa (White
Island)—a highly important matter for the text.
For present purposes, the main contention here, as I see it, is that
Part B is a later, separately constructed unit, and the work of different
hands. Whether or not one finally accepts this contention, and I will
not, two things must be conceded: there are gains from the two-part
perspective afforded, and the point is made in such thoroughgoing
fashion that it is difficult to see a way around it. Nonetheless, one can
already see the beginnings of a route in Oberlies’s presentation of Part A
as constructed around an originally semi-coherent narrative, which he
holds up in contrast with a “nonsensical” whole that “lacks cohesion
and homogeneity to a high degree.”3 That the Śvetadvīpa narrative
begins and ends in Part A certainly does hold open the possibility that
Part A would be an originally separate unit with its own coherence.
But perhaps there is more cohesion in the relationship between Parts A
and B than Oberlies allows. Oberlies’s three chapters in Nārāyaṇīya
Studien are devoted entirely to Part A, and mention Part B only in
passing. It is really the other three Nārāyaṇīya Studien authors who,
accepting his vision of the text, try to work out issues of the relation
between the parts: Peter Schreiner around the vision theme; Angelika
Malinar around the ways the Bhagavad Gītā is recalled; and Reinhold
Grünendahl in connection with the passages that mark the transition
between the two parts. John Brockington offers another way to han-
dle the relation that I find more persuasive. Having summarized the
3 Paraphrasing and condensing from Oberlies (1997: 75).
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 189
Śvetadvīpa narrative with respect to its vision theme and teachings, he
writes: “In fact this doctrine of ekānta, the worship of the One, seems
to be summed up in the first . . . chapters; the later chapters appear to
be glosses on the themes enunciated at the beginning, interspersed
with legends, at first sight miscellaneous but actually carefully chosen
to exalt the deity, to reveal his multiple forms and the activities to
which they correspond.”4 This is a helpful note of caution before we
run off the stratigraphic cliff. I believe, however, that it is more than
a matter of themes.
Braided Frames
What has been missed by the German team of scholars who try to
divide Part A from B is that the carryover from Part A to B is actually
very interesting and revolves around what I have called the epic’s three
frame stories: the “outermost” authorial frame in which Vyāsa recites
the Mbh to his five disciples, including his son Śuka;5 the “inner” gen-
erational frame in which the Pāṇḍavas’ great-grandson Janamejaya
performs the snake sacrifice at which (in the presence of Vyāsa and
Śuka) he hears the Mbh from Vaiśampāyana, one of the four disciples
who initially learned it from Vyāsa along with Śuka in the first place;
and the “outer” cosmological frame in which the Ṛsịs of the Naimisạ
Forest hear the Mbh from the bard Ugraśravas, who was also among
those who heard it from Vaiśampāyana at Janamejaya’s snake sacrifice.
That is the sequence of the frames in the order of their transmission
as the epic itself presents them.6 With the second or inner frame being
4 I leave out, at the ellipsis, the words “six or rather seven” because it is unfortunately
not clear what Brockington means by “the first six or rather seven chapters.” The next
sentence reads, “The idea that the first seven chapters form a unit is strengthened by
the inclusion of a phalaśruti at the end of them (12.327.107). This should read 326.107
rather than 327.107.
5 I view what I have introduced as this third “frame” to be indispensable to under-
standing the workings of the other two frames now mentioned (see Hiltebeitel 2001a:
34, 92, 279, 300, 317), which are in their own interrelationship so richly treated by
Minkowski (1989, 1991).
6 For the Mbh and other Indian texts, I restrict usages of “frame” to narrative-level
frame stories such as the texts present themselves. Grünendahl has unnecessarily
confused matters by using “Rahmen” and “frame” (1997: 237, 240; 2002: 236–237)
for ascribed “coatings” or “rings” (to suggest better terms) of “late” “theological”
material hypothetically interpolated in a systematic way. He was followed in this by
Oberlies (1998: 138–140) without, it seems, proper acknowledgment (Grünendahl 2002:
190 chapter seven
central as the one to carry along the main story, there are certain differ-
ences in the way the other two frames are felt as presences throughout
it.7 The outer Ugraśravas-Ṛsịs frame is felt by listeners/readers as an
overhearing of the inner frame as retold from afar,8 whereas the out-
ermost Vyāsa-and-disciples frame is felt literally and with immediacy
in the course of the narration of the inner frame by the fact that Vyāsa
and Śuka are themselves listening and bodily present at Janamejaya’s
snake sacrifice and thus at Vaiśampāyana’s inner-frame narration.
Heading the Nārāyaṇīya Studien scholars in these matters, Reinhold
Grünendahl approaches things differently. He calls the outer frame the
first dialogue level because it opens the Mbh (although as just noted
it is the third frame in the sequence of transmission), and he regards
it as a very late coating of the epic, superimposed or “stamped” on
the inner frame, which he calls the second dialogue level because one
gets to it second in the text. As to what I call the outermost frame,
Grünendahl simply folds it into the outer frame, since he regards the
whole story of Vyāsa’s authorship to be part of the “profile of ideas”
(Ideenprofil) that gets stamped on the Mbh to promote the Nārāyaṇa
theology of the “epic Pañcarātrins.”9 Indeed, the outermost frame is
not, technically speaking, a dialogue level in the sense Grünendahl is
using: that is, a dialogue that sustains the Mbh’s narration. Rather than
a dialogue, it is mainly a story: a story about how Vyāsa first recited
the Mbh to his five disciples as a communication of his creation—a
337–340). More technically correct but equally ascriptional, Fitzgerald finds that the
Rāma Jāmadagnya story is “used to frame the Pāṇḍava narrative” (2002: 104–107).
Such a usage could apply to any twice told tale in the Mbh.
7 See Minkowski (1989: 405), noting that the outer frame is always felt behind the
inner frame.
8 Wherever Naimisạ Forest is, and I argue that it is the twinkling night sky (Hiltebeitel
2001a: 95–96, 158), getting there has been a long trip for Ugraśravas.
9 Grünendahl develops this notion to describe a nexus of themes and concepts—
including the “doctrine of identity” (Identitätslehre) of Nara and Nārāyaṇa—that was
not only “coined,” “minted,” or “stamped” (geprägt, gemünzt) in the Nārāyaṇīya but
systematically superimposed on the “general epic” (210) by late Pañcarātrin redactors,
first from the vantage point of Part A and then from that of Part B (1997: 222, 225,
229, 232, 235 and, in summary, 240; 2002: 311–312, 115, 336); see n. 6 above. Like
Oberlies’ use of “parallels” or “element clusters” to connect the Nārāyaṇīya’s “oldest”
Śvetadvīpa sources with textual traditions outside the Mbh (1997: 94–96, 108, 111),
and even to account for missing elements in stories (110) or separate out a Nārāyaṇīya
story based on a thematic similarity with a “late” puranic one (234–240, 296–378),
Grünendahl dates epic passages as late by the appearance of his profile of ideas in still
later texts (1997: 234–240, 296–378). Using “structure” for dating is of course fraught
with uncertainty.
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 191
teaching, a “fifth Veda.” Yet there is dialogue between Vyāsa and his
five disciples, including Śuka: in various exchanges between Vyāsa and
Śuka sprinkled through the Moksạ dharma section of the Śāntiparvan;
in the Śuka story itself that precedes the Nārāyaṇīya; and at three
points in the latter. These are pieces of this outermost frame, which
is by definition outside the two dialogical frames, the inner and outer
ones. Beyond such actual dialogue passages, Vyāsa’s exchange with
his disciples is left tacit as an outermost frame behind the transmis-
sion of the Mbh through the other two frames. As to the outer frame,
beyond the Nārāyaṇīya passages under investigation, there are only a
few other places where it is dipped to or elicited.10 Grünendahl none-
theless treats the Nārāyaṇīya dips as exceptional, speaking of its three
dips via a generalization about the first of them as “the only one in the
whole epic, seen from its ‘beginning’ and end”; yet he affixes to this
a note adding that “the single further reference point, 15.42–43, can
here remain not taken into account” (1997: 227 and n. 162; 2002: 335
n. 110; but see n. 10).
Grünendahl includes the change from Part A to B as “not least”
(1997: 227) among a group of passages11 that present the teaching of
the identity (Identitätslehre) of Nara and Nārāyaṇa at “switch-places”
or “junctures in the epic narrative”12—the latter being an idea that
he applies to the “secondary” work of late redactors (see n. 9 above).
More emphatically (and at the beginning of his summation), Grünen-
dahl says that among such Schaltstellen, the Nārāyaṇīya “occupies a
central place because of its relation to the first dialogue level: its close
idea-historical connection with diverse ‘junctures in the epic narrative’
10 At 1.1–54; by the briefest of dips at 2.46.4 (a reference I owe to an Emory Uni-
versity dissertation in progress by Emily Hudson); at 15.42–43; and at the epic’s end
with a wraparound (18.5).
11 The others he mentions are Bhīsṃ a’s words to “Vāsudeva (!)” (Grünendahl’s
emphasis) just before his death (13.153), Yudhisṭḥ ira’s words to Kṛsṇ ̣a at Karṇa’s
death (8.69), and Vyāsa’s explanation to Aśvatthāman of why his Nārāyaṇa weapon
did not work (7.172)—all three coming at or near the ends of parvans (1997: 210–212,
223–224.
12 Schaltstellen, as per Schreiner (1997: 11–12); see Grünendahl (1997: 211–212,
223–224, 227–230, 233, 239). These are useful ideas, but they are not given their only,
and to my thinking, best interpretation: that such hinges are self-conscious and even
artful “joins.” On the contrary, Oberlies (1997: 76–77 n. 9) and Grünendahl link their
notions to the secondary work of redactors. Grünendahl says his notion of Schaltstellen
applies to “a great number of passages eliminated as interpolations” in the Nārāyaṇīya
Critical Edition. This makes it look like most hinge passages do not make it into the
Critical Edition, but obviously they do.
192 chapter seven
strengthens the accompanying supposition that the frame [see n. 6
above] must be added in a comparatively late stage of the redaction
history” (237). Going still further, he speaks of the dip as something
inserted in the Nārāyaṇīya itself: “the interpolation (Einschaltung)
of Sūta and Śaunaka here (326.860* . . .) and at diverse other places in
the Nārāyaṇīya, especially at adhyāya 334 . . .” (1997: 49). I italicize
to emphasize that while the first passage cited is a star passage and
thus by the Critical Edition’s standards can legitimately (though as we
shall now see, I think erroneously) be excised as an interpolation, the
“diverse other places” where Sūta/Sauti (i.e., Ugraśravas) and Śaunaka
speak to each other are not. For Grünendahl the dip is thus uniformly
and, it seems, axiomatically late, even though it is he who shows that
Shripad Krishna Belvalkar was unconvincing in his attempt to elimi-
nate it as a whole from the Critical Edition.
We must now address this mistake made by Belvalkar as Critical
Edition editor of the Śāntiparvan, one that Grünendahl has brought
to light (1997: 33–40) with Oberlies’ concurrence (1997: 79–83).13 This
is Belvalkar’s attempt to maintain the Nārāyaṇīya at the first dialogue
level or inner frame and to avoid a dip to the second dialogue level or
outer frame. Drawing support from only a minority of manuscripts,
Belvalkar staked his claim principally on what Grünendahl calls “the
negative findings of the Malayālam manuscripts” (1997: 51), which are
sometimes supported by the northern manuscripts K7, D4 and D9.14
In what follows, I will use the abbreviation “M” for these Malayālam
manuscripts, and “M group” for the group of M plus K7, D4,9 that
shows this agreement. This was not Belvalkar’s only mistake in treating
the Nārāyaṇīya. Using the same manuscript criteria, he followed M in
splitting one adhyāya in two at the point where it switches from prose
to poetry (at Critical Edition 12.229–230). This resulted in changing
the Nārāyaṇīya from an eighteen- to a nineteen-adhyāya unit and thus
removed the possibility that the number eighteen could be significant
as a kind of epitome of the eighteen-parvan Mbh, as it is, for instance,
13 On this point, Brockington seems to confuse matters, having Sauti speak to Nārada
rather than Śaunaka (1998: 298), apparently due to a misreading of Esnoul (1979: 21),
whom he cites here. Her point is that Sauti also speaks to Nārada, among others.
14 For examples of correspondence between M and these three mss., see Grünendahl
(1997, 51–53). According to Grünendahl, Belvalkar “underestimated” D4,9 and D9,
regarding them as “minority readings” (1997: 33), and relegated K7 to a “secondary”
Kaśmīrī group of mss. (37).
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 193
in the Gitā.15 Now in considering these manuscripts, it is necessary to
bear in mind Grünendahl’s important reservations about V. S. Suk-
thankar’s Schriftartprämisse: the latter’s grounding premise as the first
Critical Edition General Editor “that a kind of script constitutes a ‘ver-
sion’ ” (Grünendahl 1997: 30). Grünendahl shows that versions often
overlap scripts, and that an “M version” in particular could not simply
be characterized by its “purity” relative to other (Telugu and Grantha)
Southern Recension scripts (33) akin to the again-alleged purity that
Sukthankar attributed to the “Śāradā version” of the Northern recen-
sion (31). As Grünendahl indicates, the Śāradā manuscript tradition
is incomplete for the Nārāyaṇīya and questionable as a version on
its own as well as for its oft-alleged closeness to a “Kaśmīri” version”
(33–38). Nonetheless, although Grünendahl questions Belvalkar’s
inclination to follow Sukthankar’s emphasis on the “archaism” and
“primitive character” of M and the Śāradā/Kaśmīrī manuscripts, and
a “striking correspondence” between them (39), I believe there is a
significant correspondence between M and these far Northern manu-
scripts, not least in their relative brevity, and that such significance
can be appreciated not only on the level of verbal correspondences but
also by the evidence that these shorter manuscript traditions provide
toward reconstructing the textual archetype of the Mbh as a whole.
In what follows, I will thus argue that a certain redactorial agency,
by changing the names and a few other touches (a few vocatives and
other referential nouns; elimination of a couple of incorrigible pas-
sages), undertook to elide Sauti-Ugraśravas (henceforth Sauti) and
Śaunaka, the speakers of the first dialogue level or outer frame, from
the Nārāyaṇīya and replace them with Vaiśampāyana and Janamejaya,
the speakers of the second dialogue level or inner frame. Keeping in
mind Grünendahl’s reservations about the Schriftartprämisse, it is not
possible to say that a “Malayālam” redactorial agency was at the origin
of this elision, only that such an agency is by far the likeliest suspect
given that it is only in certain M manuscripts that there is a consis-
tency in favor of the elision; that there are cases where M provides
the only instances of the change; and, most important, the likelihood
that the M tradition is old. These are all matters, however, that must
emerge after further considerations.
15 Grünendahl (1997: 47); Oberlies (1997: 83; 1998, 127); and Brockington (1998:
293 and n. 142) all agree that this move of Belvalkar’s was a failure.
194 chapter seven
Since this is one of those cases where a Critical Edition editor has
made a quite significant mistake,16 it should be corrected. For a fair
appreciation of the Nārāyaṇīya and its place in the Mbh manuscript
tradition, its dip to the outer frame must be restored. Yet what needs to
be appreciated is not just that the carryover from Part A to B includes
this dip to the outer frame; it also includes Vaiśampāyana’s recollec-
tion of a dialogue with Vyāsa. For this transition is achieved by the
narrative device of a double dip not only to the outer frame, but to the
outermost one.17 In terms of overall Mbh narration, these three frames
are braided together from the immediate standpoint of the inner frame,
with the main attention drawn to Vaiśampāyana’s carrying along of
the main narration. What is striking about the Nārāyaṇīya, once one
reaches the carry-over from Part A to B, is that although there are,
as we have observed, a few other dips to the outer frame (see n. 10
above), this marks the only place in the whole Mbh where one moves
back and forth through all three frames—in fact three times. At each
point where the narration dips to the outer frame, Śaunaka comes in
and asks a question. But the point of each of these dips is to explore a
question that is raised and addressed at each level. Each dip is centered
on one multifaceted doubt, and in each case one is taken to a point
where only the author, Vyāsa, can answer the question. For reasons
that will become clear, it is necessary to set the three dips in the con-
text of what precedes and follows them.
Dip to the Sauti-Śaunaka Dialogue
Prior to the move from Part A to Part B, Nārāyaṇa has made himself
visible to Nārada at Śvetadvīpa. Coming to the end of a long revelatory
speech, he gives Nārada leave to go. We begin just after this White
Island Nārāyaṇa has told Nārada that not even Brahmā has had such
a sight (darśanam) of him (326.96). Then, finishing his account of the
“ancient and future mysteries” that include his various cosmic mani-
festations (prādurbhāvas; 96–97), he disappears. Now comes a “lead-
16 For another, see Hiltebeitel (2001a: 285 and n. 19 concerning Rāmāyaṇa 7,
Appendix 13).
17 Missing the double dip, Grünendahl (2002: 336) views the tripled primary dip
dismissively as a “device used” for the “annexation of Part B” via “several repetitions
apparently intended to provide Part B with a structure.” Actually, the first double dip
may be a triple one, as we shall see.
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 195
ing question” by Yudhisṭḥ ira to Bhīsṃ a that probably sets the first dip
in motion. It asks whether Brahmā is different from Nārāyaṇa, and,
if so, why Brahmā is uninformed about Nārāyaṇa even after having
heard Nārada’s account of him: “This is a wondrous matter, surely, the
glorification of that intelligent one [Nārāyaṇa]: Since Brahmā heard
(it) from Nārada, how did he not know? Is the blessed lord grandfa-
ther without difference from that god? How was he not acquainted
with the power of that one of unlimited energy?” (12.326.102–103).
Bhīsṃ a tells Yudhisṭḥ ira that Brahmā is merely the creator through
repeated creations and dissolutions, and that he recognizes the supe-
riority of Nārāyaṇa (104–105). He then concentrates on how he him-
self received Nārada’s account through an ārsẹ ya transmission—that
is, via Ṛsịs (113)—and supplies the first occasion to refer to it as the
essence of all narratives: “Of those hundreds of other virtuous narra-
tives that are heard from me, O king, this is extracted as their essence.
Just as the ambrosial nectar was extracted by the gods and demons,
having churned (the ocean), even so this ambrosial nectar of story was
formerly extracted by the Brahmans” (114–115). Then, after a praise
of this narrative’s merits, we come to the first passage that Belvalkar
rejects in which Sauti says to Śaunaka and the Naimisẹ ya Ṛsịs, “All
this is told you that was told by Vaiśampāyana. Having heard which,
so it was done by Janamejaya according to rule. By you surely the
penances are all severe, and your vows carried out, all (of you being)
foremost knowers of Veda, dwellers in the Naimisạ Forest, all best of
twice borns, having reached the great sacrificial session of Śaunaka.
May you sacrifice with well-offered sacrifices to the supreme self, the
lord” (12.860*).
As Grünendahl observes, this is one of two rejected passages, the
other being 334.11–12, that “come to have special significance, since
Belvalkar’s constituted text supports itself here exclusively on the M
manuscripts” (1997: 53).18 Belvalkar justifies making this one of the “few
instances” in which “M readings are given preference not ordinarily
due to them” as follows: the whole of Part B must be late because of its
sectarian contents and stylistic features (phalaśrutis, nāmanirvacanas,
prose “interpositions,” appendix-like continuation of Nārada’s visit to
18 Earlier Grünendahl writes, “Of the 32 mss. that Belvalkar had at his disposal”
here, “only four Malayālam mss. (M1, 5–7) support the constituted text—mss. which
on other occasions . . . he acknowledges as having the least authority” (1997: 49).
196 chapter seven
Śvetadvīpa), and because its dip to the outer frame would be “under-
standable . . . right at the very beginning of the Epic . . . or the conclu-
sion of it,” but not, as here, in the middle (Belvalkar 1954, Critical
Notes: 2226). Grünendahl is not convinced by these arguments (1997:
51–52), and comments: “despite the editor’s great intellectual effort . . .19
in my opinion, the change executed to the first dialogue level places
Belvalkar’s argumentation and his text critical practice with respect to
the change altogether in question” (53). I concur and would only add
that here as elsewhere, it is much easier to explain how the dip would
have been dropped than how it would have been so widely added. In
rejecting these verses that mark the original beginning of the dip to the
outer frame, the M mss. most likely deemed them incorrigible.
Belvalkar now follows up this first excision with his first change in
speakers. Having removed Sauti along with what he has just said to
Śaunaka, he can now have Janamejaya speak, again based only on M,
as if he were still uninterruptedly addressing Vaiśampāyana. But as all
other manuscripts attest, it is really Śaunaka speaking in response to
the excised words of Sauti. And what Śaunaka seems to do is follow
up the train of thought that arises from Yudhisṭḥ ira’s exchange with
Bhīsṃ a as to the relationship between (the otherworldly) Nārāyaṇa
and (the this worldly worlds of ) Brahmā:
How is the blessed lord god, the first in sacrifices, the remover,20 lord, ever
the bearer of sacrifices, and conversant with the Vedas and Vedāṅgas,
established in nivrṭtidharma, enjoying peace, beloved of Bhagavatas; (how
does) he also institute pravṛttidharma,21 this blessed lord? How are the
gods made worthy of shares in the laws of pravṛtti? How are nivṛtti laws
made for the wise who are turned aside? This is our doubt, O Sauti;22 cut
through this eternal secret. Stories of Nārāyaṇa have been heard by you
that are connected with dharma. (12.327.1–4)
To which, in another passage dropped by M (and some other mss.)
probably because it was incorrigible,23 Sauti replies, “What the disciple
19 I elide here Grünendahl’s qualification “at least in the passage named (334.11),”
which indicates that he is more certain that Belvalkar is mistaken regarding 12.334.11
than the present case at 12.860*. Grünendahl tries, I believe unsuccessfully, to give Bel-
valkar some selective credence (see “Mahābhārata Reading Communities” below).
20 327.1b: hara. Cf. 12.330.71 (for Śiva).
21 Thus “the law of the way that renounces acts” and “the law of the way of acts.”
22 With variants, for the Critical Edition’s vipra, “O Brahman.”
23 Though according to Belvalkar Critical Edition notation, it was “inserted” in the
many mss. where it appears.
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 197
of the intelligent Vyāsa24 (said when) asked by Janamejaya, that old
account I will relate to you, O excellent Śaunaka. Having heard that
glorification of the embodied supreme self, Janamejaya of great wis-
dom addressed Vaiśampāyana” (12.861*). That is, Sauti says he will
answer Śaunaka by recalling an “old account” (paurāṇam) of what
Janamejaya once asked Vaiśampāyana,25 thereby already tipping us off
as to the next step that lies ahead by referring to Vaiśampāyana as the
“disciple of the intelligent Vyāsa.” Set in the context of a bafflement as
to whether the lower gods up to Brahmā and Rudra, who have aban-
doned moksạ , give shares to Nārāyaṇa in the fashion that they receive
them from men (327.5–9, 12–13), the vexing thorn of doubt is about
“attachment to rites” (characterized as pravṛtti) versus moksạ (without
mention of nivṛtti), with the puzzlement focused on the gods’ involve-
ment with the former and seeming neglect of the latter: “Those who
give their attention to pravṛtti measured to the influence of time are
fixed there. Meting out time, that is the great fault of those given to
activity. That is my doubt, O Brahman, like a vexing thorn in my heart.
Cut it by a story of history (chindhītihāsakathanāt). My curiosity is
surely piqued” (327.10–11). What can Vaiśampāyana do on such a
weighty matter but, as anticipated, quote his guru Vyāsa:
Ah, most deeply secret is the question you have asked, lord of men. This
is surely not known by one who is not wise and heated with austerity,
who does not know about the purāṇas. It cannot be answered quickly.
Here, I will tell you what my former guru Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana Vyāsa, the
great Ṛsị Vedavyāsa, was asked by me. Sumantu, Jaimini, and also Paila
of very firm vows, I, the fourth disciple, and the fifth known as Śuka—to
these five disciples, all come together, endowed with restraint, united
together in pure conduct, wrath conquered, senses conquered, he taught
the Vedas and the Mahābhārata as the fifth on Meru, the delightful best of
mountains frequented by Siddhas and Cāraṇas. While they were studying
the Vedas a certain doubt came up: the very one that was asked by you
was explained to them by him. Since I heard it too, I will now tell you,
O descendant of Bharata. (12.327.14–19)
Vaiśampayana thus provides us with one of most detailed passages on
the outermost frame and, needless to say, warns us that the answer he
24 The Vulgate has vyāsaś ca dhimataḥ rather than vyāsasya dhimataḥ. This refers
to Vaiśampāyana, which would provide reason for excising the passage by those who
moved things to the inner frame, since he would not be referring to himself this
way.
25 Apparently “off the record” as regards the inner frame.
198 chapter seven
recalls from it will not be brief: he will now quote Vyāsa for seventy-
eight verses (327.21–98). First, as regards the persistent doubt in ques-
tion, Vyāsa indicates how he, like Nārada, comes to hold the answer: “I
have practiced very great asceticism, the height of difficult asceticism,
in order to know the past, present, and future, O excellent ones. When
I had practiced this tapas and disciplined my senses along the shore
of the Milky Ocean, by the grace of Nārāyaṇa (nārāyaṇaprasādena),
this triple-timed knowledge became manifest26 as I desired. Listen as
to that knowledge; I will speak to that supreme doubt. As to what
happens at the beginning of a kalpa, it was seen by my eye of knowl-
edge” (327.21–23). Before addressing the topic of pravṛtti and nivṛtti
directly, Vyāsa preambles it with three distinctions: first, that between
the supreme self known as Mahāpurusạ and the unmanifest as the
primal foundation that springs from him; then, that between the still
unmanifest lord and what becomes manifest for the sake of world cre-
ation; and then, within this second operation, that between the lord
now in the manifest form of Aniruddha, the first of the four Vyūhas27
and the one associated with ahaṃkāra, and Brahmā “the Grandfather”
whom he fashions (nirmame) (327.24–27). Aniruddha creates the five
elements and seven Ṛsịs plus Manu Svayambhuva called the “eight
natural energies (prakṛtayo ‘sṭ ạ u) in whom the worlds are established,”
and Brahmā creates the Vedas and Vedāṅgas for the world’s success
(28–30). All beings are thus created from Rudra on down, including
the Divine Ṛsịs, and these, taking Brahmā as their immediate creator28
and “the splendid Visṇ ̣u” as their creator beyond that and as “the one
by whom and under whose authority (adhikāra) one must act,” and
who is “the uncontested authority, who knows the meaning,” they ask
Brahmā, “What is to be protected (paripālyaḥ) by him? He is the one
with authority” (33–35). Brahmā admits this thought (cintā) has also
occurred to him, and taking it as a question that raises the further
issue of how the gods and Ṛsịs should perform activities “for the whole
extension of the worlds” without the “destruction of their strength
(balaksạ yam)”—that is, their strength is something that they would
26 Note the use of prādurbhūtam here, which resonates with the prādurbhāvas,
Nārāyaṇa’s “manifestations,” revealed to Nārada just before the dip to the outer frame.
27 The four Vyūhas and the Nārāyaṇīya’s treatment of them are too big a topic
for this chapter. For the most useful discussion I know of, see Grünendahl (1997:
198–202, 206).
28 12.327.33. It is not so clear that they are right, since just before this it is said that
the eight natural energies created “this whole universe” (viśvam idaṃ jagat; 30f ).
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 199
have the right to think should be “protected” by the supreme god—he
determines to lead the gods and sages to the northern shore of the
Milky Ocean to ask “the Witness of the World, the Great Purusạ , the
Unmanifest” about this very matter (36–38).
After the gods and Ṛsịs do a thousand years of tapas, Nārāyaṇa
finally speaks to them with a “sweet voice (madhurāṃ vānīm) adorned
by Veda and Vedāṅga” (42) that addresses the key matter in stages.
First, he says, ‘Oho, you gods together with Brahmā, and you Ṛsịs who
are treasures of tapas; welcoming you all, I would have you hear this
important word. You know that what is done by me is a great welfare
for the world. What you do in conformity with pravṛtti strengthens
your vital breath. Well-done is the tapas undertaken, O gods, for the
desire of my worship” (43–45). That is, a thousand years of tapas in
conformity with pravṛtti has already been good for them. Urging that
they should always count shares for him in every sacrifice, and that he
will now explain their entitlement (adhikāra again), he recommends
they now perform a “Vaisṇ ̣ava sacrifice” according to Vedic precepts, a
sattra (a sacrifice involving multiple sacrificers) in which Brahmā and
the others will all give shares to Nārāyaṇa in accord with the law of
the Kṛta yuga (46–50). Acknowledging that these shares have reached
him, the bodiless Nārāyaṇa then blesses them standing in space (51):
From yuga to yuga, be enjoyers of pravṛtti’s fruits. As to those who will
also offer with sacrifices in every world, O gods, men will be made to
accord you shares that are set forth in the Veda. Likewise, one who has
offered a portion for me in this great sacrifice, he merits the portion of
the sacrifice regulated by me in the sūtra of the Veda. Uphold the worlds,
you to whom is assigned the fruit of sacrificial portions. In this world you
are apt to direct, according to your specific entitlement, the rites that
you execute perfectly to obtain pravṛtti’s fruits. Strong from receiving
these, may you uphold the worlds. You will be furthered in the world
by all the sacrifices done by humans. Then, further me; that is what l
expect of you . . . . This is fashioned for you in accord with the qualities of
pravṛtti. This is instituted by me, O best of gods, until the destruction of
the aeon. Think of the welfare of the worlds, lords, as your entitlement.
Marīci, Aṅgiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and Vasisṭḥ a, these seven
are indeed fashioned by mind. These are considered the foremost Veda-
knowers, preceptors of Veda. Following pravṛtti law, they are assigned to
procreation. The path of those engaged in ritual action, having become
manifest, is eternal. Aniruddha is called the lord who makes the creation
of the world. Sana, Sanatsujāta, Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumāra, Kapila,
and seventh Sanātana—these seven Rṣ ịs are called mental sons of Brahmā.
With knowledge that comes of itself, they are established in nivṛtti law.
200 chapter seven
They are the foremost of yoga-knowers, as also knowers of the Sāṃkhya
teaching. They are preceptors in the scripture of moksạ and are promul-
gators of moksạ dharma.29 . . . Go to your entitlement, and consider what
is according to custom. Let all the rites increase in all the worlds. Be not
long. (12.327.53e–71)
Nārāyaṇa goes on to explain that in “this best of times,” the Kṛta Yuga,
“animals in sacrifice are for non-violence (ahiṃysāḥ),” but beginning
in the next yuga their death in sacrifice will be appropriate (73–74).
Then, once the gods and Ṛsịs have received Nārāyaṇa’s reply to their
question about the age-to-age decline of the dharma and are told they
will not be touched by adharma if they “inhabit the region” “where
the Vedas, sacrifices, penance, truth, restraint, ahiṃsā, and dharma
are joined together,” they all depart for their respective domains—all
but Brahmā who “alone remained in place, desirous of seeing that
blessed lord who takes on the body of Aniruddha” (77–80). Doing
one better, “the god, having assumed the great Horse’s Head, appeared
to him reciting the Vedas with their limbs, bearing a water pot and
rosary” (81).30 For once there is no reiteration of the question about
pravṛtti and nivṛtti; Brahmā seems to have gotten the point. But the
Horse’s Head, having embraced him, makes one further matter clear:
that when the yugas decline there will also be a divine response: “With
this burden appointed to you, I will quickly obtain constancy. But
when it will be intolerable to bear the work of the gods, I will go into
manifestation (prādurbhāvaṃ gamisỵ āmi) as guide according to my
self-knowledge.’ Having thus spoken, the Horse’s Head withdrew into
himself then and there” (327.84e–85). As Vyāsa now concludes (still,
of course, as quoted by Vaiśampāyana), he brings matters back to the
central doubt—now resolved:
Instructed by him, Brahmā also went to his own world without it taking
long. So it is that this one of great share, the lotus-naveled eternal one
(padmanābha sanātana), declared the one who receives first in sacrifices,
the eternal upholder of sacrifices, has fixed the law of nivṛtti, which is the
destination of those whose teaching is the imperishable. He has (also)
29 327.66; or “teaching of deliverance;” cf. 327.93. This is the title of the Mbh section
in which the Nārāyaṇīya appears, so these may be self-referential (but not on simply
that account very late) passages.
30 To handle a water pot suggests a hand and thus a human body for the Horse’s
Head; but see below. The Horse’s Head “manifestation” or prādurbhāva is highlighted
in Nārāyaṇa’s long speech to Nārada at the end of Part A (326.56 and 94).
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 201
ordained the laws of pravṛtti, having made for the world’s diversity . . . .
At the end of the yuga he sleeps after having retracted the worlds; at the
beginning of the yuga he awakens and creates the universe. Homage to
the god beyond qualities . . . who is the peace of all beings, who imparts
moksạ dharma, . . . who is Kapardin,31 the Boar, the Unicorn, . . . the Horse’s
Head . . . always bearing a fourfold form, the hidden, who is seen through
knowledge, the imperishable and the perishable, this undecaying god goes
about everywhere, his way unalterable. Just so was this one formerly seen
by me with the eye of knowledge.32 That is all told to you by me truly, as
you have asked. May you act, O disciples, according to my word. Serve
the lord Hari. Sing his praise with Vedic words. Worship him according
to rule. (327.86–98)
Vaiśampāyana thus recalls how Vyāsa enjoined his disciples to sing
praise of Hari (by extension, the epic) in Vedic words ( gīyatāṃ
vedaśabdaiḥ). Further, in winding up with a phalaśruti, Vaiśampāyana
mentions the text’s benefits not only to those of the three upper varṇas
but also to śūdras and women: hearing it, “a śūdra would obtain hap-
piness. Sonless, one obtains a son, and a maiden a desirable husband.
Should she be one whose womb is slow to deliver, a pregnant woman
will give birth to a son. A barren woman conceives and obtains a
wealth of sons and grandsons” (327.104e–5). There is more than meets
the eye here. Not only may a śūdra obtain happiness, which can be
viewed as something of a condescending cliché; he may do so hear-
ing this Fifth Veda through the Nārāyaṇīya that epitomizes the Mbh.
And so, likewise, can women hear this fifth Veda to obtain things they
desire. In these details, what is said here implying the Mbh is very
similar to what is said in the Śuka story (12.314–315) (see Hiltebeitel
2001a: 300).
To summarize then, this first double or triple dip to Vyāsa is quite
quick,33 and it is done in steps through which the questioning and
expression of doubt is quadrupled. But at all four levels—Yudhisṭḥ ira
to Bhīsṃ a, Śaunaka to Sauti, Janamejaya to Vaiśampāyana, and the five
disciples to Vyāsa—the doubts ramify upon the opposition between
pravṛtti and nivtṭti, although they are raised explicitly on that subject
31 Or, the ascetic with matted locks (Esnoul 1979: 137). At 328.18, a name for Śiva.
So too 330.69.
32 327.97ab: Vyāsa thereby confirms that he has seen Nārāyaṇa’s Horse’s Head
prādurbhāva.
33 See Oberlies (1997: 79), taking us through “den abrupten Wechsel der Gesprächse-
benen,” including the star passages 859*, 860*, 861*, which he translates at 79, n. 24.
202 chapter seven
only from Śaunaka on, and it is left for Vyāsa’s narrative to unfold them
most fully in extended oppositions. Within the Nārāyaṇīya, pravṛtti/
nivṛtti is nearly a new topic, there being only one exception in Part
A, but an informative one: “Bhagavān said, ‘Excellent is this treatise
(śāstra) you have composed consisting of 100,000 verses, from which
proceeds dharma for the entire loom of the worlds. As regards both
pravṛtti and nivṛtti, this [text] will be the womb, in agreement with the
Ṛg, Yajur, and Sāma, as also the Atharva-Agirasa [Vedas]” (322.36–37).
The authors mentioned here are the seven Citraśikhaṇḍins, and the text
is their primal “Treatise” (śāstra). Suffice it to note that it is presented
to resemble and anticipate the 100,000-verse Mbh by its accord with
the four Vedas and its teachings about pravṛtti and nivṛtti, on which
Vyāsa and his fifth Veda are now the current ultimate authority—a
point Vyāsa brings home in closing when he lets his disciples know
that, like Brahmā, he has seen the Horse’s Head.
First Continuation of the Sauti-Śaunaka Dialogue
The nivṛtti/pravṛtti opposition is also at the heart of Nārada’s move-
ment from White Island, where he has seen Nārāyaṇa, to Badarī her-
mitage and the company of Nara and Nārāyaṇa—the return journey
that launches the movement from Part A to B and presents us with
the conundrum of two Nārāyaṇas (see Biardeau 1991), a subject now
picked up by a strange question of Śaunaka’s in the first resumption
of his conversation with Sauti. Since we left it at 12.327, the dip to
the dialogue level of Sauti and Śaunaka has continued implicitly, with
Vaiśampāyana being recalled as the ostensible speaker by an unmen-
tioned Sauti. But now, once Vaiśampāyana, so quoted, has recounted
a great standoff battle between Rudra and Nārāyaṇa (330.44–71),
Śaunaka again breaks in: “O Sauti, very great is the narrative recited
by you, having heard which, the Munis are all gone to the highest
wonder” (331.1). Although Belvalkar makes his second name-change
here, suppressing “O Sauti” in favor of “O Brahman” and “Śaunaka”
in favor of “Janamejaya,” we see clearly for once that M and the M
group—Belvalkar’s sole support in these changes—have left traces of
their work; the “correction” does not make sense. Of the two pos-
sible speakers, Śaunaka or Janamejaya, the verse could only come from
Śaunaka. Unlike Janamejaya, who can have no business speaking for
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 203
“all the Munis,”34 Śaunaka is surrounded by all the Ṛsịs or Munis35 of
the Naimisạ Forest. Indeed, as the “master of the group” (kulapati)
or “master of the house” ( gṛhapati) of the Naimisạ Forest sages, he
is their spokesman (Hiltebeitel 2001a: 99, 102–104, 166). But more
than just shuffling the names in this verse, the M group36 now drops
nineteen lines. This is its longest elision, and Belvalkar follows it. He
demotes these lines to an Appendix, this time with some equivocal
support from Grünendahl that I would call faulty.37 The change in
speakers is, of course, a reduction in scale, as becomes further evident
in the long elision.
Indeed, we find that the Critical Edition scales back on what must have
been a fuller and more meaningful text that M (followed, I believe, by
the M group) has reduced. Let me put this as carefully as possible: such
a reduction means that the outer Naimisạ Forest frame began to lose
meaning, or at least importance, to M and the M group for the mainte-
nance of this portion of the Mbh. I shall return to this point in closing.
But back to the matter of reiterated questions and doubts, it is amid
this suppressed material that Śaunaka, speaking on behalf of all the
wonderstruck Munis, asks the question that runs through dip two:
“The blessed god, adored by all worlds, is hard to see by all the gods
including Brahmā, and by the great Ṛsịs and by others. That Nārada
would have seen the lord Nārāyaṇa Hari, that is surely due to this
god’s permission, O Suta’s son. When he had seen the lord of the uni-
verse stationed in the body of Aniruddha, if Nārada ran forth immedi-
34 The mss. M1, 5–7 have yacchrūtveme munivarā paraṃ vismayam āgatāḥ for line 2,
which makes it the “best of Munis” who are filled with wonder, thus not changing
anything essential but perhaps showing an awareness of the problem.
35 E.g., from the very beginning, upon his arrival at Naimisạ Forest, Sauti “greeted
all the Munis, his palms joined” (abhivādya muniṃs tāṃs tu sarvān eva kṛtañjaliḥ;
1.1.4a).
36 As Grünendahl observes, “another exclusive commonality of K7, D4,9, and M
mss.” (1997: 51).
37 The main reason for the excision is clear enough: Sauti’s description of Janamejaya’s
sacrifice (Appendix I, No. 32, lines 12–13) is incorrigible, since it could not be put in
the mouth of Vaiśampāyana who is in dialogue with Janamejaya at that very sacrifice.
Yet Grünendahl (1997: 51) finds Belvalkar’s editing “comparatively unproblematic”
(vergleichweise unproblematisch) here, reasoning that the M group “constellation prob-
ably has much more importance than the ‘M-Version’ alone,” and that this particular
passage “shows . . . diverse connections with the idea-historical frame” as defined by his
profile of ideas. The latter argument, at least, is circular and rests on his risky criterion
of his “profile of ideas” (see n. 8 above).
204 chapter seven
ately again to see the two best of gods Nara and Nārayaṇa, tell me the
reason for that” (App. I, No. 32, lines 5–11). Still within this Appendix,
Sauti now tells Śaunaka that Janamejaya also addressed Vyāsa with a
variation of this question about Nārada’s return to Badarī:
Sauti said, “While the sacrifice of Pariksịt’s royal son was going on, O
Śaunaka, while the intervals of the rites were going on as per rule, the
Indra among kings asked that Rṣ ị, that receptacle of Veda, the lord Krṣ ṇ ̣a
Dvaipāyana Vyāsa, his grandfather’s grandfather.”38
Janamejaya said, “When the divine Ṛsị Nārada had returned from
White Island, meditating on the word of the lord, what did he do further?
Having arrived at Badarī hermitage, having approached the two Ṛsịs,
how long a time did he dwell there, and what story did he ask about?”
(lines 12–19)
But Janamejeya receives no reply from Vyāsa here. As the Critical
Edition text now resumes, the reply will come from Vaiśampāyana,
for this time, rather than quoting Vyāsa, Vaiśampāyana will speak
for him by proxy.39 Immediately upon the conclusion of the excised
passage, Janamejaya remains the speaker, continuing with a second
use of the churning simile, which now, seen in this context, carries
extra force when we realize that it is addressed to Vaiśampāyana not
only in Vyāsa’s presence but also just before Janamejaya will readdress
the question to Vaiśampāyana that he first asked to Vyāsa: “Surely
having churned with the churning of your thought (āmathya matim-
anthena) the supreme ocean of knowledge by this hundred thousand-
extent narrative of the Bhāratas—as butter from milk, as sandal from
Mt. Malaya, as Ārayaṇka from Veda, and as nectar from herbs—so,
O Brahman, is this supreme nectar of story that rests on the story
of Nārāyaṇa (nārayaṇakathāśrayam) extracted as spoken by you, O
treasure of austerities” (12.331.2–4). Janamejaya is in fact simultane-
ously addressing both Vyāsa and Vaiśampāyana, their thought now
churning together.
38 Pitāmahapitāmaham: “grandfather of his grandfather” (App. I, line 15b); Abhi-
manyu is grandfather of Janamejaya and Vyāsa is grandfather of the Pāṇḍavas, including
Abhimanyu’s father Arjuna. Presumably in one case “grandfather” has the extended
sense of “great-grandfather.” See 1.54.15b, where Vyāsa is Janamejaya’s prapitāmaha,
“great-grandfather.”
39 As Ganguli ([1884–96] 1970, vol. 10: 592 n. I) notes, at least seeing the problem,
Janamejaya’s questions seem to be addressed to Vyāsa, but “All the editions . . . make
Vaishampayana answer.”
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 205
Yet we find that Grünendahl considers these passages further sup-
port for his attempt to deproblematize Belvalkar’s elisions of the sec-
ond dip. Grünendahl argues that where there are doublets between the
elided Appendix and what follows it in the Critical Edition text, one
passage or the other must be the double, since he views doubling to
be a sign of interpolation, with the first doublet often being the inter-
polated one.40 But there is more to look at in these reiterations. They
occur in three units, each with intervening material. First, as appropri-
ate to a concern with the two sets of interlocutors, the initial doublets
make the clearest differentiations:
App. 32.3ab: pāvitāṅgāḥ sma saṃsvṛttāḥ śrutvemām āditaḥ katham
Our limbs purified, we are fulfilled having heard from the beginning
App. 32.4cd: nārāyaṇāśrayam punyām sarvapāpapramocanīm
this meritorious story resting on Nārāyaṇa that offers deliverance from
all our faults.
12.331.8ab: sarvathā pāvitāḥ smeha śrutvemām āditaḥ kathām
Those here are indeed in every way purified having heard from the
beginning
12.331.8cd: harer viśveśvarasyeha sarvapāpapraṇaśanīm
this story of Hari the lord of all here, that offers destruction of all our
faults.
The phrasing is a near-verbatim match in the second pādas or halves
of each line, but even there not without a subtle shift: whereas the
Naimisẹ ya Ṛsịs obtain release from all their faults, the attendees of
Janamejaya’s snake sacrifice obtain destruction of all their faults. As
to the first pādas in each line, the Naimisạ Forest sages obtain this
release by hearing “the meritorious story resting on Nārāyaṇa,” while
the attendees at Janamejaya’s snake sacrifice reap destruction of their
faults by hearing “the story of Hari the lord of all here,” with iha
(“here”) emphasized twice. These are minor differences, but plausible
in conveying a certain spatial intricacy amid a differentiation as to
the soteriological versus ritual value of the “story” at these different
locations—one “elsewhere” and the other “here.”
40 Grünendahl (1997: 51); see Oberlies 1997: 75 on repetitions; 119 on doublings.
206 chapter seven
Before we get to the remaining doublets, Janamejaya recalls the
good fortune of his ancestors, the Pāṇḍavas, to have had “Visṇ ̣u” as
their “friend” (sakhā; 331.10),41 and then he readdresses the question
he asked Vyāsa (in the appended passage) to Vaiśampāyana, putting
this “same” question now more elaborately:
More fortunate than they (the Pāṇḍavas) was Paramesṭḥ in’s son Nārada. I
know the undecaying Nārada to be a Rṣ ị of not just a little splendor, since
he reached White Island and saw Hari himself. His viewing (darśana)42
was manifested due to divine grace when he saw the god established there
in the body of Aniruddha. When Nārada ran forth to Badarī hermitage
to see Nara and Nārāyaṇa, what was the reason? Returned from White
Island, Nārada, son of Paramesṭḥ in, having reached Badarī hermitage,
having approached the two Ṛsịs, how long did he dwell with them and
what story did he ask for? When that one of very great self had come from
White Island, what did those two high-souled Ṛsịs Nara and Nārāyaṇa
say? You must relate all that to me truly. (12.331.13–18)
Within this rephrasing are the two doublets with verses in the elided
Appendix, with Grünendahl viewing those in the Appendix as inter-
polated. But here it is appropriate that the phrasing is very close, since
the driving point is that they are iterations of the “same question.”
And there are still slight distinctions.43
Finally, beginning his reply, Vaiśampāyana lets us know how his
speaking for Vyāsa by proxy works: “Homage to that blessed lord
Vyāsa of unlimited splendor, by whose grace I speak (yasya prasādād
vaksỵ āmi) this story of Nārāyaṇa” (331.19). And indeed Vaiśampāyana
now uses iha similarly to the double usage just cited above at 331.8a
and 8c, but now with more precise spatial information: “Reaching
White Island and seeing the undecaying Hari, Nārada left, O king, and
quickly reached Mount Meru, bearing in his heart the weighty word
41 This is both a Vedic evocation of Visṇ ̣u as friend of Indra and a recollection of
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s friendship with the Pāṇḍavas, especially Arjuna.
42 Note that Janamejeya now realizes that Nārada’s darśana of Nārāyaṇa-Hari in
Śvetadvīpa is superior to his ancestors’ “viewing” of Kṛsṇ ̣a. On darśana now as “doc-
trine,” see Schreiner 1997b: 191.
43 The doublets are App. 32, lines 9–11 / 331.14c–15, and App. 32. lines 18–19 /
331.16c–17b. The first has two little points of emphasis that carry along a differentia-
tion: the Naimisẹ ya Ṛsịs’ grander scale of vision in using the name Jagannātha, lord
of the universe, rather than “the god”; and consistent with what has been said about
locations “here” and anon, Janamejaya’s greater interest than Śaunaka’s in Nārada’s
arrival at Badarī. In the second doublet, there is only the slight continuing hint that
whereas Śaunaka has Nārada “arrive” at Badarī from elsewhere, Janamejaya speaks of
his “reaching” it here.
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 207
that was said by the supreme self. After that, O king, a great conster-
nation arose in him. When he had gone a long way, he got back here
safe (ksẹ mī punar ihāgata). Then he proceeded from Meru to Mount
Gandhamādana. Quickly he dropped from the sky toward the broad
Badarī” (331.20–22). This iha looks at first like it should refer to the
location of Janamajeya’s snake sacrifice, said to have been Taksạ śīlā.
But that is made very unlikely by what follows, which suggests an
arrival somewhere “in this world” round about Meru on the way to
Mount Gandhamādana for a landing there at the Badarī hermitage of
Nara and Nārāyaṇa. From there, what Vaiśampāyana has to tell is of
course why Nārada made this fantastic run, which he does by telling
two things: first, that immediately upon his return Nārada saw the
bizarre physical similarities between the inhabitants of White Island
and the Ṛsịs Nara and Nārāyaṇa at Badarī (23–27), whom he calls “the
two Purusọ ttamas” (29b); and second, Nārada’s answer to a question
from Badarī Nārāyaṇa: “Is the blessed one, the eternal supreme self,
now seen by you in White Island, the ultimate original nature44 of us
two?” (331.35).
For this second dip, in sum, it is less quick than staggered, and the
steps are less obvious than in the first. Once Śaunaka asks the ini-
tial question, there is only one clear step between the inner and outer
frame, while others are made by allusions, and one never quite reaches
the outermost frame except by acknowledging Vyāsa’s presence and by
Vaiśampāyana’s proxying for him. But the underlying question is less
diffuse. The theme of Nārada’s strange running journey back to this
world—which should remind one of Śuka’s journey “on foot” from
Meru to Mithilā (12.312.12–15; Hiltebeitel 2001a: 292)—preoccupies
the questioners at each dialogue level. Clearly, the force of the pas-
sage is to take the risk of shifting levels again as a means to marking
out the relation between the White Island Nārāyaṇa and the Nārāyaṇa
who with Nara at Badarī manifests himself “here.” Devoted to both,
Nārada is thus one of those who can discuss this relation, as he con-
tinues to do, distinguishing between the (relatively) “unmanifest” form
of Nārāyaṇa and the “manifest” forms of Nara and Nārāyaṇa (331.36–
38)—Vyāsa is another, having covered the same itinerary but not with
44 Following Esnoul (1979: 173), for prakṛtiḥ parā. Their original nature seems to be
from White Island, not Nārāyaṇa (but White Island is his original nature; see 321.30,
323.26 especially, and 332.2–5, 12ab).
208 chapter seven
the same motive or urgency.45 If Nārada’s return from Śvetadvīpa is as
important as his journey there,46 as the text clearly considers it to be,
and indeed as it must be if we in this world are to know about it, it
would seem to be another case where one draws a certain value from
considering Part A and Part B together.
Second Continuation of the Sauti-Śaunaka Dialogue
Nārada’s conversation with Nara and Nārāyaṇa extends over adhyāyas
12.332–333, with their words strung ostensibly from the inner frame
as recounted by Vaiśampāyana (who is mentioned at 333.1–3). It
highlights further disclosures of the bewildering identity of the two
Nārāyaṇas, and closes with Nārada asking Nara and Nārāyaṇa about
the origin of the three piṇḍa balls or clods of earth used in ances-
tor rites, which prompts their joint reply: a story of Visṇ ̣u-Nārāyaṇa’s
retrieval of the earth from the ocean as Varāha, the Boar (333.11–23).
As Schreiner (1997b: 175) observes, this passage picks upon one of
Yudhisṭḥ ira’s questions at the beginning of the Nārāyaṇīya (321.2 and
4)—that is, at the beginning of Part A—concerning what should be
offered to gods and ancestors.
From that, the next adhyāya (334) leads into the second continua-
tion of Sauti’s dialogue with Śaunaka. Initially, Vaiśampāyana returns
as speaker to make three points, or more precisely, to allow for three
textual moves. First he describe Nārada’s “intense devotion toward
the god, dedicating himself to exclusivity (ayantabhaktimān deve
ekāntitvam upeyivān) . . . in Nara and Nārāyaṇa’s hermitage”47 for a
thousand years, whereafter “he promptly went to Himavat where his
own hermitage is” (334.1–2). This is Nārada’s exit from the Nārāyaṇīya.
Henceforth he is mentioned five times, but only as a source for Vyāsa
or as indirectly connected with him (334.12; 336.11–12 49–50, 60, 79).
Nārada’s departure makes way for Vyāsa to be the central Ṛsị for the rest
45 See 326.123–124 and 327.21–23b, as cited above, though let us note that when
Vyāsa obtains the “triple-timed knowledge” from Nārāyaṇa, we do not learn that he
saw the Śvetadvīpa Nārāyaṇa. While Nārada’s itinerary concerns spatial coordinates,
Vyāsa obtains temporal ones.
46 On which there is more to say that cannot be said here, other than that it occurs
in Part A at 12.322.5–8, and that the coordinates aligning Meru and White Island are
vertical: White Island is above Mount Meru. Other translators settle for “distance,”
but ūrdhvam (8) means “height.”
47 Note how this again juxtaposes the two and the one.
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 209
of the Nārāyaṇīya. Second, directly addressing himself to Janamejaya,
Vaiśampāyana makes a point about enmity that looks like a comple-
ment to what Janamejaya had said earlier, just before addressing Vyāsa
but hearing back only from Vaiśampāyana, about the good fortune of
his Pāṇḍava ancestors in having had “Visṇ ̣u” as their “friend”: “You
(Janamejaya), even of unlimited energy, born in the Pāṇḍava family,
are of purified soul now, having heard this story from the beginning.
His is neither the other world nor this, best of kings, who by word,
thought, or deed should hate the undecaying Visṇ ̣u. Whoever hates
the best of gods, the god Nārāyaṇa Hari, his ancestors sink into hell
for eternity. How may he be hated who is the self of the world? The
self, O tiger among men, is to be known as Visṇ ̣u. That is affirmed”
(334.4–7). Third, Vaiśampāyana now reveals something that must be
meant to be a bit startling, since it has not been revealed prior to this
point in the whole Mbh: “This one who is our guru, the Ṛsị [Vyāsa],
son of Gandhavatī, by him this is told, son, this glorification of the
supreme self. From him it was heard by me, and it is told to you, sin-
less one. Know Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana Vyāsa as the lord Nārāyaṇa. Who
else, indeed, could be the maker of the Mahābhārata, O tiger among
men?” (334.8–9d). Telling Janamejaya now to perform a horse sacri-
fice, Vaiśampāyana tucks him textually aside, much as he just did with
Nārada, to open the way for Sauti to begin the second continuation
of the outer frame. Here again Belvalkar, in his editorial work for the
Critical Edition, switches names. But with the dip restored, this is how
Sauti opens (including a star passage set in brackets): “Sauti said, ‘Hav-
ing heard this great narrative, the king, Pariksịt’s son, then began all
the rites for the sake of accomplishing the sacrifice. This Nārāyaṇīya
narrative is told to you by me [892* as asked now, O Śaunaka, here
among the residents of Naimisạ Forest]. Formerly, indeed,48 Nārada
had revealed it to the guru49 . . .’ ” (334.1 11–12d, with the one-line star
passage between 12b and c). Belvalkar changes speakers from “Sauti”
to “Vaiśampāyana,” and eliminates the references to Śaunaka and the
48 Rather than yad vai here, the Critical Edition sustains the second dialogue level
with rājan, “O king,” as if this were addressed to Janamejaya rather than Śaunaka.
49 The Critical Edition has guruve me, “to my guru,” befitting Vaiśampāyana as
speaker, but with the me wavy-lined as dubious, while most other mss. have guruve tu,
“to the guru.” As Grünendahl (1997: 52) says, it could only be Vyāsa. But Nīlakaṇtḥ a,
with no explanation, has guruve bhaspataye; see Ganguli ([1884–96] 1970, vol. 10: 600
n. 2): he thinks it must mean Vyāsa or Vaiśampāyana. As long as it is not “my guru,” we
can lake the words as Sauti’s and not have to explain how Vyāsa would be his guru.
210 chapter seven
Naimisạ Forest Ṛsịs by excising the star passage. But this time he gets
no support from Grünendahl. As the latter observes, Sauti must be the
speaker here since Janamejaya’s “having heard this great narrative” and
his seeing to “all the rites for the sake of accomplishing the sacrifice”
require Sauti’s first dialogue level to report them (1997: 52). Grünen-
dahl confirms “that the text refers to the first dialogue level in . . . 12ab
and in the additional line found in all mss. other than M, in which
Śaunaka is addressed directly (892*)” (1997: 52). Obviously M deemed
892* both incorrigible and dispensable. For Grünendahl, it is the con-
sideration that Belvalkar supports his reconstitution solely on M, with
no support this time from other manuscripts in the M group (52–53),
that “overturns the foundational decision he has set forth” (52).
So Sauti now has the podium, and, picking up it would seem on what
Vaiśampāyana has just told Janamejaya about Vyāsa, he begins to turn
Śaunaka’s attention as well to “the guru”—that is, Vyāsa—to whom, as
we immediately learn in continuation, Nārada revealed the Nārāyaṇīya
“in the hearing of the Ṛsịs, Pāṇḍavas, Kṛsṇ ̣a, and Bhīsṃ a” (334.12ef ).
Here things have begun to get a bit obscure, since we don’t know
when this colloquy took place.50 And they remain almost as obscure
in the next verse, where, having just referred to Vyāsa as “the guru,”
Sauti begins to describe “the supreme guru (paramagurur)” (334.13a).
Although it seems at first that he would still be talking about Vyāsa,
the terms in which he continues (13h–17) indicate that he has moved
on to a description of White Island Nārāyaṇa (see Ganguli [1884–96]
1970, vol. 10: 600). Yet considering that Sauti is adumbrating on what he
would have just reported from Vaiśampāyana, one might imagine—as
a possibility—that he is playing on the latter’s revelation that Vyāsa is
Nārāyaṇa. In any case, the ground is prepared for Śaunaka to have his
last questions in the three-dip series. Having briefly reviewed what he
has heard about Nārāyaṇa’s glorification of the supreme self and his
having taken “birth in the house of Dharma in the person of Nara and
Nārāyaṇa” (335.1), about the “ancient origin of the piṇḍa . . . and as to
50 On this group, see 336.11, with the phrase “when Krṣ ṇ ̣a and Bhīsṃ a were listening”
to Nārada who was responding to “Pārtha.” This “Pārtha” looks like it would be Arjuna,
who is just mentioned, but see 336.60, where the same basic verse has “Dharmarājñe”
(“to the king of Dharma,” Yudhisṭḥ ira) instead of “Pārtha,” and 336.80, where Vyāsa
told this explicitly to Dharmaputra. This setting thus recalls 334.12 and 822*, just cited.
It does not seem that it could have been during the Śāntiparvan. The setting is also
mentioned in a passage unattested by the Critical Edition but translated by Ganguli
that would close the Nārāyaṇīya ([1884–96] 1970, vol. 10: 625).
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 211
what is ordained concerning nivṛtti and pravṛtti” (2)—that is, a nice
recap of the substance of the two prior dips plus the reference to the
piṇḍa story, which is after all also a matter of pravṛtti—Śaunaka gets
to his bottom-line issue:
And you formerly told about the great Horse’s Head of Visṇ ̣u that con-
sumes havya-kavya51 in the great ocean in the northeast, that was seen
by lord Brahmā Paramesṭḥ in. Why has this form, this power without
precedent among the great powers, been sustained by Hari, sustainer of
the worlds, O best of the wise? Having not seen that best of gods before,
of unlimited energy, that meritorious Horse’s Head, what did Brahmā
do, O Muni.52 This is our doubt (etat naḥ saṃśayam), Sauti,53 born from
knowing the Purāṇa.54 Tell, O one of foremost intelligence, what is fash-
ioned by the great Purusạ . Purified by you, Sauti,55 tell this meritorious
story. (335.3–6)
Sauti says he will do so by recalling how Janamejaya had a doubt about
the same question:
I shall tell you the whole Purāṇa, equal to the Veda, that the blessed
Vyāsa sang for Pariksịt’s56 royal son.57 Having heard about this form of
the god Harimedha with the Horse’s Head, the king had a doubt arise
(utpannasaṃśayo rājā), and so he pressed him.
51 Probably rites to gods and ancestors, respectively. Oberlies 1997, 150–152 assigns
them to a young but still middle stratum among the sacrificial conceptions treated in
Part A.
52 The additional M group mss. K7 and D4,9 have muniḥ for mune—“what did the
Muni Brahmā do?” The vocative mune is puzzling, since it is not clear how Sauti would
be a Muni. Usually, and I cannot cite an exception, it refers to a Brahman. Perhaps it
acknowledges Sauti’s wisdom.
53 The Critical Edition has brahman, “O Brahman.” “Our” doubt likely encapsules
Śaunaka’s speaking for Ṛsịs.
54 Again, this would be most appropriate for Śaunaka, who knows all the ancient
stories Sauti tells him in Book 1 (see Mbh 1.5.1–3 and Hiltebeitel 2001a: 104); it is
doubtful that Janamejaya is, at least at this point (ie., before the Bhāgavata Purāṇa),
such a Purāṇa -knower.
55 Saute occurs in K7 D4,5,9; sūta in T G1–3,6. The Critical Edition has brahman,
“O Brahman.”
56 The Critical Edition has dharmasutasya (i.e., Yudhisṭḥ ira’s) wavy lined. Pāriksịtasya,
with varied formations and spellings, occurs in both southern and northern mss. This
would be something Sauti would report.
57 The added M group mss. K7 and D4,9 go to the outer frame here, inserting after
verse 7: “I will tell alt this to you. Listen, Śaunaka” (839*). M5, however, at the same
point refers the exchange to one involving Yudhisṭḥ ira and Vyāsa (894*).
212 chapter seven
Janamejaya58 said, “That god bearing the Horse’s Head whom Brahmā
saw, what is the reason that the god took this form?” (335.7–8)
And so we come with this doubt not only to Śaunaka’s bottom line
question for the outer frame, but to the bottom line of what links the
outermost and the inner frames. For this is the only time in the entire
epic where Vyāsa, seated as an otherwise silent though not entirely
inactive attendee at Janamejaya’s snake sacrifice, gives Janamejaya a
solely verbal reply.59
Vyāsa’s Purāṇa is a long story (12.335.21–66) about how Visṇ ̣u-
Nārāyaṇa awakens from his yogic sleep at creation and assumes the
form of Hayaśiras, the Horse’s Head, to rescue the creator Brahmā,
freshly emerged in the primal lotus, from the two demons Madhu
and Kaitạ bha, who interrupt him as he is in the process of creating
the worlds by “first emitting the four Vedas” (25cd). “Having seen
the Vedas, those two best of demons, bearing form themselves, then
forcibly seized the Vedas in Brahmā’s sight. Then those two best of
Dānavas, having stolen the Vedas, quickly entered the Rasā60 in the
great ocean of the northeast” (26–27). The great ocean is the Milky
Ocean, and its northeast is henceforth to be the location of this Horse’s
Head manifestation of Nārāyaṇa. With the Vedas stolen, Brahmā is
stupefied, and heartrendingly deplores their loss. Then he thinks of
Hari Nārāyaṇa, lauds him for his aid, recalls how they have cooper-
ated through six prior creations, and implores him to wake up and
help him. Nārāyaṇa awakens and by his lordly yoga assumes the vast
cosmic form of the Horse’s Head:
Having taken on lunar splendor with a body that had a beautiful nose,
having made the auspicious Horse’s Head, receptacle of the Vedas, the
lord, by his head, then became the sky with the stars and constellations.
His long hairs61 were of the same splendor as the rays of the sun. His two
ears were in the hell of downward space (? avākāśa), his forehead was
58 Rather than the Critical Edition’s “Yudhisṭḥ ira,” varied northern and southern
mss. have Janamejaya speaking.
59 The two other times Vyāsa responds to Janamejaya at the latter’s snake sacrifice
it is primarily through action: when Janamejaya asks him to tell about the “breach”
between his ancestors and Vyāsa turns matters over to Vaiśampāyana (1.54.18–22);
and when he asks Vyāsa to enable him to see his deceased father Pariksịt just after he
has heard how Vyāsa enabled the warriors who died at Kuruksẹ tra to be seen risen at
night from the Gaṅgā by their surviving loved ones (15.42–43).
60 See 12.335.3, 54 on the Rasā in the ocean to the northeast as the location of the
Horse’s Head.
61 Presumably his mane.
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 213
the earth as the bearer of beings, the meritorious great rivers Gaṅgā and
Sarasvatī were his eyebrows.62 Soma and Sūrya were his eyes, his nose
recalled the twilight, the adornment63 was the syllable Oṃ, his tongue was
fashioned of lightning, the renowned soma-drinking ancestors became
his teeth, O king; Goloka and Brahmaloka became the great-souled one’s
lips. The Night of Time that transcends the strands, O king, became his
neck.64 (44–48)
Thus self-manifested, the Head sets forth for the Vedas’ retrieval:
Having entered the Rasā, he resorted to the highest yoga. Adopting the
tone regulated by the rules, he emitted the sound Oṃ. And this sound
resonated and was smooth everywhere it went . . . . Then the two Asuras,
binding the Vedas together, having hurled them into the Rasātala ran
to where that sound was. Meanwhile, king, the god bearing the [form
of the] Horse’s Head, Hari, grabbed all the Vedas that had gone to the
Rasātala, gave them to Brahmā, and then returned to his own nature
[of the sleeping Nārāyaṇa as Aniruddha]. After he had established the
Horse’s Head in the northeast of the great ocean, the Horse’s Head then
became the repository of the Vedas (vedānām ālayas). Thereupon the two
Dānavas Madhu and Kaitạ bha, not seeing anything, again came there.
The two speeders looked around where they had hurled the Vedas, but
that place was absolutely empty. Then resorting to high speed, the two
best of the powerful again quickly rose up from the abode of the Rasā.
And they saw that Purusạ , the lord, the maker of beginnings, white
with a radiance of lunar purity, established in the body of Aniruddha;
of immeasurable vigor, under the influence of the sleep of yoga, he was
defined upon the waters on a bed abounding in serpent coils prepared
to his own measure that was surrounded by a garland of flames . . . . The
two Dānava lords released a great laugh. Pervaded by rajas and tamas,
they said, “This white Purusạ lies under the influence of sleep. It is he
who has taken back the Vedas from the Rasā . . . .” When the two had
spoken so, they awakened Hari seeking to fight . . . . Gratifying Brahmā,
Madhusūdana slew (them). (12.335.50–64)
62 335.46cd: gaṅgā sarasvatīpuṇyā bhruvāv āstām mahodadhi. With śroṇyau for
puṇyā, the Vulgate has “Gaṅgā and Sarasvati were his hips, the two oceans his brows”
(12.347.50ab), but this would be the only mention of a bodily part below the neck.
Otherwise, the passage suggests a Horse’s Head with nothing below the neck. But
cf. 327.81d, cited above, where he holds a water pot. In illustrating the current passage,
the Citraśālā Press edition seems to fudge things, showing a full-bodied Hayaśiras,
horse-headed from the neck up, necklaced, but otherwise a typical four-armed standing
Visṇ ̣u bearing a lotus, conch, mace, and cakra, but no water pot. See Kinjawadekar
1929–33, vol. 5, facing page 731.
63 335.47c: saṃskāra, a guess; perhaps a forehead mark.
64 The Horse’s Head’s neck is thus Kālarātrī, the “Night of Time”! Does this imply
that he is a kind of ultimate Aśvamedha head equivalent to the doomsday Brahmaśiras?
Cf. Grünendahl’s observation that the horse is not slain in the Nārāyaṇīya’s story of
the Aśvamedha of King Vasu (2002: 327 n. 77.).
214 chapter seven
These two demons’ opposition to Brahmā has thus led to their further
opposition to Nārāyaṇa-Visṇ ̣u, recalling that the whole passage is pref-
aced by an evocation of the theme of enmity with this god, and in back
of it the theme of friendship with him as well.65 Meanwhile, Brahmā,
having received back the Vedas, is able to fashion all the “mobile and
stationary worlds” (12.335.65–66), and Hayaśiras is made the reposi-
tory of the Vedas in the northeastern ocean where, even though they
have so far seemed to be manuscripts,66 their orality is now clearly
primary. Indeed, soon enough Vyāsa emphasizes the Horse’s Head as
the source and inspiration of oral means of Vedic preservation: “Hav-
ing praised with fierce tapas the god bearing (the form of) the Horse’s
Head, the sequence (of recitation, kramaḥ) was obtained by Pañcāla
on the path pointed out by Rāma” (71).67
In sum, this third dip is fairly straightforward. Śaunaka is once again
positioned to voice the pivotal doubt. And again we find a frame-
crossing appeal by Janamejaya to the authority of Vyāsa, with the answer
coming this time neither by quotation nor proxy but by Vyāsa himself.
Clearly, all this dipping has led to a kind of revelation, in fact, a revela-
tion about revelation: Veda. The three-part sequence is nice enough for
us to congratulate the author, whom Vaiśampāyana sets up from the
outset of dip three by telling Janamejaya, “Know Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana
Vyāsa as the lord Nārāyaṇa. Who else, indeed, could be the maker of
the Mahābhārata?” (334.9). Who else, indeed, would be so informed
about the mysterious Horse’s Head!68 With Nārada’s Nārāyaṇīya exit
65 In Hiltebeitel 2002, I argue that these demons, at least in this version of the myth,
provide a figuration of heterodoxy: probably of the Buddhists who oppose the idea of
Brahmā as creator and reject the Mahābhārata’s view of friendship and enmity.
66 See Hiltebeitel 2005c discussing the theft, binding, tossing to hell, and retrieval
of the four Vedas as implying manuscripts and writing.
67 See also in the Nārāyaṇīya 12.330.31–39, especially 36–38, where it is indeed
by Kṛsṇ ̣a’s grace as the Horse’s Head that Gālava of the Bābhru gotra, evidently “the
high-souled one from Pañcāla,” was the first to master the “division of the sequence of
syllables” (kramāksạ rabhāgavit)—that is, the krama-pātḥ a style of “ab bc cd etc.” Vedic
recitation—” by the path pointed out by Rāma” (330.36–38). This passage allows some
possibilities for dating. According to T. P. Mahadevan, Babhru is mentioned in the Ṛg
Veda Prātiśākhyā—dated around if not well before Pāṇini (ca. fourth century B.C.E.)
at patala 10, with more on krama in patala 11. Earlier in this passage, the ṚV is said
to have had twenty-one śākhas or branches (12.330.32ab), a number mentioned—after
other traditions mention the number at five and seven, by Patañjali, usually dated at
150 B.C.E. I thank Frits Staal for this information, and both Staal and Mahadevan for
discussions on these matters.
68 I must reserve some points on this topic for development elsewhere; see now, in
this book, chapter 9 §D.
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 215
leaving the focus on Vyāsa, one waits upon the author as a subject
to be continued,69 which he is, notably in adhyāya 337, where Vyāsa
reveals his double birth, saying, “I am born of that god Harimedhas’s
grace and named Apāntaratamas, born by Hari’s command. And
again I am born the celebrated joy of the family of Vasisṭḥ a. I have
thus told of my former birth. So I am born of a portion of Nārāyaṇa by
Nārāyaṇa’s grace” (337.54–55). It seems this means that he is a “por-
tion of Nārayaṇa” in both births. In any case, the name Harimedhas,
which surely connects the “sacrificial essence/sap (medhas) of Hari”70
with the horse’s head of the Aśvamedha,71 cannot be innocent in the
Nārāyaṇīya.72 We have also met it when Janamejaya has his last doubt
after he has “heard about the form of the god Harimedhas with the
Horse’s Head” (355.8ab). In terms of Vyāsa’s final authority on this
remarkable manifestation, which among other things speaks for Vedic
orality, it seems that he speaks not only as a “portion of Nārāyaṇa” but
from the “Hari-essence” of the Horse’s mouth. The theme of appeal-
ing to Vyāsa’s authority then has one last turn in the Nārāyaṇīya, in
the next to last adhyāya, when Vaiśampāyana bows to him as hav-
ing taught a single highest Person (Purusạ ) as the origin of all oth-
ers, and as informed by the Purusạ sūkta (338.2–7; cf. Schreiner 1997b,
160)—a perfect example of the “churning” together of Mahābhārata
and Veda.
Mahābhārata Reading Communities
Vyāsa thus tells Janamejaya a way to “read” all the stories in the epic—
and more, since the Mbh famously includes “everything there is”
(1.56.33; 18.5.38), it is a way to “read” any and all stories anywhere. It
is a meta-statement about the Mbh and all it encompasses. Obviously
69 Grünendahl handles Vyāsa’s authorship and links with Nārāyaṇa among the
“coinages” of the epic’s late coating in conjunction with Part B. For him, Vyāsa has
three aspects: this very late author aspect; the proclaimer of the Nārāyaṇa theology,
whom he connects with the older Part A; and an older Vyāsa who “appears in numer-
ous places in the epic, at which the [other] two aspects generally are not addressed”
(1997: 239–240). A lot hangs on that “generally.” I do not think one can correlate such
separations with strata of textual development; see Hiltebeitel 2001a: 32–91.
70 Perhaps the “tawny/yellow/reddish (hari) sacrificial essence.”
71 I doubt that the name Harimedhas is related to Iranian xvarena, but see Brock-
ington 1998: 144, 296.
72 Along with the usage discussed, the name Harimedhas has suggestive uses at
323.12d and 336.28b.
216 chapter seven
it is also a bhakti statement73 about the whole and a meta-statement
of the point of view of at least the Nārāyaṇīya author. Its author may
have made it one of the last contributions to the Mbh, but I think he
was not working in isolation from the others who first composed the
epic. In any case, to date the Mbh archetype disclosed by the Poona
Critical Edition, it will help to date the bhakti-oriented reading com-
munities for the epic that the Nārāyaṇīya helped to shape.74 Suffice it
to say that while there is plenty of evidence for the pre-Gupta date of
bhakti ways to read the epic (not least in the Rāmāyaṇa and the Bud-
dhacarita), there is none that I know of for any earlier way of reading
the Mbh.75 M was certainly among these reading communities, since
the Nārāyaṇīya was a bhakti reading of the epic that M had to con-
sider. Clearly it was important enough for M to change it. But where,
when, and why?
In his treatment of Belvalkar’s editorial choice to eliminate the outer
frame throughout the Nārāyaṇīya, Grünendahl is clear that Belvalkar is
unconvincing where he bases himself on M manuscripts alone, but he
gives him wriggling room where it is a question of the M group, whose
testimony has “much more importance” (1997: 51) and is “more con-
vincing” (53). 1 do not follow Grünendahl in making such a discrimi-
nation. Beyond his view that the passages are interpolations and found
in a late “surrounding field,” I see him offering no other reasons why
M group passages should be more weighted in the reconstituted text
than those targeted by M alone. Yet Grünendahl extends the point:
“On principle (grundsätzlich) it is well to agree with Belvalkar, since
he holds such a change to the first dialogue level to be a late redaction-
73 It is gratifying to see Grünendahl now emphasize that bhakti (with darśana and
pūjā) is the Nārāyaṇīya’s main issue (2002: 319, 328–3 33), against Oberlies’ stress
on sacrifice (1998). But he pushes things too far and thus underestimates the integral
thread of sacrifice, evident, just for instance, in the treatment of pravṛtti, the Horse’s
Head (see n. 64), and the name Harimedhas.
74 In adapting this terminology so richly developed for the Maṇimekakai by Anne
Monius (2001), I continue to think that the best way to envision the Mbh’s “empiri-
cal author” (the “model author” being another story . . .) is to hypothesize that the
Mbh is a written work of composite authorship (Hiltebeitel 2001a: 19–35, 169; 2002)
that produces a text by which “professional literati” could engage and create “liter-
ate audiences” even among “illiterates” through oral performance (see Monius 2001:
35–36; Hiltebeitel 2001a, 21–22; chapter 1 above). Schreiner’s notion (1997b) of the
Nārāyaṇīya as a “dialogical text” provides a promising starting point for envisioning
the Nārāyaṇīya’s and the Mbh’s early “model audience.”
75 Such as Fitzgerald (2001, 2003a) is yet to account for in proposing a pre-bhakti
“main MBh.”
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 217
historical appearance. He sees it as an index for the recentness of
‘the whole piece’ [Part B],76 and not more. Meanwhile, the content-
related/idea-historical indexes mentioned for a redactional connection
between the Nārāyaṇīya and the Ādiparvan give this change a dimen-
sion wherein it leaves it to appear little rich in meaning to consider it
isolated” (1997: 53; cf. 2002: 334). On the contrary, I believe that even
if debate remains as to the dating of the Nārāyaṇīya “parts and whole”
and its relation to other sections of the Mbh, I have shown that its
change to the outer frame, considered in the isolation of its immediate
context in and through Part B, is in itself “rich in meaning.”
In assessing Belvalkar’s work, Grünendahl gives a final sense of how
he draws the line between Belvalkar’s editorial shortcomings and his
occasionally good results:
Except for Sukthankar’s Schriftartprämisse, there are not editorial prin-
ciples to derive from the above examples. The editor works from case
to case . . . . it is “higher criticism” speaking. And “plausibility” plays an
underestimated role. When subjectivity adds up like this, it calls into
question the compulsory text-critical exercises (classification of mss.,
etc.). Add to this that these foundations sometimes leave us to miss in
consequence the excellent decisions made. So, for example, his note to
328.11 ff. (Belvalkar 1954, Critical Notes: 2227) that he would prefer not
to include this passage in the constituted text, since Kṛsṇ ̣a here refers
to himself, etc. The fact alone that it finds itself in all mss. has stirred
him to include it still, but nevertheless—and here again it is the higher
criticism speaking as in the last instance—”provisionally closed in square
brackets.” He argues similarly with reference to the whole second section
of the Nārāyaṇīya (12.327–339). (Grünendahl 1997: 53–54)
Evidently the combination of Kṛsṇ ̣a and textual reflexivity provides
an “excellent” criterion for dismissal. Belvalkar’s lower critical work is
affected by his higher critical views, but the latter are apparently com-
mendable where they agree with those of their assessor.
This leads to a last point of disagreement—one more with Ober-
lies (1997: 140–142) than Grünendahl, though the latter shares the
premise (1997: 204–221; 2002: 314 n. 19). It is clear in these Part B
passages, including the one just mentioned (328.11 ff.) in which Kṛsṇ ̣a
76 Grünendahl cites here Belvalkar’s long opening note on 12.327–339 (or Part B)
in which he laments that he must include these adhyāyas at all, comparing them to
“another palpable addition which, as being given by all MSS., we could not drop”
(1954, Critical Notes: 2226–2227). Belvalkar’s main “redaction historical” arguments
are to be found in that note.
218 chapter seven
tells Arjuna about his names, that there would be no possibility of
“fanning out” the text into separate units based on the varied names
of the deity.77 From this perspective, it looks as if the long passages of
Part A that stress the names Nārāyaṇa and Hari—to the near—but not
total absence of Visṇ ̣u (324.30)—do so because they are telling stories
about Śvetadvīpa, a place in which these are simply the names most
pertinent to the deity there.
Finally, it was in thinking that everything could be “reverted” to
one level that Belvalkar made his big mistake—a simplifying miscon-
strual apparently based on M and still given credence “on principle”
by Grünendahl. One can only wonder that critics have never asked
why a decision to revert to the outer frame would have been made
here—at a point near the end of the Moksạ dharma, which treats ulti-
mate questions. In fact, the Moksạ dharma’s last three units give shape
to the authors’78 parting overview of at least the Śāntiparvan. The final
section is an allegorical story that takes place in the Naimisạ Forest
(which we thus do not exactly leave) about the many doors to heaven
and the best duty of the four life stages (see Hiltebeitel 2001a: 19–20,
156): these being connecting themes with the two sections that pre-
cede it—the Śuka story79 and the Nārāyaṇīya, both of which take us
back to the outermost frame.
Yet there may still be more to learn from what seems to have
begun with M. Here I would like to draw on the current work of
T. P. Mahadevan, who attempts to link the migrations of two Brah-
min groups—the Pūrvaśikhās (those with forelocks) and Aparaśikhās
(those with topknots to the back)—from north to south India with
the north-to-south migrations of the epics. Mahadevan argues that
77 See Oberlies (1997: 76), citing Hacker (1961). For a different approach of examin-
ing how specific names are used in context, see (most recently for her) Biardeau 2002,
2:317 and passim.
78 I do not follow the author/ redactor differentiation that runs through Nārāyaṇīya
Studien, especially where Oberlies invokes Biblical Criticism (1997: 75–76) and Schreiner
describes the work of redactors (1997: 159 and passim) indistinguishably from that of
authors. Grünendahl (2002: 332 n. 97) seems to find Brockington’s distinction (1998:
11) between sūta oral reciters and brahmin redactors useful here. But see Hiltebeitel
2001a: 13 n. 51, 101: for me, it is always simply Brahmin authors (usually as poets).
79 The Nārāyaṇīya refers back to the Śuka story: when Vyāsa tells about his prior
birth from Nārāyaṇa as Apāntaratamas, he recalls Nārāyaṇa’s prediction that he “will
not gain release from affection. And your son, free from affection, will be a supreme
soul by the grace of Maheśvara” (337.45c–46d). See 12.320.17–36 (just before the
Nārāyaṇīya) and Hiltebeitel (2001a: 310–312).
the nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities 219
the Malayālam version—long recognized as the shortest version in the
Southern Recension, and similar in at least that regard to the shortest
Northern Recension versions (the Śāradā and Kaśmīrī)—is connected
with those who made the first migration, the Pūrvaśikhās, and that
the more inflated other manuscript groupings of the Southern Recen-
sion (the Telugu and Grantha manuscripts) reflect the overlay upon
the earlier M-sized Southern Recension that follows from the arrival
of the much later (mainly) Aparaśikhā migration.80 If, as Mahadevan
makes to seem very likely, the changes in M are made after the arrival
in the south by Pūrvaśikhā Brahmins, who would have brought a
Mahābhārata probably close to the Kaśmiri-Śāradā recension which
they fashioned into the oldest Southern archetype and later developed
into M in Kerala after (or even during) the so-called Kalạ bhra inter-
regnum of the fourth to seventh centuries C.E. (Monius 2001: 3), that
would mean that the dip to the outer frame, which M changed,81 would
be as old as the departure to the south: possibly as early as the second
century B.C.E., and certainly pre-Gupta. By Mahadevan’s reckoning,
the southern archetype that M keeps close to82 goes back to migra-
tions that took place before the Kalạ bhra interregnum, and probably
occurred in the Sangam period. A full study of the M manuscripts
is called for, but taking into account what is presently known, one
may conjecture that the M manuscript redactors were concerned to
make the epic as comprehensible as possible for a new and linguisti-
cally different milieu. This would at least provide a common explana-
tion for four things that have been observed so far. In one case noted
by Grünendahl, and also discussed by me, M manuscripts make a
nice editorial cut to avoid doubling a reference to Mount Kailāsa in
80 In introducing the phrase “earlier M-sized Southern Recension” in place of “M”
in the original article, I offer a correction. “M” is not the earliest evidence we have of
the Southern Recension archetype, as I thought it was when writing this article. Rather,
“M” has modified that archetype, which Sukthankar 1933 and 1942 simply calls “S”
for Southern Recension, differentiating this “S” from the attempt at a Southern Recen-
sion begun in Sastri 1931. “M’s” contribution to the reconstruction of an all-Indian
Critical Edition archetype is that, unlike the southern manuscripts in Grantha and
Telugu, “M” kept its Mbh short. In the Nārāyaṇīya, however, we have been discussing
passages where “M” modified an older “S.” For further discussion of this problem, see
Mahadevan 2010; Hiltebeitel 2010c.
81 Probably in Kerala, since no non-M southern mss. are affected by the change,
or “retain” it.
82 Again, for the same reasons as are discussed in n. 80, the foregoing phrase now
replaces “M mss.”
220 chapter seven
accounting for the movements of Śuka. Here we could suspect that the
M redactors try for force and clarity.83 Second, it is a trait that M man-
uscripts share with the rest of the Southern Recension of supplying
names for characters left in the Northern Recension without them as
part of what Sukthankar calls its demonstration of a “thoroughly prac-
tical outlook” (1933: xxxv–xxxvi).84 Finally, treating the Nārāyaṇīya
as an especially significant text to modify, M decides, for what looks
like simpler solutions, to divide prose and verse sections to create two
adhyāyas where there were one, and it tries to maintain everything at
one familiar dialogue level to get to the bottom-line bhakti teachings
of Vyāsa without the complications of a dip to the outer frame. If
the Nārāyaṇīya was important enough to draw such practical solu-
tions, it would be because it was deemed a valued text in shaping new
Mahābhārata reading communities.
83 12.318.63 and 798* See Grünendahl (1997: 49–50); Hiltebeitel (2001a: 301).
84 I again correct here, in accord with the corrections made in nn. 80 and 82, by
deleting a parenthesis in this sentence suggesting that “M probably thus originates this
trait” of supplying names for bit characters. Clearly “M” just goes along with an earlier
“S” in this; see Hiltebeitel 2010c.
CHAPTER EIGHT
AMONG FRIENDS: MARRIAGE, WOMEN,
AND SOME LITTLE BIRDS
Draupadi, the heroic princess of the Hindu epic of Mahabharata is the
epitome of feminism and feminity [sic]. Through out history Draupadi
has remained an enigmatic woman of substance. Fragile, with a granite
will, compassionate yet volcanic enough to reduce her enemies to ashes.
Draupadi alone enjoyed the unique relationship of sakhī (female-friend)
with her sakha (male-friend) Krishna. Krishna’s divine presence was
constant in her life, whenever life’s obstacles seemed insurmountable,
there was Krishna gently guiding her.
These words, ‘compiled by: Anu Simlote’ for a rendition of ‘Drau-
padi’ by Hema Malini in Washington DC on 25 September 2004,
comprise the opening paragraph of a two-page account of the themes
and episodes to be developed in a ‘fusion stage’ performance in
which the famous danseuse plays the part of Draupadī supported by
a well-choreographed troupe, with intervals for cinematic soliloquies
in which Draupadī meditates on the quandaries she faces. I found
Anu Simlote’s description interesting for its opening insistence that
Draupadī, as ‘the epitome’ of feminism and femininity, has ‘remained
an enigmatic woman of substance’, for it reminded me of a passage I
highlighted in my book, Rethinking the Mahābhārata: ‘bṛhatī śyāmā
buddhisattvaguṇānvitā/draupadī (17.3.36)—a description whose phil-
osophical import I will return to in closing, but which we might, given
this opening, retranslate for the moment (and with an eye to further
consideration) as ‘Draupadī, the great enigma endowed with intel-
lectual substance’.1 I also found it interesting that before this play-
bill goes into anything specific about her story, it invokes the ‘unique’
sakhī-sakhā friendship of Draupadī and Krṣ ṇ ̣a.2 The ‘uniqueness’ of
1 See Hiltebeitel 2001a: 272–3, where I discuss some possible translations, beginning
with ‘the great dark one rich in spirit, character, and virtue’.
2 This chapter owes deep debts to Derrida 1997 regarding—amongst other things—
his discussions of friendship with and among women (pp. 101, 155–7, 164–86, 191
n. 6, 201, 239, 273–4, 281–3, 291, 293); friendship and love (pp. 20–1); self-friendship
and self-enmity (pp. 177 and 190 n. 5); how many friends may be too many, and
two the ideal (pp. 21–2, 101); the third friend as odd one out or mysterious presence
222 chapter eight
Draupadī and Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s sakhī-sakhā relationship is well noted, and has
important moments in the Sanskrit epic that I will also come to. But
first, some differences between this performance and the classical text
are also noteworthy.
Subtales and Soliloquies
On the fusion stage, Draupadī turns to Krṣ ṇ ̣a far more frequently
than she does in the Sanskrit epic—and notably in her soliloquies. For
instance, as regards the ticklish subject of her polyandry, Draupadī gets
marital advice from Krṣ ṇ ̣a in soliloquized dialogues, whereas in the
Sanskrit epic the only marital counsel on this matter is given not to her
by Krṣ ṇ ̣a but to her father by Vyāsa and to her husbands by Nārada.
First, Vyāsa tells Drupada the divine secret that makes his daughter’s
polyandry legal—that Draupadī is Śrī incarnate and the Pāṇḍavas
five former Indras to whom she had already been serially wed (in the
Pañcendra-Upākhyāna or ‘Subtale of the Five Indras’, 1.189); second,
Nārada tells the Pāṇḍavas how and why they must regulate this mar-
riage—by taking yearly turns with Draupadī to avoid such rivalries
over a woman as led to the mutual destruction of the demon brothers
Sunda and Upasunda (in the Sunda-Upasunda-Upākhyāna, 1.201–4).
Instructively, this information is conveyed not through soliloquies but
through two upākhyānas or ‘subtales’—in these two early cases, ones
that Draupadī does not herself hear.
I would like to build on my recent research on the Mahābhārata’s
subtales or upākhyānas (Hiltebeitel 2005a) to explore further how sub-
tales are worked into the epic’s textual weave, particularly in the ways
they set off differences in the portrayal of male and female characters.3
The Mahābhārata has sixty-seven upākhyānas, or sixty-eight if one
adds the story of Śvetadvīpa (‘White Island’), which the Nārāyaṇīya
seems to call the essence of them all:
(pp. 260, 276–7, 293); and the question of whether friendship is possible with God and/
or animals (pp. 17, 19, 198, 206–7, 211, 222–4, 294). Derrida’s book also opens many
other paths into the Mahābhārata that I hope to explore in additional essays.
3 See Adarkar 2001: 86 and n. 24 on different ‘options’ open to male and female
characters, noting that, for the latter, ‘exploring such options would be another study’.
For some especially rich discussions of character in this work, see pp. 49–62, 145–8,
234–40.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 223
Of those hundreds of other virtuous subtales (anyāni . . . upākhyānaśatā
ni . . . dharmyāṇi) that are heard from me, king, this is raised up as their
essence (sāro); just as nectar was raised up by the gods and demons,
having churned (the ocean), even so this nectar of story (kathāmṛtam)
was formerly raised up by the sages. (12.326.114–15)
The full sixty-seven includes sixty called upākhyānas in the colophons
and/or running heads for units in the Critical Edition; six more (includ-
ing the aforementioned Pañcendra- and Sunda-Upasunda-Upākhyānas)
are named in the epic’s table of contents—the Parvasaṃgraha,4 and one
(the Indra-Namuci-Upākhyāna, 9.42) is mentioned additionally only
in passing in the text (at 9.42.28a).5 In treating this sample, it should be
clear, as the Nārāyaṇīya passage suggests by mentioning upākhyānas
in the hundreds, that it would not be a boundaried group without over-
lap with other ‘ancillary story’ material (see Gombach 2000).
Most notably, some narratively well-developed ‘tales’ (ākhyānas),
‘dialogues’ (saṃvādas), ‘adventures’ (caritas), and ‘birth/origin stories’
(utpattis) such as the ‘Birth of Skanda’ (Skanda-Utpatti), the ‘Birth of
Śuka’ (Śuka-Utpatti); and the ‘Origins of the Sword’ (Khaḍga-Utpatti,
12.160) and ‘Origins of the Daṇḍa’ (Daṇḍa-Utpatti, 12.122) could
and should be grouped with the upākhyānas. Indeed, the colophons
often reveal overlap in titling these narratives, as with the Kapota-
Upākhyāna or ‘Pigeon Subtale’ (12.141–5), discussed briefly below,
which Stephanie Jamison refers to as the Kapota-Lubdhaka-Saṃvāda
or ‘The Dialogue of the Pigeon and the Fowler’ (1996: 163).6
In probing the main story through the subtales, let us note that the
upākhyānas in their ‘hundreds’ are said to be dharmyāṇi—‘virtuous’,
that is, ‘concerned with dharma’. In thinking through the relation
4 Pañcendra- and Sunda-Upasunda- are mentioned in the Parvasaṃgraha at 1.2.87c
and 90cd respectively. Four others mentioned there are narrated in Book 3: the
Śyena-Kapotīya-Upākhyāna (1.2.115ab, referring to 3.130–1), Asṭạ̄ vakrīya-Upākhyāna
(1.2.126a = Auddālakīya, referring to 3.132–4), Vainya-Upākhyāna (1.2.126b, referring
to 3.183), and ‘ “The Fire-Sticks Subtale” in which Dharma instructs his son’ (āraṇeyam
upākhyānaṃ yatra dharmo ‘nvaśāt sutam/1.2.127, referring to 3.295–9). The Ambā-
Upākhyāna (5.170–93) is mentioned both in the Parvasaṃgraha (1.2.54a and 150f )
and the colophons.
5 Two others are mentioned both in passing in the text and in the colophons: the
Dhundhumāra-Upākhyāna (3.192–5; see 3.195.37c) and the Indravijaya-Upākhyāna
(5.9–18; see 5.18.16a).
6 Jamison may follow Sörensen 1963: 383, who gives this title. The colophons for the
tale’s opening adhyāya 12.141 mentioned in the Critical Edition favour the saṃvāda
title by 11 manuscripts to 9, but with representation only in the Northern Recension,
whereas ‘Kapota-Upākhyāna’ occurs in the three Malayalam manuscripts, M1–3.
224 chapter eight
between the main story and the upākhyānas and the way they construct
gender together as it has to do with dharma, I believe it is fruitful to
invoke Masaji Chiba’s ‘three-level structure of law’ (Chiba 1986: 5–7),
and Werner Menski’s opening of Chiba’s approach to a treatment of
‘Hindu Law’ (Menski 2005: 71 and passim), as involving official law,
unofficial law, and basic legal postulates. Although the Mahābhārata
skirts posing as a vehicle of official law like the Dharmasūtras and
Dharmaśāstras, it often invokes such official law in the main story,
as, for example, when Bhīsṃ a enumerates the eight modes of mar-
riage before abducting the Kāśi princesses (1.96.8–11),7 when Krṣ ṇ ̣a
(5.138.1–9) and Kuntī (5.142.25)8 tell Karṇa he is ‘legally’ a son of
Pāṇḍu, and fairly regularly during the Rājadharmaparvan. In con-
trast, I would suggest that the upākhyānas are more often vehicles of
unofficial or informal law, posed for the heroes and heroines of the
main story to ponder grey areas as they set dharma as their lodestar.
Meanwhile, basic postulates,9 like, for instance, the indissolubility of
marriage, are often unstated and implicit values by which we can read
back and forth between these two types of interwoven narrative. Here
I will take the sixty-seven upākhyānas and the reverberations between
them only as an extendable base set from which to probe gender con-
struction in the epic’s main story, principally as it concerns (or might
concern) Draupadī.
First, there are differences—at least in degree—in the ways male
and female characters are drawn into the story from prior existences.
Generally, this can occur in two ways: prior divine and demonic iden-
tities and the karma of previous human lives. While there are many
males with prior divine/demonic identities in the Mahābhārata, there
7 See Jamison’s rich treatment of this passage amid discussion of the eight forms of
marriage and the rāksạ sa mode among them (1996: 210–35, 296 n. 9).
8 Kuntī says, ‘Why should this kānīna (son of an unmarried girl), who has returned
to me as a son, not do my word that is so salutary for his brothers?’ Kuntī is right that
Karṇa would be covered by the law’s retrospective intent regarding unwed mothers. But
Mānava Dharmaśāstra 9.160 would not allow Karṇa to inherit the kingdom: a kānīna
is one of six types of sons ‘who are relatives but not heirs’! But of course Yudhisṭḥ ira
would ‘give’ the kingdom to him, as Karṇa has just said to Krṣ ṇ ̣a, and Karṇa would
give it to Duryodhana. Yet Kuntī is also drawing on a ‘basic legal postulate’ that
worked so well with her other sons when they followed the unintended outcome of
her telling them to ‘share it all equally’ (1.182.2) and jointly married Draupadī: sons
should listen to their mothers.
9 ‘A legal postulate is a value principle or value system specifically connected with
a particular official or unofficial law, which acts to found, justify, or orient the latter’
(Chiba 1986: 6).
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 225
are few females with them, and Draupadī as the incarnation of Śrī is
the only one of any significance.10 As far as I am aware, incarnations
tend to occur mainly in the main story as part of the aṃśāvatāraṇa or
‘partial descent’ of gods, demons, and other supernaturals, and do not
figure among characters developed in the upākhyānas. The revelation
that Draupadī is an incarnation of Śrī, amplified in the Pañcendra-
Upākhyāna, is thus doubly exceptional.
On the other hand, main characters in the Sanskrit epics have little
karmic depth from previous human lives, such as there is, for instance,
in several upākhyānas,11 in the Buddhist Jātakas and many other Bud-
dhist stories, and in the Tamil epics influenced by Buddhism and
Jainism. Nonetheless, it is a trait especially of women characters12 to
exclaim that the sins they committed in previous lives must have been
considerable to have brought them to their present impasse, as if their
present life must have emerged out of some personal karmic morass
10 After three verses on Draupadī-Śrī (1.61.95–7), the epic’s fullest list of partial
incarnations concludes by accounting for the other three leading females as uneventful
incarnations of post-Vedic abstractions: ‘The Goddesses Success (Siddhi) and Endur-
ance (Dhrṭi) were the two mothers of the five, born as Kuntī and Mādrī; and Wisdom
(Mati) became the daughter of Subala [Gāndhārī]’ (tr. van Buitenen). See Dumézil
1968: 251 on prominent early Vedic goddesses not incarnated: ‘Aditi, Usạ s, Prṭhivī,
Sarasvatī, the Waters, etc.’ Like Sörensen (1963: 599), Dumézil (1968: 252–3) mentions
a verse identifying Rukmiṇī as an incarnation of Śrī and Draupadī as an incarnation
of Śacī, but it is interpolated (1.·*566) and the reference to Śrī is not recorded in the
Critical Edition’s apparatus.
11 As especially informative on the karmic mechanisms of reincarnation as they
have affected a worm and a virtuous śūdra hunter, see respectively the Kītạ -Upākhyāna
(13.118–20, discussed in Hiltebeitel 2001a: 198–9) and the Pativratā-Upākhyāna
(3.196–206; Hiltebeitel 2001a: 204–5). Interestingly enough, where we do learn how
karmic outcomes—overridden by curses or vows—have affected characters of the main
story, it is still in upākhyānas: Śaṃtanu in the Mahābhisạ -Upākhyāna (1.91); Vidurā in
the Aṇīmāndavya-Upākhyāna (1.101); the Pāṇḍavas etc. in the Pañcendra-Upākhyāna;
and Śikhaṇḍin in the Ambā-Upākhyāna.
12 One exception was pointed out to me by Emily Hudson at the London Epic
Constructions conference: a passage where Dhrṭarāsṭṛa, like his wife Gāndhārī, won-
ders whether it is his past deeds from previous births that occasion his postwar grief:
‘Saṃjaya, I do not recall doing anything wrong in the past that might have yielded
as its fruit what I suffer here and now as a dazed fool. But obviously I did something
wrong in earlier births, since the Disposer has joined me to such wretched deeds’ (na
smarāmy ātmanaḥ kiṃ cit purā saṃjaya dusḳ ṛtam/yasyedaṃ phalam adyeha mayā
mūdhena bhujyate//nūnaṃ hy apakṛtaṃ kiṃ cin mayā pūrvesụ janmasu/yena māṃ
duḥkhabhāgesụ dhātā karmasu yuktavān//11.1.17–18; see Fitzgerald 2004a: 31; Hill
2001: 33). Hill 2001: 30–4 discusses this utterance as well as two of the other passages
now cited, and likewise observes how few the instances are ‘where any character, beset
by misfortune, contemplates or expresses remorse at how the actions and desires of
previous lives may have brought about their current lot’ (ibid.: 31).
226 chapter eight
that they are now unaccountably accounting for. I have so far found
five such instances, two of which are spoken by Gāndhārī. Blindfolded
yet seeing the corpse-strewn battlefield with the divine eye given her
by Vyāsa, she says to Kṛsṇ ̣a:
Obviously I did evil in earlier births, Keśava, since I behold my sons,
grandsons, and brothers killed. (11.16.59, tr. Fitzgerald)13
And again, speaking not only of herself but also of her daughters-
in-law:
O you who are blameless, I guess the evil these women beyond criticism
did in past lives—and I as well, so dim-witted am I—must not have been
small. The King of Law [Yama] now repays us, Janārdana, O Vṛsṇ ̣i, there
is no erasing either good or bad deeds. (11.18.11–12, tr. Fitzgerald)14
But the other three occur in upākhyānas: In the Śakuntalā-Upākhyāna
(1.62–9)—the very first upākhyāna in the Northern Recension and the
second in the Southern Recension (where it swaps first and second
positions with the Yayāti-Upākhyāna)—Śakuntalā presses her case
that King Duḥsạ nta has sired the son she has brought before him to
his royal court, and asks him just before he tells her all women are
liars:
What evil deeds have I done before in another life that in my child-
hood I was abandoned by my kin, and now by you? (1.68.70, tr. van
Buitenen)15
In the Vyusịtāśva-Upākhyāna (1.112), the only upākhyāna spoken by a
woman, Kuntī tells Pāṇḍu how Bhadrā Kāksị̄vatī addressed the corpse
of her husband King Vyusịtāśva, who had just died of ‘consumption’
from their sexual overindulgence:
Surely, in previous bodies, my prince, I must have sundered faithful
companions or separated those that were united! The misery that I have
13 nūnam ācaritaṃ pāpaṃ mayā pūrvesụ janmasu/yā paśyāmi hatān putrān pautrān
bhrātṛṃś ca keśava/Fitzgerald has ‘brother’ rather than ‘brothers’.
14 pūrvajātikṛaṃ pāpaṃ manye nālpam ivānagha/etābhir anavadyābhir mayā
caivālpamedhayā//tad idaṃ dharmarājena yātitaṃ no janārdana/na hi nāśo ‘sti vārsṇ ̣eya
karmaṇoḥ śubhapāpayoḥ//Brodbeck 2009b interprets Gāndhārī’s words here as ‘sub-
versive, ironic, even sarcastic’, which may be so, given her distrust of Kṛsṇ ̣a; but I do
not think the characterization applies to these usages generally.
15 kiṃ nu karmāśubhaṃ pūrvaṃ krṭavaty asmi janmani/yad ahaṃ bāndhavais tyaktā
bālye saṃprati ca tvayā//
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 227
piled up with evil deeds in previous bodies has now come upon me in
my separation from you. (1.112.25–26, tr. van Buitenen)16
—all this said before Vyusịtāśva’s voice announces that he can still
impregnate her on certain days that lie ahead, from which she will
have seven sons (all as quoted by Kuntī, preparing the impotent Pāṇḍu
for her revelation that she could still bear him sons, which results in
Pāṇḍu’s choosing Dharma to sire his first son, Yudhisṭḥ ira, and so on).
And finally in the Ambā-Upākhyāna (5.170–93), the estranged and
embittered Ambā, preparing to seek a male reincarnation whereby she
can avenge herself against Bhīsṃ a, tells the sympathetic hermit-sage
Śaikhāvatya:
I want to wander forth. I shall practice severe asceticism. Surely there
must have been evil deeds that I foolishly committed in previous bodies,
and this as surely is their fruit. (5.173.14–15, tr, van Buitenen)17
These passages express this anguished sentiment in varied and non-
formulaic terms,18 which suggests that it is more than a trope or a
convention. I believe it finds its deepest analogue in the utterances of
women about to become satīs who hold themselves at fault for their
husbands’ predeceasing them.19
I do not find a place in the Sanskrit Mahābhārata where Draupadī
invokes her own or others’ unknown past karma like this, although I
recall her making such exclamations in Tamil Draupadī cult terukkūttu
(street theatre) dramas.20 But she is perhaps unique in the epic’s main
16 abhāgyayā mayā nūnaṃ viyuktaḥ sahacāriṇaḥ/saṃyogā viprayuktā vā pūrvadehesụ ,
pārthiva//tad idaṃ, karmabhiḥ pāpaiḥ pūrvadeheṣu saṃcitam/duḥkhaṃ mām
anusaṃprāptaṃ rājaṃs tvadviprayogajam//
17 pravrājitum ihecchāmi tapas tapsyāmi duścaram//mayaivaitāni karmāṇi
pūrvadehesụ mūḍhayā//kṛtāni nūnaṃ pāpāni tesạ̄ m etat phalaṃ dhruvam//
18 That is, there are no repeated lines, half-lines, or even phrases in these utterances;
each is an ‘original’. One line in the stanza following the two cited in n. 12 ‘feels’ for-
mulaic, where Dhṛtarāsṭṛa goes on to say, ‘Is there a man in the world more miserable
than I?’ (ko ‘nyo ‘sti duḥkhatitaro mayā loke pumān iha//11.1.19). This is reminiscent
of three lines that introduce the Nala-Upākhyāna—the first one uttered by Yudhisṭḥ ira
describing himself (3.49.34ef) and the other two (36cd; 38cd) describing Nala. But in
11.1.19 Dhṛtarāsṭṛa has stopped attributing his troubles to karma from previous lives
and has turned to fate (daiva) as an explanation (Hill 2001: 33).
19 See Weinberger-Thomas 1999: 26 (on karmadosạ , ‘the ‘fault of karma’), 45, 86,
102, 106–8, 132, 143–51, 163–7; Hiltebeitel 1999c.
20 I checked the likely Tamil chapbook dramas where I thought I recalled a line
where Draupadī laments that she must be suffering on account of karma or sins from
a past life, but could not find what I was looking for. Perundevi Srinivasan then kindly
read several of them also at my request, and likewise found nothing so explicit. But
228 chapter eight
story in being not only the incarnation of a deity, but in having at
least one known prior human life with antecedent karma that affects
her in this one:21 she was an overanxious maiden who pressed Śiva
too insistently—five times—to grant her a husband, with the result
that the god destined her to have five husbands. Vyāsa first tells this
story to the Pāṇḍavas (1.157.6–13) to set them en route to Pañcāla to
attend Draupadī’s svayaṃvara (the ‘self-choice’ ceremony where she
will obtain a husband), and he repeats it to Drupada in the Pañcendra-
Upākhyāna.22 Thus even though the early upākhyānas in Book 1—and
also the Ambā-Upākhyāna which Bhīsṃ a tells Duryodhana in Book 5—
are told out of Draupadī’s earshot, they circumscribe what we know
about her as the rare if not only woman whose karma from a previous
life is revealed—again, in an upākhyāna whose importance is under-
scored by its being a double revelation from Vyāsa, the author.
What then of the upākhyānas that Draupadī does hear? Let me
interject a suggestive comment of Madeleine Biardeau’s as to the pri-
mal scene of the epic’s composition (see Hiltebeitel 2001a: 165).
If it were necessary, I would imagine a father, a son, and a maternal uncle
of the father or son working together, and, in a corner out of the way, just
beyond voice range, a woman, wife of the father, mother of the son, and
sister of the uncle. (Biardeau and Péterfalvi 1985: 27, my translation)
she did find in ‘Eighteenth-Day War’ (Patine̱ tṭạ̄ mpōr Nātạ kam) that after Aśvatthāman
kills the Pāṇḍavas’ and Draupadī’s five children, Draupadī laments, ‘Is it a lesson, or
a curse, a curse, a curse expanded from the past?’ (pātạ mō, paṇtạ i virittitṭạ cāpamō,
cāpamo, cāpamo; Kirusṇ ̣appilḷạ i 1980: 79)—which no doubt contains something of the
idea, again overridden by a presumed curse (see n. 11). Both Srinivasan and I recall a
more explicit statement at least from oral performances.
21 Her uniqueness would seem to be paralleled by that of Sītā in the Rāmāyaṇa,
with her former life as Vedavatī (Rāmāyaṇa 7.17). In fact, considering the short list
(see n. 11) of main characters having prior existences affected by vows or curses, the
only other person in the main story to have had her or his life affected by known or
unknown karma from a previous human life would be Śikhaṇḍin: likewise a woman
reborn as a girl, but with the difference that she turns into a man. Of the others men-
tioned in n. 11, only Śaṃtanu had a prior human life as the former King Mahābhisạ ,
but the act that led Mahābhisạ to be reincarnated as Śaṃtanu occurred in heaven. The
situation contrasts with that in numerous vernacular oral epics, where the Pāṇḍavas,
Draupadī, and other epic figures are reincarnated due to the ‘unfinished business’ of
their Mahābhārata karma (see Hiltebeitel 1999a).
22 Indeed, the Southern Recension of the Sanskrit epic and Tamil (including Draupadī
cult) variations on it identify this overanxious maiden to have been Nālạ̄ yaṉī, wife of
the rṣị Mudgala. See Hiltebeitel 2001a: 237. Mudgala’s own story is told as the Mudgala-
Upākhyāna (3.246–7), which Draupadī does hear, along with her husbands.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 229
At first sight this silently listening woman would hardly remind us
of Draupadī, who is certainly the most active woman in the epic not
only in deeds but also in words. On the reputation of her being a lady
paṇḍitā (learned scholar),23 she makes long speeches when debating
with Yudhisṭḥ ira early in their time in the forest, demanding Kṛsṇ ̣a’s
reassurances of revenge against the Kauravas, revealing wifely duties to
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s wife Satyabhāmā, and deriding Yudhisṭḥ ira’s wish to renounce
the kingdom after the war. But she is also certainly the epic’s most fre-
quently present silent listener. This speaking/listening contrast is illu-
minating with regard to the modern stage’s use of cutaway soliloquies
and the epic’s use of cutaway subtales. In the Sanskrit epic, women
characters, at least,24 do not have soliloquies. But they do listen to sub-
tales. Kuntī, for instance, must have listened to upākhyānas to be able
to tell one.25 Indeed, all of the upākhyānas would have been heard by
such missing characters from Sörensen’s Index (1963) as Mrs. Janame-
jaya and Mrs. Śaunaka and the other wives of the ṛsịs of the Naimisạ
Forest, since performers of satra sacrifices—at which both of the epic’s
frame story recitals occur—cannot come without their wives (Jami-
son 1996: 31; Hiltebeitel 2001a: 166). But clearly Draupadī is the main
female auditor of subtales within the main story. Once the fine points
of her polyandry are sanctioned by Vyāsa’s and Nārada’s subtales that
are meant privately for male ears only in Book 1, and after she has
been abused in the public ‘men’s hall’ of Book 2, from the time she
is with her husbands in the forest to the epic’s last subtale at the end
of the Āśvamedhikaparvan, Draupadī hears all forty-four upākhyānas
that her husbands hear, including three told by Kṛsṇ ̣a early in Book 12.
Indeed, Draupadī offers a vignette on a female’s listening position to
tell Yudhisṭḥ ira an ‘old story’ (itihāsaṃ purātanam, 3.31.20b), first
propounded by the god Bṛhaspati, that she heard as a child when a
learned Brahmin came to her father’s house and spoke to her brothers
23 3.28.2; see Hiltebeitel 2001a: 261 n. 58, 268.
24 At 12.17, Yudhisṭḥ ira responds to his family’s urging to abandon his aspiration to
renounce the just-won kingship with what James Fitzgerald takes as ‘a kind of solilo-
quy’ (2004a: 694) in which ‘[t]he inner battle that Bhīma predicted now takes place
within Yudhisṭḥ ira’ (ibid.: 179). But I think this is unlikely; see Hiltebeitel 2005d: 252.
In that one could soliloquize in others company, Dhṛtarāsṭṛa could be the epic’s main
soliloquizer—and as Emily Hudson (2007) shows, from right near the start.
25 See also Kuntī’s narrative of the Vidurā-Putra-Anuśāsana (or Vidurā-Putra-Saṃvāda,
5.131–4). Cf. Dumézil 1968: 55: Kuntī ‘sait sa théologie’ when Pāṇḍu instructs her to
invoke three gods for her impregnations.
230 chapter eight
while she listened in, doing errands and sitting on her father’s lap
(3.33.56–58). The story is featured in Draupadī’s ‘puppet speech’
(Hiltebeitel 2001a: 214 n. 106, 269), in which she tells Yudhisṭḥ ira that
God (Īśvara) as the Placer (Dhātṛ) assembles and manipulates beings
like a grand puppeteer. She thereby suggests something of her state of
mind at the beginning of her years in exile, shortly after the trauma
of her disrobing.
Most prominently, and, I would argue, setting the tone for all the
upākhyānas that the adult Draupadī hears, are three upākhyānas in
Book 3 that Biardeau calls ‘mirror stories’ (2002, vol. 1: 412–13): tales
that mirror the listeners’—the Pāṇḍavas’ and Draupadī’s—current
tribulations. These are the Nala-Upākhyāna (3.50–78), the love story
about Nala and Damayantī told by the seer Bṛhadaśva while Arjuna
is visiting Śiva and Indra and Draupadī misses her favourite husband;
the Rāma-Upākhyāna (3.257–76), a ‘Mahābhārata-sensitive’ version
of the Rāma story (see Hiltebeitel 2009) focused on Sītā’s abduc-
tion and told to all five Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī by Mārkaṇḍeya just
after Draupadī’s abduction by Jayadratha Saindhava; and the Sāvitrī-
Upākhyāna (3.277–83), the story of a heroine who saved her husband
from Yama, told also by Mārkaṇḍeya just after the Rāma-Upākhyāna
when Yudhisṭḥ ira asks, having already heard about Sītā, if there ever
was a woman as devoted to her husband(s) as Draupadī. As the frames
of these three mirror stories show, Yudhisṭḥ ira is very much aware of
Draupadī as listener.26 So this implicit slighting of Sītā is rather curious,
and could be Yudhisṭḥ ira’s way of affirming that, unlike the Sītā of the
Rāma-Upākhyāna, to whom Rāma says, ‘Whether you are innocent
or guilty, Maithilī, I can no more enjoy you than an oblation that has
been licked by a dog’ (3.275.13), Draupadī’s fidelity after her handling
by Jayadratha goes without question, and need not be affirmed by the
gods, as Sītā’s has just been by a heavenly host including Brahmā,
Vāyu, Agni, Varuṇa, and Bhagavat, whoever that is (3.275.17–34).27
Indeed, when Jamison writes, ‘The Brāhmaṇas and the Mahābhārata
present a series of female types, both positive and negative, but the
Adulterous Wife is not in this gallery of archetypes’ (1996: 92), she
26 See Hiltebeitel 2006b for a discussion of the frame of the Rāma-Upākhyāna, and
Hiltebeitel 2001a: 216, 239 for the frame of the Nala-Upākhyāna.
27 Bhagavat is mentioned at 3.275.18d, and is probably a coy allusion to Visṇ ̣u,
for which there is a parallel in the Nala-Upākhyāna’s deployment of the charioteer
Vārsṇ ̣eya.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 231
would seem to have momentarily overlooked not only the innuendos
of this scene but also the Cirakāri-Upākhyāna (12.258) and its tale of
how Cirakārin took so long reflecting on his father Gautama’s com-
mand to kill his mother Ahalyā for her adultery with Indra that finally
Gautama changed his mind.28 Moreover, this story, which Draupadī
hears with her husbands in the Moksạ dharmaparvan of Book 12, The
Book of the Peace, seems to offer a peaceful resolution to a case of real
adultery as an advance beyond the violent response to a woman’s mere
thought of adultery in the Kārtavīrya- (or Jāmadagnya-) Upākhyāna
(3.115–17) in the pre-war Book 3, in which Rāma Jāmadagnya beheads
his mother Reṇukā at the command of his father Jamadagni.
This brings me to a point I would now like to open up on a bit: while
Draupadī endures virtually every imaginable strain on her marriage to
five men in the Mahābhārata’s main story, and yet remains unquestion-
ably faithful to them, she hears upākhyānas that probe ‘fringe’ matters
bearing on female sexuality—mainly in response to questions asked
by Yudhisṭḥ ira. Indeed, she is there to hear Yudhisṭḥ ira ask Bhīsṃ a,
seemingly quite out of the blue, ‘In the act of coition, who derives
the greater pleasure—man or woman?’ (13.12.1; Dandekar 1966: lix),
whereby Yudhisṭḥ ira gives his grandfather, the lifelong celibate, the
opportunity to make his case that the luckier ones are women by tell-
ing the Bhaṅgāśvana-Upākhyāna (13.12). Or is Yudhisṭḥ ira’s question
so out of the blue? With the turn from the Moksạ dharmaparvan of
Book 12 to the Dānadharmaparvan of Book 13, he has just turned his
mind from matters of ultimate liberation, which cannot be his if he
is to rule as all require of him, to the householder life that he—and
Draupadī, and his brothers—must accept for what lies ahead in the
rest of their lives together. One could take this as a ‘jolt of sexuality’
like those centred on the wife that Jamison finds energizing the struc-
tures of Brahmanic rituals29—and as a timely reminder to Draupadī of
the pleasures Yudhisṭḥ ira would like to think she once enjoyed and,
28 Jamison does discuss the Cirakāri-Upākhyāna as a tale of ‘adultery’ slightly later
(1996: 291 n. 2), but she focuses mainly on the Rāmāyaṇa’s version of Ahalyā’s seduc-
tion for its emphasis on the theme of hospitality (ibid.: 156–7).
29 Jamison 1996: 96, 283 n. 221; cf. 95 (‘sexual “kick” ’), 98 (‘frisson of forbidden
sex’), and passim. If so, it would not be the only one in the sequence, as it is preceded
by the Sudarśana-Upākhyāna (13.2) in which Sudarśana’s wife Oghavatī performs
hospitality by sleeping with a guest.
232 chapter eight
who knows, could enjoy again.30 Indeed, it is just a short time later,
when Bhīsṃ a has completed his main run of Book 13 upākhyānas,
that Draupadī jolts us with the one confirmation (13.57.42–4) that she
has been silently listening all along to Bhīsṃ a’s battlefield oration by
voicing her approval when—as Vaiśaṃpāyana reports—Yudhisṭḥ ira
finally says he ‘no longer longed to dwell in a hermitage’.
Birds and Friendship
Birds play in and out of numerous epic stories, as no one saw bet-
ter than Julia Leslie, to whose memory I would like to dedicate this
chapter.31 Since I cannot detail all the upākhyānas that bring birds to
bear upon marital ‘fringe matters’, let me focus on little birds, and let
it suffice to note two themes that run through a few upākhyānas, and
explore a few such matters from this double angle. The two themes are
birds and friendship, and let us bear in mind that this combination
has a well-known precedent in the relation of the two birds who nestle
in the same tree (dvā suparṇā sayújā sákhāyā samānáṃ vṛksạ́ ṃ pári
sạ svajāte) in Ṛgveda 1.164.20—a line that gets reinterpreted in a bhakti
parable about the soul and the Lord in the Muṇḍaka and Śvetāśvatara
Upanisạ ds, to which I will return. As Biardeau has emphasized, birds
are dvijas, ‘twice-borns’, especially as implying brahmins, and thus
upākhyānas featuring birds can work out norms and implications of
dharma especially as they bear on brahmins—although clearly some
birds are more brahmin than others. Now there are a number of sto-
ries that treat the themes of birds and/or friendship while bringing
into focus deeper ‘fringe matters’ of marriage and sexuality. One that
weaves in these themes is the aforementioned Kapota-Upākhyāna
(12.141–5), which, in Book 12, entertains the theme of implied satī
when the female pigeon joins her overly hospitable husband on his
funeral pyre.32 Also interesting, though without a couple, is the Śuka-
Vāsava-Saṃvāda (13.5), where the friendship is not between birds or
humans, but a bird and a tree. Here a parrot, out of ‘devotion (bhakti)
30 At least in popular traditions, with some possibility that the Sanskrit epic is the
basis for their depiction, Draupadī has been celibate since her violation at the dice
match; see Hiltebeitel 1981.
31 See Leslie 1998, and my discussion of her findings in relation to the Śuka-Utpatti
in Hiltebeitel 2001a: 318–22.
32 For discussion, see Leslie 1989: 306–7; Bowles 2004: 227–35.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 233
to the tree’ (tasya bhaktyā vanaspateḥ, 13.5.6), refuses to leave it with-
ering from a poisoned arrow, and explains to Indra (in Brahmin guise),
who cannot believe that a bird could demonstrate such ‘non-cruelty’
(ānṛśaṃsya), that because it received the tree’s protection, it stays out
of devotion to non-cruelty, and because compassion (anukrośa) is the
great dharma and perennial happiness of the respectable (sadhūnām)
and ‘always extends kindness’ (sadā prītiṃ prayacchati, 13.5.23d)—with
prīti implying ‘in a friendly way’. Indra then revives the tree (Hiltebeitel
2001a: 213). Though not an upākhyāna, it comes in the series of them
that runs from the end of Book 12 through the beginning of Book 13.
But here I would like to give fuller attention to two upākhyānas which,
taken together, allow us to explore what Mahābhārata subtales have to
say about dharma or Law as it bears upon a tension between implied
marital indissolubility and ‘irretrievable marital breakdown’—terms I
use advisedly, since in India the latter is not, even today, considered a
legal ground for divorce.33
First of these is the Śārṅgaka-Upākhyāna (1.220–5), a tale about
seven Śārṅgaka birds told to the Pāṇḍavas’ great-grandson Janamejaya
by Vaiśaṃpāyana at the end of Book 1, where it is notched into the
episode of the Burning of the Khāṇḍava Forest. It thus occurs in the
epic well before one gathers, in Book 3, that Draupadī is a frequent
listener to subtales; and since it is told three generations after her life,
she would not be alive to hear it anyway. But there are still things that
Mrs Janamejaya and Mrs Śaunaka might connect at this juncture with
Draupadī, whose favourite husband Arjuna has just returned with a
second wife, and who will lose her sons in a great conflagration.
The ṛsị Mandapāla, ‘Slow-to-protect’,34 having learned from the
gods who sit around Dharmarāja (i.e. Yama)35 that he cannot enjoy
the fruits of his acts in heaven without fulfilling his obligation to beget
33 See Menski 2005: 449–80. The closest the Mānava Dharmaśāstra comes to even
imagining divorce comes right after the famous verse denying women independence:
‘As a child, she must remain under her father’s control; as a young woman, under her
husband’s; and when her husband is dead, under her son’s’. She must never seek to live
independently. She must never want to separate herself from her father, husband, or
sons; for by separating herself from them, a woman brings disgrace on both families’
(5.148–9, tr. Olivelle).
34 Cf. van Buitenen 1973: 467: ‘the slow protector’.
35 Who has the habit of appearing frequently in upākhyānas; see Hiltebeitel 2005a:
480–4, 492.
234 chapter eight
sons (1.220.8–12), has the inspiration to fulfill this debt to his ances-
tors quickly by becoming a bird.
So he became a Śārṅgaka bird and coupled with a female (śārṅgaka)
named Jaritā, On her he begot four sons who were wise in the Veda
(brahmavādinaḥ), deserted them on the spot (tān apāsya sa tatraiva),
and ran after Lapitā. (1.220.16c–17)36
Now just as Agni is about to burn the Khāṇḍava Forest, the distraught
Jaritā lovingly oversees the four’s hatching. Mandapāla knows Agni’s
intention and lauds him with a Vedic-sounding hymn full of pralayic
overtones by which he obtains the god’s promise to spare the chil-
dren, whose survival of this conflagration will in some manner—as
Biardeau saw (1971–2: 141)—be reminiscent of the four Vedas.37 But
of course Jaritā and the children do not know of Mandapāla’s inter-
vention, since he is still flitting about the woods with Lapitā (1.220.20).
Jaritā, now described for the first of three times as a tapasvinī,38 a ‘suf-
fering woman’ (used now and then for Draupadī, especially beginning
with three usages describing her mistreatment in the gambling hall39),
bewails her plight:
36 Here and below I generally follow van Buitenen’s translation (and later Fitzgerald’s)
except for small changes, unless otherwise indicated.
37 ‘Jaritāri’, one of the names of the four sons, recalls the Rigvedic jaritṛ as a term
for Agni as a singer (Macdonell 1974: 97; Lubotsky 1997, vol. 1: 559–60). Another of
the sons, Sārisrḳ va, addresses Agni with the Vedic name Jātavedas. In Söhnen-Thieme’s
comparison (2005) of the Sārṅgaka-Upākhyāna with the Vatṭạ ka Jātaka (Jātaka 35;
for translation, see Cowell 2005, vol. 1: 88–90), this name is noted as central to an
‘act of truth’ in a gāthā verse uttered by the Buddha in one of his previous lives as a
baby quail, by which he called upon Agni to cease his approach in the form of a great
forest fire. Söhnen-Thieme regards the gāthā and three other verses as the nucleus
of a Buddhist ‘transformation’ of a presumably non-Buddhist story, but not of this
Mahābhārata story, which she sees as an indirect amplification—all of which seems
cautious, plausible, and curious in that both traditions build their stories around
pseudo-Vedic idioms. But note that the Jātaka story also includes a pralayic theme:
the baby quail’s words create the ‘aeon miracle’ of protecting the spot from fire for
an entire aeon (kalpa), and thus protect the Buddha and his monks who have found
themselves there. In effect, the Buddha, by his former truth-act as a quail, now protects
his disciple-sons as Mandapāla does.
38 At 1.221.2. Cf. 1.224.4 and 6 (discussed on p. 120), where Mandapāla settles his
thoughts on her as the one he is really worried about, and breaks with Lapitā.
39 At 2.62.3; 2.71.2; 2.72.12; cf. also 4.12.10; 4.34.11; 14.68.12. See Hara 1977–8: 58:
the word ‘makes frequent appearance . . . when a pitiable heroine in distress is described
by her lamenting friends, both male and female, showing their sympathy with her’. He
cites Nala’s description of Damayantī at Mahābhārata 3.64.10 as an example.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 235
Here this dreadful Fire is coming, burning the underbrush, setting the
universe aglow ( jagat saṃdīpayan),40 and terrifyingly he increases my
miseries. And these children of little wit (śiśavo mandacetasaḥ) pull at
me—still without feathers or feet, yet the final recourse of our ancestors
(pūrvesạ̄ ṃ naḥ parāyaṇam). Here is the Fire coming, terrifying, licking
the trees. (1.221.3–4)
Two things to note here: Jaritā underestimates the wit of these preco-
cious sons, and she is raising them for ‘our ancestors’. Despite the haste
with which she and the kids have been abandoned, the indissoluble
union conferred by her marriage has bought her surprisingly quickly
into her husband’s ancestral program. Indeed, we now learn that his
abrupt departure was not without words on this point. As Jaritā begins
to ponder her options, and first among them is covering her children
with her limbs and ‘dying with’ (maraṇaṃ saha) them,41 she tells them
that Mandapāla’s parting words included the prediction that their sec-
ond son Sārisrḳ va would ‘beget offspring, increasing the lineage of the
ancestors’ (prajāyeta pitrṇ ̣āṃ kulavardhanaḥ, 1.221.8). Immediately the
children also buy into the ancestral program, telling her:
Cast off your love (sneham utsṛjya), and fly away to where there is no
Fire (havyavāt)̣ . For when we have perished, you shall have other sons.
But when you have died, the continuance of our line will be cut (naḥ syāt
kulasaṃtatiḥ). Reflect on these two outcomes and do what is best for our
family (ksạ maṃ syād yat kulasya naḥ)—the ultimate moment has arrived
for you to do so, mother. Don’t be misled by your love for us your sons
(snehaṃ kārsị̄ḥ; sutesụ naḥ) into destroying the family (kulavināśāya);
for this deed of our father, who wishes for his worlds (lokakāmasya naḥ
pituḥ), must not be in vain. (1.221.12–14)
To follow the children’s use of the first person plural pronoun naḥ is
to realize that their concern for their mother is not her love (sneha)
for them, which she should disregard,42 but the ‘desire for worlds
(lokakāma) of our father’, which—they are already shrewd enough to
know—provides ‘what is best for our family’ as well as ultimate ‘safety’
40 See 1.220.24c, 28b; 1.223.12b, 15b (Agni as jagat-pati) on Agni and the entire
jagat, and 1.221.11ab and 224.3 on release from the cosmic blaze as moksạ (on which
see the discussion of pralaya themes below).
41 The term is evocative of satī as sahagamanam. As Söhnen-Thieme nicely points
out (2005), Jaritā is ‘naturally not able to stop the fire with a hymn or a prayer.’
42 Indeed, they offer her some typical moksạ dharma wisdom on this point: ‘We have
done you no favours, you do not know us at all. Who are you, so virtuous (satī) that
you support us under much anxiety, and who are we to you?’ (1.222.13).
236 chapter eight
(ksẹ ma, 1.222.16) for their mother through her status as a joint sac-
rificer in the ancestral rites. For as the little ones soon clarify further,
Jaritā is beautiful and can win her husband back and have other ‘beau-
tiful sons’ (1.222.4).43 As for themselves, the four fledglings tell Jaritā
they prefer a purifying death by fire to the uncertainties of being hid-
den in a rat hole, which is the best idea she has to offer; ‘or, perchance,
Fire will not burn us, and you shall come back to us again’ (1.222.15).
When she has flown off to a ‘safe country (deśaṃ44 ksẹ mam) devoid
of fire’ (1.222.16), the fledglings ask Agni to ‘protect us young ṛsịs’
(rsị̄n asmān bālakān pālayasva; 1.223.11c) by lauding him one by one
themselves (1.223.7–19). Agni is gratified by their stotra, but has of
course already promised their safety to Mandapāla, as he tells them
(1.223.22ab); but since their laud is also weighty to him, he asks what
else he can do for them, to which the little darlings’ reply is, ‘Burn
these cats!’—which Agni does while continuing on his eating binge
(1.223.20–5).
Whereupon the scene shifts to Mandapāla and Lapitā. Vaiśaṃpāyana
leads off by telling that Mandapāla was anxious about his sons even
though he had spoken to Agni. But this is just indirection by which
we find direction:
In his anxiety over his sons, he said to Lapitā, ‘Why, my little sons are
incapable of flying,45 Lapitā! When the Fire spreads and the wind begins
to blow hard, my sons will be unable to make their escape (asamarthā
vimoksạ̄ ya). Why, their poor mother (mātā tesạ̄ m tapasvinī) is unable to
save them; she must be anguished when she sees no way of saving her
sons. Why, suffering (saṃtapyamānā) for my sons, who are still incapable
of either running or flying, she must be screeching and fluttering about!
How is my son Jaritāri, how my Sārisrḳ va, how Stambamitra, how Droṇa,
and how that poor woman (kathaṃ sā ca tapasvinī)?’ (1.224.2–6)
43 I thank Simon Brodbeck (personal communication, February 2006) for the follow-
ing astute comment: ‘In general, in this whole Śārnġ aka story the ones who face the fire
are males (Mandapāla and the sons, because they must ensure the patriline survives),
whereas the females can just fly off “around somewhere” and have other children: it
is only the chicks who are so keen when Jaritā leaves them that her future sons might
be their father’s sons too. But the gendering of this “ancestral-heavenly” salvation and
the gendering of the “freedom from future rebirth” moksạ are slightly different’—the
former requiring ‘cooperation with the female’; the latter, ‘rejection of the female’.
44 I translate deśa mainly as ‘country’ in this story and the next, as van Buitenen
does only at the end of this story.
45 Van Buitenen has ‘escape’ for plavane.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 237
As we have noted, the tapasvinī theme is set in motion when Jaritā
starts bewailing the onset of Agni. Now, suddenly, it occurs twice from
the beak of Mandapāla, which is too much for Lapitā, who sees cor-
rectly that Mandapāla cannot really be worried about his sons, whom
he knows Agni has agreed to protect, and zeroes in, ‘as if jealously’
(sāsūyam iva, 1.224.7d):
You do not care at all for your sons! You yourself said they were ṛsịs of
splendour and power, and had nothing to fear from Fire. Also, before
my very eyes46 you commended them to the Fire, and the great-spirited
god gave you his promise. The World Guardian won’t ever tell a lie! And
they are eloquent speakers. Your mind (mānasam)47 is not on them. You
are suffering (paritapyase) because you are thinking about only her, my
rival (mamāmitrīṃ)! Your love for me is not firm as it once was for her.
Surely, it is not right for a bird (paksạ vatā) [to be] loveless to a friend,
[and] able to overlook [her] when he himself is somehow pained. Go to
your Jaritā, for whose sake you suffer (paritapyase) so! I shall wander
alone, as [befits having attached myself] to a bad man.48 (1.224.8–13)
Here the theme of friendship among birds takes on a double mean-
ing, since when Lapitā says it is ‘not right for a bird to be loveless
to a friend’, paksạ vat, ‘one possessing wings’, can also be translated
‘one who has two causes’ (van Buitenen) or ‘[one] that hath two par-
ties dividing his attention’ (Ganguli 1.235, p. 453). Moreover, Lapitā’s
word for ‘rival’ is amitrī, ‘enemy, adversary’—literally ‘non-friend’.
Mandapāla has brought a very human mess into his life as a bird
which he thought would be such a quick fix. But the point seems to
be that he now realizes this and is deciding to do something about it:
indeed, he is deciding to do ‘the right thing’. When Lapitā twice tells
him ‘you suffer’ (paritapyase) for Jaritā, she is matching his double
reference to ‘my poor wife’ (tapasvinī). And that is where he is headed
(1.224.14–16). Chagrined at the trouble his children are in, and real-
izing that the world despises a ‘slow-witted’ (mandadhiḥ) man who
‘abandons the present (or past) for the sake of the future’ (bhūtam
46 1.224.9b: mama saṃnidhau. Van Buitenen somewhat over translates this phrase,
which literally means no more than ‘in my presence’, but I have translated it as ‘before
my very eyes’ to evoke the sense of being a witness since it might remind one of the
story’s bearing as ‘unofficial law’, and also since it might, with Lapitā as the female
witness, be slightly suggestive in relation to the parable of the two birds in the one
tree, discussed below.
47 From here through to the end of this passage, I do not follow van Buitenen’s
translation.
48 Cf. Ganguli 1.235, p. 453.
238 chapter eight
hitvā bhavisỵ e ‘rthe), he tells Lapitā, ‘Do as you wish. For this blazing
fire is licking the trees and brings a hateful malign sorrow to my heart
(dvesỵ aṃ hi hṛdi saṃtāpaṃ janayaty aśivaṃ mama)’.
Vaiśaṃpāyana now shifts to the site just left by Agni, to which Jaritā
now dashes, ‘screeching pitifully’ (rorūyamāṇā kṛpaṇā), where she
sees ‘the most incredible sight’ (aśraddheyatamam . . . darśanam) of her
sons; she embraces them again and again and weeps (1.224.17–19).
Then suddenly Mandapāla himself arrived there, Bhārata, and none
of his sons welcomed him. Though he chattered at each of them time
and again, and at Jaritā, they spoke not a word to the ṛsị, good or bad.
(1.224.20–1)
Not a word until he tells his sons, ‘I made [you] over to the Oblation
Eater, but from this I found no peace’ (kṛtavān asmi havyāse naiva
śāntim ito labhe; 1.224.23). Mandapāla’s hesitation and ambiguity are
important here.49 He is not quite making it explicit that he obtained
Agni’s promise to protect them, which he does not know that they
now already know from Agni. But more importantly, he would not be
willing to make it explicit because Jaritā, who does not yet know that
he got Agni’s protection for the children, would realize that he did
not get Agni’s protection for her. In any case, Mandapāla’s ‘From this
I found no peace’ finally gets the parents talking:
Jaritā said, ‘What does your eldest son matter to you, or the second one?
What does the middlemost matter, or this poor youngest? You left me
completely destitute and went your way. Go back to your tender sweet-
smiling Lapitā!’ (1.224.24–5)
This sour reception is enough for Mandapāla to put a bad twist on her
response and a good twist on his own actions:
Mandapāla said, ‘Apart from another man, nothing in the world is so fatal
(bhavitavyam) to women as rivalry with another wife (sāpatnakam)! For
even the faithful and good Arundhatī, famous in all the worlds, distrusted
Vasisṭḥ a, the eminent ṛsị. He was always completely pure-hearted and
devoted to her happiness and well-being, yet she despised that hermit
among the Seven Ṛsịs, Because of this contempt she is now a tiny star
like a red ember overlaid by smoke, not very lovely, sometimes visible
sometimes not, which appears like a bad omen. You yourself obtained
49 Van Buitenen trims this to, ‘I left you to the Fire, but I found no peace’ (not
translating the ‘itas’—‘thence’, ‘from this’), which makes Mandapāla sound more as if
he is simply exhibiting a regret.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 239
me to get offspring, and giving up what you wanted,50 now that it has
come to this pass, you become like her. A man should never put trust
(viśvāsaḥ) [in the word] ‘wife’ (bhāryeti), for a wife who has sons does
not look to her duty.’ (1.224.26–31)
Mandapāla thus passes off his relationship with Lapitā with a maxim
about what is ‘fatal’ to women: another man, above all, but then rivalry
among co-wives’—even as it is he who, not ‘fatally’ at all, has had
another woman, and one with whom it is not so clear that he was
actually married. For as would be typical of Brahmanical marriages, at
least as they are viewed in post-Independence Indian courts, a public
marriage to a first wife would be considered sacramentally ‘irrevoca-
ble’ through the ‘seven-step’ rite of sapta-padī, which makes a wife a
‘friend’ (sakhā), whereas marriage to a second wife or concubine would
not.51 Moreover, more outrageously, Mandapāla’s comparison of Jaritā
to Arundhatī lets him get away with his implicit comparison of him-
self with the ever-faithful Vasisṭḥ a. Indeed, he seems to have made up
this story about Arundhatī and Vasisṭḥ a, the two stars that newlyweds
look to as emblems of fidelity (see Hiltebeitel 1977: 345), just for the
occasion.52 And most outrageously, he tries to pass off a maxim that a
wife cannot be trusted once she has sons when it is he, the husband,
who was not to be trusted! But his poppycock is enough to have won
over the children, who now ‘waited on him properly (saṃyag upāsire)’
50 Van Buitenen has ‘the man you wanted’ for isṭạ m (1.224.30c), which seems
gratuitous.
51 See Menski 2005: 276–301, 317, 396–403, 433, 526–7 on saptapadī in Hindu mar-
riage law; Nicholas 1995 on the invisibilization of divorce through emphasis on the
marriage saṃskāra as a rite that leaves no mental room for marital dissolution; Jamison
1996: 121, citing Sāṅkhāyana Gṛhryasūtra 1.14.6 etc. (sakhā saptapadī bhava, ‘Become
a companion [friend] of the seventh step’) and Āpastamba Śrautasūtra 10.23 (sakhāyaḥ
saptapadā abhūma, ‘We have become companions [friends] at the seventh step’).
52 Hopkins 1969: 182 cites no corroborating passage when he briefly mentions,
‘Arundhatī, though a model of faithfulness, yet suspected Vasisṭḥ a and became “smoky-
red”’. One cannot, of course, prove that a story is intentionally mis-told for effect, and
that alert audiences would raise their eyebrows, but that is what I suspect here. The
Mānava Dharmaśāstra seems to rely on this Mahābhārata mis-telling when it relates
both stories through the supposed low birth of Arundhatī to make the point that the
cases of ‘Śārnġ ī’ (= Jaritā) with Mandapāla and ‘Akasṃ ālā’ (= Arundhatī) with Vasisṭḥ a
prove that ‘women of low birth attained high status in this world by reason of the
eminent qualities ( guṇas) of their respective husbands’ (Mānava Dharmaśāstra 9.23–4,
tr, Olivelle)! But whether or not the Mānava Dharmaśāstra has the Mahābhārata story
as precedent, its totally different emphasis and conclusion show the originality of the
authors of both texts—as may also be said of the comparison between this story and
the Vatṭạ ka Jātaka (see n. 37 above).
240 chapter eight
as he began ‘to reassure’ (āśvāsayitum) them, telling them, with a few
choice words also tucked in for their mother, what they already know
but she up till now does not:
I had commended you [boys] to the Fire, so that he might spare you; and
he promised to me he would do so. Thus, knowing the Fire’s promise,
and your mother’s piety in the Law (dharmajñatām), and your own great
power, I did not come sooner. You had no need to worry about your
death, sons. Even the Bearer of Oblations knew you were ṛsịs, and the
brahman is known to you. (1.225.1–3)
Somehow Mandapāla leaves out that another reason he did not come
sooner is that he was having a good time with Lapitā. Jaritā too is
now silent on this point and others as well, and Lapitā is still flying
around somewhere. But the good news is that despite male infidelity
and wife- and child-desertion this marital reconciliation is complete,
without anyone having had to go to counseling or to court—like, say,
Śakuntalā, or Draupadī. For so Vaiśaṃpāyana now ends the tale: ‘Hav-
ing thus reasurred (āśvāsya) his sons, Mandapāla took them and his
wife, O Bhārata, and went from that country to another country (deśād
anyaṃ deśaṃ jagāma ha)’ (1.225:4).
Now somewhere along the line, I think probably when Mandapāla
had his change of heart and left Lapitā, but certainly by now, attentive
readers and listeners like Mrs Janamejaya and Mrs Śaunaka, who, as
noted, might be alert to the pertinence to Draupadī of a wayward yet
returning husband and the nearly slaughtered children, would realize
that Mandapāla’s name ‘Slow-to-protect’ would refer not to his chil-
dren, whom he protects from the very beginning, but to his ‘poor wife’
to whom he returns. And who would not wish the avian couple and
their children well as they depart for another country? But as they fly
off, leaving us poised to enter the Sabhāparvan, such listeners might
also reflect that they are coming to the scene in the main story in
which a husband will be all too horribly ‘slow-to-protect’ his ‘poor
wife’—as Draupadī is called for the first time, and then repeatedly,
when she is dragged into the sabhā (see n. 39).
This bring us to our second story, not an upākhyāna but a saṃvāda,
the Brahmadatta-Pūjanī-Saṃvāda (12.137),53 which occurs amid sev-
eral animal tales in the Āpaddharmaparvan of Book 12 that precede
53 Belvalkar (1954: 737) calls attention to parallels in the Harivaṃśa (now appen-
dix 5 in its Critical Edition) and the Kuntanī Jātaka (Jātaka 343), as Gombach notes
(2000, vol. 1: 274). For further discussion, see Bowles 2004: 199–202.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 241
the Kapota-Upākhyāna, which, as mentioned, ends in a female bird’s
implied satī. The bird Pūjanī—nicely translated as ‘Adorable’ by James
Fitzgerald—would seem to experience a surprising number of the
Śārṅgaka-Upākhyāna’s main issues, but, with contrary results. When
Adorable tells King Brahmadatta that she rejects his offer to restore
their friendship because her ‘trust’ (viśvāsa) is broken, she says, “A fool
is trapped by trust (viśvāsād badhyate bālas) . . . Some who cannot be
captured easily, not even with well-sharpened weapons, get captured
with conciliation, the way elephants are trapped by other elephants”
(12.137.34c–35). Adorable thus says that she would be a fool to restore
a friendship on the basis of coinciding interests, for, as with forest
elephants, such interests lead into traps.54
Adorable had lived for a long time in the women’s quarters
(antaḥpura) of Brahmadatta’s capital of Kāmpilya (12.137.5). Each
had a son, but one day at the beach the king’s son killed the bird’s
son. Reflecting upon this turn of events, Adorable says,
There is no association (saṃgatam) in a ksạ triya—neither affection (prītir)
nor goodheartedness (sauhṛdam). They participate with others to get
something done and then, when their interests have been accomplished,
they abandon them. There is no trust (viśvāsaḥ) among ksạ triyas. They
harm everyone. And after wronging someone they are always conciliatory,
but uselessly. I will now wreak fitting vengeance upon this horribly cruel
ingrate who has slain my trust (viśvāsaghātinaḥ). Triple is his sin, because
he killed someone born and raised with him, one who ate with him, and
who depended upon him for protection. (12.137.13–16)
Adorable then puts out the little prince’s eyes. This case of Adorable
and King Brahmadatta is interesting for having been a sakhya friend-
ship before their falling out. When Brahmadatta tries to coax Adorable
back, she says to him:
Friendship (sakhyam) can not be forged again between one who does
injury and the victim. The perpetrator knows that in his heart (hṛdayaṃ
tatra jānāti), and so does the victim. (12.137.32)
Brahmadatta disagrees:
Friendship (sakhyam) can be forged again between one who does injury
and the victim. Cessations of hostilities have been seen to happen
(vairasyopaśamo dṛsṭạ ḥ); neither meets with evil again. (12.137.33)
54 This explains a statement in the previous story, the Māñjāra-Mūsạ ka-Saṃvāda,
in which a mouse tells a cat, ‘no one is really anyone’s friend—interests just coincide
with other interests like elephants in the forests’ (12.136.104).
242 chapter eight
But, recalling the elephants, Adorable says, in effect, forget it. It is
suggestive that while sakhya describes the baseline of their friendship,
Adorable reviews her impasse in other friendship terms as well. She
gears up for her revenge against the little prince with the thought that
Ksạ triyas lack affection (prīti) and goodheartedness (sauhṛdam), and
says to Brahmadatta that both perpetrator and victim know how inju-
ries linger in the heart (hṛdayam). And with regard to mitra (‘alli-
ance’) friendship, she tells Brahmadatta that the only friends one can
truly trust are one’s innate friends (mitrāṇi sahajāni), the friends one
is born with—that is, one’s own good qualities:
Knowledge, bravery, initiative, strength, and fortitude the fifth—these they
say are one’s innate friends by which the wise make things happen here
(vidyā śauryaṃ ca dāksỵ aṃ ca balaṃ dhairyaṃ ca pañcakam / mitrāṇi
sahajāny āhur vartayantīha yair budhāḥ). (12.137.81)
K.M. Ganguli, in his translation of the Mahābhārata, once takes mitra
and suhṛd to imply a juxtaposition between ‘interested’ (mitra) friend-
ship and ‘disinterested’ (suhṛd) friendship.55 This nice contrast pres-
ents suhṛd in what could be taken as its ideal form, while, as regards
mitra, Adorable says the only truly dependable ‘allies’ would be one’s
innate good qualities. Perhaps she echoes a Buddhist emphasis: that
one must begin by being a friend to oneself as the opening to the
beneficial practice of ‘unlimited’ mindfulness on ‘friendship’ (maitrī or
mettā).56 In any case, contradicting the axiomatic ‘non-independence’
(asvatantratva) one is supposed to expect from a real woman in the
55 Ganguli 13.10, p. 25, translating Critical Edition 13.10.1: ‘Yudhisṭḥ ira said, “I
wish to know, O royal sage, whether any fault is incurred by one who from interested
or disinterested friendship [mitrasauhṛdabhāvena] imparts instructions unto a person
belonging to a low order of birth . . .” ’.
56 The practice is the first of the four ‘unlimited mental states’ (apramāṇacittas),
also known as the four brahmavihāras or ‘stations of Brahmā’: friendliness, compas-
sion, sympathetic joy, and impartiality (see Conze 1967: 80–91). Buddhaghosạ says the
purpose of developing ‘friendliness is . . . to seclude the mind from hate’ (Visuddhimagga
9.3; see Ñāṇamoli 1975); first and foremost, friendliness ‘should be developed . . . towards
oneself ’ (9.8), on which the Buddha said, ‘I visited all quarters with my mind/Nor
found I any dearer than myself/Self is likewise to every other dear/Who loves himself
will never harm another’ (9.10). Some statements that the self (Bhagavadgītā 6.5–6) or
one’s dharma (merits, virtue, Mānava Dharmaśāstra 4.239) is one’s true friend occur
elsewhere in classical brahmanical sources, and are also, I think, varied ripostes to such
Buddhist teachings. The Gītā citation, for instance, refers to anātman as an inimical
outlook (6.6c) and occurs amid references to (brahma-)nirvāṇa (5.24–5; 6.15) and the
friendship of Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a as two aspects of the self. See Sukthankar 1957: 94–102
on these verses and matters.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 243
epic and in the Mānava Dharmaśāstra,57 Adorable is gearing up to be
an ‘independent woman’.
Ultimately, and with further unpacking of these and further friend-
ship and kinship terms, Adorable concludes with an intriguing com-
mentary on marriage, kinship, and the state:
One should keep away from a bad wife (kubhāryām), a bad son (kupu-
tram), a bad kingdom (kurājānam), a bad friend (kusauhṛdam), a bad
relative (kusaṃbandham), a bad country (kudeśam). There is no trust in
a bad friend (kumitre nāsti viśvāsaḥ). How could there be pleasure in a
bad wife? There is no satisfaction in a bad kingdom. No one can make a
living in a bad country. There is never any association (saṃgatam) with
a bad friend (kumitre), whose friendship (sauhṛde) is always inconstant.
A bad relative becomes contemptuous when one loses one’s wealth. She
is a real wife who says what is dear (sā bhāryā yā priyaṃ brūte);58 he is a
real son in whom one takes satisfaction. He is a friend (mitram) where
there is trust; a real country is a place where one can survive. When
there is no oppression with violence, then the king rules with properly
strict governance. When he seeks to support the poor, it is not just some
personal tie of his own. Wife, country, friends (mitrāṇi), sons, kinsmen
(saṃbandhi), relatives (bāndhavāḥ)—all of these are excellent when
the king looks with the eye of Law (etat sarvaṃ guṇavati dharmanetre
mahīpatau). (12.137.89–94)
Adorable actually concludes the first verse of this passage, ‘One should
keep far away (dūrataḥ) from a bad country.’ Presumably, unlike
Lapitā who is left where she is, or Jaritā who flies off to another coun-
try with her husband and children, Adorable flies off to a distant coun-
try alone. Nor does she even have to say, like Lapitā, that she will be
better off without a ‘bad man’ (kupurusạ ). Gender is constructed to
show that these three pajaritas—or as Jamison puts it, ‘little (female)
birdikins’ (1996: 70)—hold the stories together, and that each in her
57 See Mānava Dharmaśāstra 5.147–8 (as partially cited in n. 33 above); 9.3. For
the epic, see Jamison 1996: 236–7 and 305 n. 98, citing also the Tapatī-Upākhyāna
(1.161.14), and noting contradictions of Manu’s dictum. The issue and the key terms
svatantrā/asvatantrā return in other substory material: the Vyusịtāśva-Upākhyāna
(1.113.4, 26); the Sulabhā-Janaka-Saṃvāda (with five references between 12.308.64
and 140); and the Asṭạ̄ vakra-Dik-Saṃvada (‘The Dialogue Between Asṭạ̄vakra and Lady
North’, with seven references between 13.21.11 and 18). Meanwhile, the main story
brings the terms to the fore when Sūrya is seducing Kuntī and telling her she is free to
follow her desires (3.291.13), and at Karṇa’s lowest moment when he tells Draupadī,
now wagered, that she is not only asvatantrā but also the wife of a slave (2.63.1). See
also the Vivāha-Dharmaḥ or ‘The Laws Governing Marriage’ at 13.46.13.
58 12.137.92a; for the translation ‘dear’, cf. the Yājñavalkya-Maitreyī-Saṃvāda at
Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upanisạ d 2.4.1–13; 4.5.1–15.
244 chapter eight
own way is more virtuous than her male partner. Unlike female char-
acters in general, who, as we have seen, are prone to fault themselves
with unknown sins even from previous lives, Mandapāla has the tenu-
ous no-fault clause that comes with being a man—a clause, no doubt
‘soteriologically’59 nuanced, that finds elegant and precise expression
in the Pativratā-Upākhyāna (3.196–206) when the virtuous hunter of
Mithilā proclaims, ‘Having committed a sin, a man (purusạ ) should
think, “Not I!” ’.60 No doubt alert to such dodges, Jaritā knows how
to weigh what she hears from her husband and the boys to keep her
family together. Meanwhile, Lapitā reads things truly when she sends
Mandapāla home to her. And Adorable knows the bottom-line basic
legal postulate that, deeper than her own revenge against the king’s
son, for which she is ostensibly exonerated, a king is responsible for
protection that does not occur.
But what are we to make of this baseline sakhya friendship between
a male king and this ‘adorable’ female bird, one based on a trust
(viśvāsa) that both admit has been broken, one that, with the breach,
calls so many friendship terms and ties under such thorough review
and ultimate forsaking? As we have noted, sakhya friendship can
imply marriage, and marriage itself can forge such friendship in the
seventh step. Indeed, in so far as Adorable calls her relation to the king
a sakhya friendship, one could take her to be implying that she is King
Brahmadatta’s first wife, the one with whom his bond would be made
truly indissoluble by the sacramental seven steps. Here a number of
species-crossing unimaginables could reflect deeper logics of the text,
which I thank Simon Brodbeck for suggesting that I consider. Were
Adorable to regard her own slain son to be Brahmadatta’s true heir,
she would now have put a blind half-brother in his place, which could
remind listeners of the blind Dhṛtarāsṭṛa whose rule, like Brahmadat-
ta’s, was untrustworthy; and of Dhṛtarāsṭṛa and Gāndhārī’s sons, who
by the time this story is told have been both disinherited and killed.
But a bird’s story must keep to certain bounds.
This little bird from the king’s ‘women’s quarters’ makes an analogy
between good friendship, good marriage, and a peaceable kingdom
and country. It seems that with Adorable and Brahmadatta’s parallel
59 Neither purusạ nor ātman can commit karma, whether good or bad, so a ‘man’
(both terms are of masculine gender) is really saved no matter what he has done.
60 pāpaṃ kṛtvā hi manyeta nāham asmīti purusạ ḥ/3.198.51. See similarly Nala’s
disclaimer about abandoning Damayantī: ‘It was not my own fault’ (nāhaṃ tat krṭavān
svayam, 3.74.16b, tr. van Buitenen). On both passages, see Hiltebeitel 2001a: 235.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 245
relationship as parents with sons but with no mention of their spouses,
Adorable’s story involves an implicit reflection on the unthinkable
grounds of ‘irretrievable marital breakdown’ that would, after all, even
if only in theory, justify a wife who leaves her husband—as must have
happened more often than we are told. For given the prior presump-
tion of marital indissolubility, irretrievable marital breakdown cannot
actually be admitted for creatures of the same species—or at least,
should a rare exception be found, it is easier to say it about creatures of
different ones. And where would trust or its breach finally have to lie?
In both cases, in the treatment of sons, for, in contrast to the story of
the Śārṅgaka birds where reconciliation can begin from the mother’s
and father’s mutual if uncoordinated care for the children, here we
have the opposite outcome of one son killed and the other maimed
in revenge—by Adorable herself. Indeed, what she seems to be really
saying, as so often by displacement, is that she can no longer be ‘a real
wife who says what is dear’. Don’t forget who is listening directly to all
this: not just Draupadī and her husbands, but also Kṛsṇ ̣a.
Friends among Friends
Coming now to Draupadī’s ‘unique’ sakhā-sakhī relationship with
Kṛsṇ ̣a, I will discuss the few occurrences that play out this relation-
ship explicitly in the text, and some of those that do so implicitly, and
conclude with some speculation on Yudhisṭḥ ira’s closing description
of Draupadī mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
In relationships with individual males, a woman’s husband could
consider her to be an exemplary ‘intimate friend’, as Yudhisṭḥ ira does
in answering the yaksạ ’s questions in the Āraṇeyam Upākhyāna or
‘Firesticks Subtale’ (so called at 1.2.1 27c):
. . . What is the friend made by fate (kiṃ svid daivakrṭaḥ sakhā)? . . . The wife
is the friend made by fate (bhāryā daivakṛtaḥ sakhā). (3.297.50b, 51b)
Note that sakhā, for the wife, is in the masculine. But for a woman to have
a sakhā outside of marriage is something rare. The Gautama Dharmasūtra,
one of the earliest texts on dharma, introduces such a relationship prob-
ably before the Mahābhārata,61 but fleetingly, with the following rules:
61 Olivelle 1999: xxviii–xxxiv places Āpastamba Dharmasūtra in the early third
century B.C.E. and Gautama Dharmasūtra in the mid-third century B.C.E. as the two
earliest Dharmasūtras.
246 chapter eight
Sex with a female friend (sakhī) or uterine sister,62 a woman belonging to
one’s lineage, the wife of one’s pupil, one’s daughter-in-law, and a cow
is equal to sex with the wife of an elder. According to some, it is equal
to a student’s breaking the vow of chastity.63 (Gautama Dharmasūtra
23.12–13, tr. Olivelle)
But Gautama does not develop the idea of the sakhī in any other rule,
and when one gets to the Mānava Dharmaśāstra, the rule is sanitized
so that it no longer concerns the delicate matter of sex with a female
friend (or a cow) but only with the wives of male friends or their
sons: ‘Sexual intercourse with uterine sisters, unmarried girls, lowest-
born women, and the wives of a friend or son, they say, is equal to
sex with an elder’s wife’ (Mānava Dharmaśāstra 11.59; tr. Olivelle).64
In the epics, as far as I know, the only case of such a relationship is
that of Kṛsṇ ̣a and Draupadī, which confirms not only its uniqueness
but also the singularity with which the Mahābhārata brings it to life.
I find it mentioned explicitly in only two contexts: first, three times
with reference to Draupadī’s disrobing; and then, much later, in an
ostensibly lighter scene.
Its first mention is thus in a scene of evident great intensity. Dragged
into the men’s gambling hall by her hair, dashed to the ground in
a single bloodstained garment, wretched with misery, hearing her
question about dharma only ducked and bandied about by the men,
Draupadī calls for the last time for it to be answered, mentioning for
the first time in the epic that she is the sakhī-friend of Kṛsṇ ̣a:
From of old, we have heard, they do not bring virtuous women into the
hall (dharmyāḥ striyaḥ sabhāṃ pūrvaṃ na nayantīti naḥ śruta). This
ancient eternal law (pūrvo dharmaḥ sanātanaḥ) is lost (nasṭạ ḥ) among
the Kauravas. How can I, wife of the Pāṇḍus, sister of Pārsạ ta, a good
woman (satī), and friend of Vāsudeva (vāsudevasya ca sakhī), enter the
hall of kings? Is the wife of Dharmarāja, whose birth matches his, a slave
or not a slave (dāsīm adāsīṃ vā)? (2.62.9–11)
It is shortly after this that she prays to Kṛsṇ ̣a, who, in conjunction with
Dharma (her dharma?), multiplies her sarees to prevent her disrobing—
62 I have added ‘uterine’, as Olivelle himself does when translating the parallel at
Mānava Dharmaśāstra 11.59.
63 Gautama Dharmasūtra 23.17–20 lists penances for this and comparable sins, as
do Baudhāyana Dharmasūtra 2.2.12–14 and Vasisṭḥ a Dharmasūtra 20.16 for compa-
rable sins.
64 The expiation is provided at Mānava Dharmaśāstra 11.171.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 247
at least so it is in all Sanskrit texts prior to the Critical Edition. As I
see it, the Critical Edition, in taking stock of a kind of Genghis Khan
effect in which a rampant breeding of variants has made it impossible
to trace earlier ‘generations’ (Stokes 2004), has taken Kṛsṇ ̣a’s part in
this intervention to suggest that there would once have been an origi-
nal in which he did not intervene and it was Draupadī’s own dharma
that saved her.65 Indeed, as the war approaches in Book 5, Draupadī
specifically connects her being Kṛsṇ ̣a’s sakhī with her having called
upon him to ‘save’ her in the sabhā:
It has been said often enough, but I repeat it confidently, Janārdana:
has there been a woman like me on earth . . . risen from the middle of
the altar . . . your dear friend (tava . . . priyā sakhī), Kṛsṇ ̣a? . . . Yet I . . . was
molested in the men’s hall . . . The Pāṇḍavas watched it without showing
anger or doing anything, so it was you I desired in my heart, Govinda,
crying ‘Save me!’ (trāhi mām iti govinda manasā kāṅkṣito ‘si me).
(5.80.21–6)
There is the suggestion here that only an ‘intimate friend’ (sakhā)
could touch her sarees in her husbands’ presence. But the main thing
about the intimacy of their sakhā-sakhī relationship in this episode
is that it is steeped in bhakti; as Draupadī herself also makes evident
earlier in the Forest Book when she questions how, as Kṛsṇ ̣a’s sakhī,
she could have suffered such insults. Seeking Kṛsṇ ̣a’s refuge (śaraṇyaṃ
śaraṇaisịṇī) and acknowledging at length that he is the supreme deity
(3.13.42–50), she asks:
And here am I, about to tell you of my grief, out of love (praṇayāt),
Madhusūdana—for are you not the lord of all beings, both divine and
65 James Hegarty (2004: 202 n. 298), speaking of ‘the shifting identification of the
being responsible for the replenishing of Draupadī’s skirts’, cites 2.*544.1–4 as yield-
ing ‘alternately, Dharma’s intervention’. But he omits to mention that in the first two
lines of this passage Draupadī invoked Kṛsṇ ̣a, Visṇ ̣u, Hari, and Nara to make this
happen. Nearly all manuscripts have Draupadī make some prayer to Kṛsṇ ̣a, while
the four that do not are in agreement with the rest that Duḥśāsana taunted her that
she would do so (2.60.26). Given that Kṛsṇ ̣a (5.58.21) and Draupadī (5.80.23–6) both
agree later that he did so, it would seem that she made some private prayer even in
the manuscripts where it is not so stated and where it is left, rather delicately (and
perhaps originally), for one to piece things together from these other attestations. The
epic has many ways of saying, ‘Where Kṛsṇ ̣a is, there is dharma.’ For discussion of
these matters, which continue to cause a lot of wishful readings, see Hiltebeitel 2001a:
250–7. See now Bhattacharya 2009 (I had only seen an email version in 2005), which,
despite recognizing evidence to the contrary at Mbh 9.58.10, for some reason wishes
to argue that Draupadī was never disrobed at all.
248 chapter eight
human? Then how was it that a woman like me, wife to the Pārthas, sister
of Dhṛsṭạ dyumna, your friend (tava . . . sakhī), Kṛsṇ ̣a, came to be dragged
into the hall, Lord? (3.13.52–3)
If, as I have argued elsewhere, Draupadī’s question about dharma ques-
tions the ‘ownership’ of women,66 it would seem that being Kṛsṇ ̣a’s
sakhī simply nullifies such ownership at a higher plane. But on a more
down-to-earth plane, Draupadī’s sakhī relation with Kṛsṇ ̣a is, at least
in these scenes, one of the main things that keeps her marriage to five
men going, and with it the dharma that they are all born to protect
and restore.
And now, much later into the epic, that seemingly lighter moment.
Kṛsṇ ̣a has just told Yudhisṭḥ ira what he has learned from spies: Arjuna
is returning, quite emaciated after many fights, from his mission of
guarding the horse for Yudhisṭḥ ira’s postwar Aśvamedha; prepara-
tions for the rite should begin. Yudhisṭḥ ira is very glad to hear of
Arjuna’s imminent return, but he is troubled by the report of his
brother’s gaunt look and asks Kṛsṇ ̣a whether Arjuna bears some
‘unfavourable67 mark by which he experiences such miseries’ (anisṭ ạ ṃ
laksạ ṇaṃ kṛsṇ ̣a yena duḥkhāny upāsnute; 14.89.4). ‘Reflecting for a
very long interlude’ (dhyātvā sumahad antaram; 14.89.6b)—and let
me mention that Vaiśaṃpāyana sometimes likes to cue us that Kṛsṇ ̣a
is an entertainer68—Kṛsṇ ̣a replies:69
O king, I surely do not detect this one’s having anything unfavourable
except that this lion among men’s cheekbones70 are overly developed (na
66 And it is most notably, and ironically, Karṇa—the sakhā of Duryodhana—who
rises to defend the husband’s ownership of the wife after the attempted disrobing
(2.63.1); see Hiltebeitel 2001a: 259 and n. 57 above.
67 For an-isṭạ : ‘unwished, undesirable, disadvantageous, unfavourable; bad, wrong,
evil, ominous’ (Monier-Williams).
68 See 12.29.6, where Kṛsṇ ̣a, speaking to Yudhisṭḥ ira ‘disarmingly’ (abhivinodayan,
Fitzgerald 2004a: 228) or ‘entertainingly’, launches into amusing stories, among them
that of Svarṇasṭḥ īvin, ‘Excretor of Gold’, in the Nārada-Pārvata-Upākhyāna (12.30), to
begin to dissolve some of Yudhisṭḥ ira’s postwar grief. See Hiltebeitel 2005d: 254–5 on
this passage; on the generally gloomy and depressed character of Yudhisṭḥ ira during
the Aśvamedha, see Jamison 1996: 76, to which p. 277 n. 151 adds, with only slight
but, as I am trying to suggest, significant exaggeration, ‘This, of course, is true for all
of the postwar Mahābhārata. The Pāṇḍavas seem to live in a state of clinical depression
for parvan after parvan.’
69 Note that at 14.89.6 he is called Hṛsị̄kesa, Visṇ ̣u, and ‘increaser of the Bhoja
princes’.
70 Dumézil 1970: 164 n. 9: ‘Piṇḍikā, which designates “a globular swelling or pro-
tuberance,” here certainly has the meaning “cheekbone.” ’
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 249
hy asya nṛpate kiṃ cid anisṭạ ṃ71 upalaksạ ye/ṛte purusạ siṃhasya piṇḍike
‘syātikāyataḥ). On account of these two, this tiger among men is always
hitched to the roads (nityam adhvasu yujyate). I do not see anything else
by which this Jaya has a share of misery. (14.89.7–8)
His curiosity satisfied, Yudhisṭḥ ira says, ‘So it is, Lord’ (evam etad iti
prabho; 14.89.9d).
But Kṛsṇ ̣a Draupadī indignantly72 glanced askance at Kṛsṇ ̣a (kṛsṇ ̣ā tu
draupadī kṛsṇ ̣aṃ tiryak sāsūyam aiksạ ta). The Slayer of Keśin, Hṛsị̄keśa,
approved that showing of her affection (pratijagrāha tasyās taṃ
praṇayam)73 as if he were Dhanaṃjaya in person (sāksạ̄ d iva),74 a friend
of a friend (sakhyuḥ sakhā). Having heard, Bhīma and the other Kurus
and Yādavas75 there took pleasure in this story about Dhanaṃjaya whose
manner was amusing,76 O lord (remuḥ śrutvā vicitrārthā dhanaṃjayakathā
vibho). (14.89.10–11)
Now if Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s remark and his approval of Draupadī’s show of affection
were all we had to go on, we might begin by noting that he seems to be teas-
ing his friend Draupadī. Vaiśaṃpāyana’s initial cues would reinforce this:
Krṣ ṇ ̣a took a very long time to come up with this vicitrārthā . . . kathā—
this ‘amusing’, ‘entertaining’, or ‘colourful’ tale about Arjuna.
But what do we have here in this sakhyuḥ sakhā, ‘friend of a friend’?
Who is whose friend? Let us return to the last line of the three-line
verse where this phrase occurs: ‘Hṛsị̄keśa [approved that showing of
her affection], as if he were Dhanaṃjaya in person, a friend of a friend
(sakhyuḥ sakhā)’ (14.89.10ef ). The commentator Nīlakaṇtḥ a is silent.
Georges Dumézil, while trying to make a comparative point about the
facial distortions of Indo-European warriors, seems to take sakhyuḥ
sakhā as referring to Kṛsṇ ̣a as the friend of Arjuna: ‘Draupadī, . . . who
71 Instead of anisṭạ m, the Vulgate (14.87.8b; see Kinjawadekar 1929–36) reads
saṃślisṭạ m, on which Nīlakaṇtḥ a suggests something confounded, bristling, fleshy,
and extending broadly and from behind.
72 I translate sāsūyam here as ‘indignantly’, noting that I have followed van Buitenen’s
‘jealously’ in the response of Lapitā to Mandapāla’s newfound concern for his ‘poor
wife’ (1.224.7d). In fact, ‘indignantly’ would do for both usages, whereas ‘jealously’
would not fit the present one. For the adjectival sāsūya, Monier-Williams gives ‘hav-
ing envy, envious; disdainful, scornful, angry at or with’. Ganguli 14.87, p. 149, has
‘angrily’, which I would regard as the next best thing in this context.
73 Again, praṇayam; cf. the early Forest Book passage just cited.
74 ‘Visibly, really, actually’ (Monier-Williams); with his own eyes.
75 The Vulgate reads yājakās, ‘sacrificers’ (14.87.12d) rather than yādavās.
76 Whose goal was varied; whose concern, manner, or meaning was charming,
entertaining, amusing, colourful.
250 chapter eight
has a preference for Arjuna, . . . takes strong exception to a challenge of
this kind to the hero’s perfect beauty; she throws an angry glance at
Kṛsṇ ̣a, who, in his own affection for Arjuna, enjoys her feminine reac-
tion’ (1970: 164 n. 9).77 This is certainly grammatically plausible, since
the genitive sakhyuḥ, ‘of the friend’, is in the masculine. But Ganguli
takes sakhyuḥ sakhā as referring to Kṛsṇ ̣a and Draupadī, translating,
‘The slayer of Kesi, viz., Hrishikesa, approved of that indication of
love (for his friend) which the princess of Panchala, who also was his
friend, displayed’—to which he adds in a note: ‘It is worthy of note
that Draupadī was always styled by Krishna as his sakhī or “friend”.
Krishna was highly chivalrous to the other sex at an age when women
were universally regarded as the inferiors of men’ (Ganguli 14.87,
p. 149).78 That is, Ganguli takes ‘friend of a friend’ to refer to Kṛsṇ ̣a
(the sakhā) as the friend of Draupadī (sakhyuḥ, even though it is in
the masculine), while reminding us in parentheses that Arjuna, for
whom Draupadī makes her show of affection, is also Kṛsṇ ̣a’s friend.
Somewhat in favour of this reading, the genitive tasyās, ‘of her’, in
‘that showing of her affection’ which precedes sakhyuḥ sakhā, could
be taken as pointing to Draupadī in the genitive masculine ‘of the
friend’, and it is instructive that three Malayalam manuscripts79 replace
sakhyuḥ with the feminine genitive sakhyāḥ to make this explicit: that
‘friend of a friend’ means ‘friend of a female friend’. Actually, it is per-
fectly ambiguous. The masculine genitive sakhyuḥ could refer to either
Draupadī or Arjuna as ‘friend’ of Kṛsṇ ̣a, for as William Dwight Whit-
ney observes, ‘forms of [the masculine] sakhī are sometimes found
used with feminine value’ (1960: 342)—we have noticed such a usage
when Yudhisṭḥ ira describes the wife as the ‘friend (sakhā) made by
fate’. Moreover, since Kṛsṇ ̣a sees Draupadī ‘as if he were Dhanaṃjaya
in person (sāksạ̄ d iva)’, it could even be saying that he is sympatheti-
cally seeing what Arjuna would be seeing as the friend in the nomina-
tive, leaving the genitive—the friend whose friend is Arjuna—to be
either Draupadī or Kṛsṇ ̣a.
77 Dumézil would probably have in mind behind this the Vedic precedent of Visṇ ̣u’s
being the ‘intimate friend of Indra’ (indrasya yújyaḥ sákhā, Ṛgveda 1.22.19).
78 Note, however, that Ganguli turns matters around to make this point for Kṛsṇ ̣a
who, as far as I can see, leaves it entirely to Draupadī to affirm their friendship in
sakhā-sakhī terms.
79 Those called M1–3 in the apparatus of the Critical Edition.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 251
But there are other clues in Vaiśaṃpāyana’s narration, for we are
actually in the midst of another highly charged ritual situation involv-
ing not only Draupadī and Arjuna but also the returning horse. In this
regard, Draupadī could have more on her mind to be indignant about
than just this slight of Arjuna, whose return with the horse after its
year of wandering signals that Draupadī must now ramp herself up for
a ritual highlight of the Aśvamedha. For if one were following the old
ritual texts, as the queen or chief wife (mahisị̄) of the king, she would
soon be lying down and exposing herself sexually to the horse after it
has been suffocated. Even though it is certainly selective in describing
other details of the Aśvamedha, the Mahābhārata does not omit this
‘sexually jolting’ ritual scene, which it soon describes with manifest
restraint:
When the bulls among priests (yājakarsạ bhāḥ) had made the horse
agree [i.e., when they had killed it] according to rule, they caused the
wise (manasvinīm) daughter of Drupada to lie down beside it for three
minutes (kalābhis tisṛbhī) according to rule, O king. (14.91.2)80
Let us note that Vyāsa plays a supervisory priestly role at both
Yudhisṭḥ ira’s rājasūya and his Aśvamedha, and would thus be one of
the chief ‘bulls among priests (yājakas)’ mentioned here.81 But what
is most noteworthy is that Kṛsṇ ̣a’s friendship with Draupadī comes
explicitly into play around these two ritually defined scenes: one in a
development from the dice match as an extended narrative sequel to
the Rājasūya,82 and the other in an underplayed portrayal of the role
of the mahisị̄ in exposing herself sexually to the sacrificed horse in the
Aśvamedha. I suspect that in each case Kṛsṇ ̣a intervenes to lighten
Draupadī’s sexual humiliation. As the epic wife takes her role as vic-
tim83 within the arena of the great Vedic royal sacrifices, she has a new
80 With little change from Jamison, who comments, ‘Three minutes sounds about
right. For whatever reason, at the Aśvamedha depicted in the Rāmāyana a whole night
is required’ (1996: 66), and describes in detail what the traditional ritual would expect
of Draupadī (ibid.: 68–9).
81 See Sullivan 1990: 31–4; Hiltebeitel 2001a: 50–1, 77–9.
82 As van Buitenen demonstrated (1972), the Mahābhārata’s second book transposes
the dice match that should end a Rājasūya from Yudhisṭḥ ira’s ceremony at the Pāṇḍava
capital, which ends without a dice match, to the ostensibly independent sequel that
occurs when Yudhisṭḥ ira is invited to play dice at the Kaurava capital.
83 See Jamison 1996: 256 on the ‘sacrificed’ sacrificer’s wife playing the role of media-
tor between men and gods. I would suggest that this is the Vedic ground from which
this aspect of Draupadī’s relation to Kṛsṇ ̣a is developed by the epic poets.
252 chapter eight
friend to turn to in the text’s bhakti theology: God. But really, he is not
a new friend but an old one, for as the earlier Vedic Brāhmaṇa texts
are fond of repeating, yajño vai visṇ ̣us, ‘Visṇ ̣u is the sacrifice’.84
Further, I believe that Vaiśaṃpāyana offers hints that the Yādavas,
among others, or, even more interestingly, the yājakas or ‘sacrificial
priests’ (see n. 75), among others, would have found even more to be
amused about in Kṛsṇ ̣a’s ‘colourful’ tale about Arjuna. This would be
that Kṛsṇ ̣a seems to be referring not only to Arjuna but to the horse;
or, more exactly, that if Kṛsṇ ̣a were reading, or perhaps better, reading
into, his ‘intimate friend’ Draupadī’s mind, he would be hinting that
Arjuna and the horse would have a somewhat fused or interchange-
able profile as they approach together. While piṇḍikā can indeed des-
ignate ‘a globular swelling or protuberance’ on a man’s cheeks, it could
also describe the same on a horse.85 Kṛsṇ ̣a’s bon mot would thus be a
ślesạ or double entendre: one that would be especially amusing to the
yājakas, who are thinking not only of Arjuna but also—or perhaps
more so—of the horse he is bringing for them to sacrifice. Indeed,
the yājakas, as we have seen, are headed by Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana Vyāsa,
the author, who would be the first to understand double meanings. Or
alternatively, the Yādavas know their kinsman Krṣ ṇ ̣a better than most.
The narration and Kṛsṇ ̣a’s own words offer further clues in this
direction. That Kṛsṇ ̣a approves Draupadī’s show of affection under
his name Slayer of Keśin is more than curious, since Keśin is a horse
Kṛsṇ ̣a slew in his childhood.86 Even the name Hṛsị̄keśa is worth noting
here, since it can mean ‘Master of the Senses’ (Biardeau 2002, vol. 1:
595) and, with that, convey the familiar Upanishadic image of ‘yok-
ing’ the senses, with the senses evoking horses.87 But most tellingly,
these meanings apply when Kṛsṇ ̣a says in his own words that Arjuna’s
facial protuberances come from his being ‘always hitched to the roads’
(nityam adhvasu yujyate), like a family workhorse. If so, no wonder
Draupadī looks at him askance. She would understand this play on
words just as well as the yājakas or Yādavas do.
84 See Hiltebeitel 1976: 105, 293–4, 333, 356.
85 Cf. Monier-Williams: ‘Piṇḍika, n. the penis, Linġ aP.; (ā), f., see piṇḍaka’; piṇḍaka,
‘. . . a round protuberance (esp. on an elephant’s temples) . . . (ikā), f. a globular fleshy
swelling (in the shoulders, arms, legs, &c., esp. the calf of the leg)’. Similar meanings
also apply to piṇḍa. I will not press the late attestation of ‘penis’.
86 On the principle that names of multiply named characters are often used selectively
for their contextual fit, see Biardeau 2002: passim.
87 See Katḥ a Upanisạ d 3.3–9 and other Mahābhārata ramifications in Hiltebeitel
1984.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 253
In short, when Vaiśaṃpāyana tells us that Kṛsṇ ̣a responded to
Draupadī’s indignation as a friend of a friend (sakhyuḥ sakhā), the
sakhā could be either Kṛsṇ ̣a or Arjuna, and the sakhyuḥ could be
either Arjuna, Draupadī, or Kṛsṇ ̣a. If Vaiśaṃpāyana is cuing us to take
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s ‘story’ about Arjuna’s cheekbones to be ‘amusing’, he is prob-
ably also leaving us with at least some of these ambiguities as to the
triple intimacies of the sakhā-sakhī friendship of Draupadī, Kṛsṇ ̣a, and
Arjuna. One could probably say that it is the relation of these prin-
cipal characters—the leading man, leading woman, and their friend
God—as they act, wink, and listen, that provides the epic’s armature
of gender throughout. I have in mind principally Draupadī’s colloquy
with Kṛsṇ ̣a’s wife Satyabhāmā in The Book of the Forest (3.222–4),
Arjuna’s disguise in The Book of Virātạ (see Hiltebeitel 1980b), and
above all the persona of Kṛsṇ ̣a, a devious divinity (Matilal 1991) of
whom it can be said that part of his charm is that you don’t have to
believe a word he says.
The Mahābhārata does not really tell us where these friendships start.
Perhaps Arjuna’s with Kṛsṇ ̣a is among the friendships and rivalries the
Pāṇḍavas form with others—notably Aśvatthāman and Karṇa—who
receive Droṇa’s martial training, since the Vṛsṇ ̣is and Andhakas are
mentioned among that lot (1.122.46), but without Kṛsṇ ̣a being person-
ally identified there. But by the time of Draupadī’s svayaṃvara, Kṛsṇ ̣a
is there with Balarāma to recognize Arjuna, restrain the vying suitors,
and seal the deal as ‘lawful’ (dharmeṇa, 1.181.32)—before it becomes
a matter of polyandry (which calls for the additional interventions,
mentioned above, of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s congeners Vyāsa and Nārada). Draupadī
does not much appreciate Kṛsṇ ̣a’s next entanglement: encouraging
Arjuna to marry Subhadrā, his (Kṛsṇ ̣a’s) sister (1.211–12). Indeed,
when Kṛsṇ ̣a uses the phrase ‘always hitched to the roads’ to explain
Arjuna’s high cheekbones, Draupadī could also be reminded of this
tour (provoked by Nārada’s intervention) that brought Arjuna home
with this new bride. In any case, the Burning of the Khāṇḍava Forest
is framed by these now developed friendships. Before the fire starts,
Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a decide to go, as each puts it, ‘surrounded by [our]
friends’ (suhṛj-janavṛta)—including Draupadī and Subhadrā88—for
water sports and a picnic with liquor and music on a bank of the
88 Friendships between women in classical sources deserve further study, for which
Pintchman’s ethnography (2007) of women’s friendships in Benares has important
pointers.
254 chapter eight
Yamunā (1.214.14–25). And when the conflagration is over, Agni
grants Kṛsṇ ̣a the boon of ‘eternal friendship with Arjuna’ (prītiṃ
pārthena śāśvatīm, 1.225.13)89—like marital friendship, friendship
between males can be sanctioned by circling around fire.90 Moreover,
in the grisly scene between these two bookmarks of confirmed amity,
the Burning of the Khāṇḍava Forest reveals Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a for the
first time as ‘the two Kṛsṇ ̣as’ (1.214.27, 32; 1.219.3) riding together
on one chariot, as they will do in the war (see Hiltebeitel 1984). By
that point one also knows that Kṛsṇ ̣a, Arjuna, and Draupadī are three
enigmatic ‘Kṛsṇ ̣as’ along with a fourth, the author Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana
Vyāsa. As we have now seen, all this has been further developed when
Draupadī and Kṛsṇ ̣a are mentioned as two Kṛsṇ ̣as at the beginning
of the passage about Arjuna’s return with the horse, where Vyāsa not
only stands behind everything Vaiśaṃpāyana says, but also is the chief
of the priests overseeing the whole Aśvamedha when Draupadī and
the dead horse take their three minutes to cohabit.
Now with regard to sakhī 91 as ‘intimate friend’, we have seen that there
is an Upanishadic usage of that term in describing two birds who as
‘companions and friends’ nestle in the same tree:92
Two birds, who are companions and friends (sayujā sakhāyā), nestle on
the very same tree. One of them eats a tasty fig; the other, not eating,
looks on. Stuck on the very same tree, one person grieves, deluded by her
who is not the Lord (anīśayā). But when he sees the other, the contented
Lord (īśam)—and the Lord’s majesty—his grief disappears. (Śvetāśvatara
Upanisạ d 4.6–7, tr. Olivelle 1996; also Muṇḍaka Upanisạ d 3.1.1–2)
89 Curiously, these are the same terms Drupada uses when he disingenuously asks
Droṇa for ‘eternal friendship’ (1.128.13d) after the latter has returned to him half
of the kingdom he conquered from him with the help of his just mentioned martial
trainees.
90 As with the friendship forged between Rāma and Sugrīva (Rāmāyaṇa 3.68.13;
4.5.16).
91 Henceforth I use the stem form sakhī of the masculine noun generically rather
than the nominative singulars sakhā and sakhī. I will not treat in this chapter the
alternate meaning of sakhī as ‘pact friend’ or socius, on which see Hiltebeitel 1976:
25–66; Dumézil 1970: 20, 30.
92 Biardeau sees the parable of the two birds standing behind Kṛsṇ ̣a’s story
(Mahābhārata 2.13.36–42) of the two allies of Jarāsaṃdha: Haṃsa (whose name
‘Gander’ evokes the supreme self or ātman) and Ḍimbhaka (‘Sot’, ‘Fool’); see Biardeau
2002, vol. 2: 756.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 255
It would seem that the Muṇḍaka and Śvetāśvatara93 Upanisạ ds put a
bhakti twist on the first of these two verses—which is originally the
first in a sequence of three Rigvedic riddle verses94 about two male
birds without a female birdikins to complement them—by introducing
the feminine as ‘her who is not the Lord’,95 the ‘tasty fig’ that deludes
the one friend who eats while ‘the other, the contented Lord’, ‘not
eating, looks on’. Indeed, given the preceding verse that contextual-
izes this parable at Śvetāśvatara Upanisạ d 4.5, ‘she’, as one of the three
‘unborns’ or aja/ajās, is none other than tri-colored primal matter
whom the one unborn male ‘burning with passion, covers’ while the
other ‘unborn male leaves her after he has finished enjoying her plea-
sures’ (tr. Olivelle 1996).96 To put it briefly, the exemplary sakhī friend-
ship of the two male birds passes entirely over ‘her’ head.
I have been suggesting in this chapter that the Mahābhārata has done
something to correct this in Kṛsṇ ̣a’s sakhī friendship with Draupadī.
But we must finally see this not from within this ‘dark’ circle of sakhī
friends named Kṛsṇ ̣a/ā (‘black’), but from the dying consciousness of
the almost infinitely educable Yudhisṭḥ ira, who is always slightly out-
side that circle (that is, one barely finds him mentioned as Kṛsṇ ̣a’s
sakhī friend—see for example 5.70.91ab; Arjuna is after all his brother,
and although Yudhisṭḥ ira does speak of the wife as sakhā, he knows
that among his brothers this relation to Draupadī would belong above
all to Arjuna).
Yudhisṭḥ ira knows that Draupadī has died on the path up into the
Himālaya that he and his brothers take on their final great setting forth
(mahāprasthāna) accompanied by a dog who is Dharma in disguise.
Draupadī is the first to fall, leaving Yudhisṭḥ ira to explain to Bhīma
that she fell as the result of her one fault in life: that she had a partial-
ity for Arjuna (17.2.6). Without looking back he climbs ahead. But he
continues to think about her, and once the dog has revealed himself
93 I would not go as far as Oberlies, who argues that the Śvetāśvatara is from around
0–200 C.E. (1997: 86; 1988: 57–9), though he may be right (even if I doubt it) that it
is younger than the Gītā. Cf. Olivelle 1996: 252: ‘Its thought and vocabulary are close
to those of the other famous theistic document, the Bhagavad Gītā.’
94 Ṛgveda 1.164.20–2; see most recently Houben 2000: 520–2.
95 Anīśayā is the instrumental of the feminine anīśā, ‘not-lord’, which Olivelle
translates by this whole phrase.
96 See also Olivelle 1996: 399: the ‘expression’ anīsā ‘probably refers to the female
cosmic power, that is, prakṛti, which is distinct from the Lord and which is the cause
of human ignorance. The opposition between the two principles is more pronounced
in the SU [Śvetāśvatara Upanisạ d] [than it is in the Muṇḍaka Upanisạ d].’
256 chapter eight
to be Dharma, Yudhisṭḥ ira is taken in a chariot to heaven in his own
body, with all his human feelings still intact; and once there, desiring
to be wherever his brothers and Draupadī are, he brings Book 17 to a
resounding close by asking where bṛhatī śyāmā buddhisattvaguṇānvitā/
draupadī is (17.3.36). Then, as Book 18 begins, finding Duryodhana
rather than his loved ones there, he soon finds Draupadī (and the rest)
at the end of her post-mortem but still ‘human’ path in Hell (18.2.11–
41). There he dramatically curses the gods, dharma, and Dharma as his
father (devaṃś ca garhayāṃ āsa dharmaṃ caiva yudhisṭ ḥ iraḥ; 18.2.50)
for all the awful tests they have made him and his loved ones endure.
And having reentered heaven himself, just as he has his last longing to
question Draupadī (18.4.8), Indra breaks in to tell him he cannot do so
because she has already returned to her divine identity:
O Yudhisṭḥ ira, she is Śrī, who took the form of Draupadī for your sake,
becoming human though not born of a womb, beloved of the world, she
who smells good (śrīr esạ̄ draupadīrūpā tvadarthe mānusạ ṃ gatā / ayonijā
lokakāntā puṇyagandhā yudhisṭḥ ira). (18.4.9)
In questioning where Draupadī is in this interval between death and
what is next for her, I would speculate that Yudhisṭḥ ira may be evok-
ing an even deeper identity of Draupadī than Śrī,97 whose ‘good smell’
is surely but also merely that of the earth, which Yudhisṭḥ ira must
now leave behind. If so, this would call for us to think that the epic’s
concatenation of friends named Kṛsṇ ̣a/ā would be co-configured (by
the epic’s author, another Kṛsṇ ̣a, no less) against the full background
of what Madeleine Biardeau nearly forty years ago98 introduced as the
epico-puranic ‘universe of bhakti’, a cosmology in which on the grand-
est scale—on top, that is, of the ‘occasional dissolutions’ in which the
earth is periodically dissolved into the single ocean—there are the
‘great dissolutions’ in which all the elements are dissolved into pri-
mal matter, the third ajā. If so, Kṛsṇ ̣a and Arjuna, ‘the two Kṛsṇ ̣as
97 This paragraph, and indeed this whole chapter, carries along a meditation on this
description of Draupadī in Hiltebeitel 2001a: 271–7, especially 272–3 and nn. 88–90,
the latter on the ‘ “darkly illuminating” sattvic quality’ that the ‘three Krṣ ṇ ̣as’ Draupadī,
Kṛsṇ ̣a, and Vyāsa share. I would suggest that the identity of the Goddess as Yoganidrā
in the Devī Māhātmya (1.54–71) and elsewhere would emerge from this range of ideas.
As Visṇ ̣u’s ‘yogic sleep’, it is she who, at Brahmā’s behest, awakens Visṇ ̣u to defeat the
demons Madhu and Kaitạ bha, thereby securing the continuance of creation.
98 Principally in the 1967, 1968 and 1971 articles reprinted in Biardeau 1981a.
among friends: marriage, women, and some little birds 257
on one chariot’99 as images of the soul and the Lord, would be sakhīs
with a ‘great enigmatic dark Lady’ (bṛhatī śyāmā) indeed. The sakhī
relation that connects the three of them would apply not only to the
two males as Lord and soul, but also to the three as Lord, soul, and
primal matter—that is, primal matter in her highest sattvic aspect as
pradhāna, which reveals itself / who reveals herself, or is revealed, at
eschatological moments of both individual and cosmic illumination. If
so, Yudhisṭḥ ira would be not only asking after the woman of substance
and intellect, the lady paṇḍitā (or learned scholar) he knew in life, but
also giving homage to the deepest nature she could possibly have in
this more than occasionally philosophical text: the great enigmatic dark
one (bṛhatī śyāmā) who is buddhisattvaguṇānvitā, primal substance as
intellect. The ‘great enigmatic dark one’ who is buddhisattvaguṇānvitā
would then be that tasty fig come to life in parity, the mysterious third
friend who is, precisely for Yudhisṭḥ ira, the friend of the friend of the
friend.
99 Whose friendship also recalls their identity as Nara and Nārāyaṇa: ‘. . . the two
dear friends who were the seers Nara and Nārāyaṇa’ (āstāṃ priyasakhāyau tau
naranārāyaṇāv ṛsị; 1.210.5).

CHAPTER NINE
EPIC AŚVAMEDHAS
My goal is to convince readers that the impregnations of the Kuru
queens Ambikā and Ambālikā’s by the Mahābhārata author Vyāsa
allude to the Aśvamedha scene where the chief queen or mahisị̄ lies
with the sacrificial horse. To put it bluntly, Vyāsa should come out
smelling something like a horse.
The case calls for four quick moves. The first is to recognize that the
Aśvamedha scene most susceptible to veiled allusion is this very one.
The second is to explore a suspicion that one way to allude knowingly
to it would be to shift planes from the Aśvamedha to other rites where
a woman is called upon to secure offspring outside marriage: espe-
cially via niyoga, with a live man rather than a dead horse. The main
move is to note a symmetry where the two epics treat four episodes:
three where Aśvamedhas occur in the main narratives, and the fourth,
our target: ostensibly a niyoga or “levirate” story with an anti-niyoga
sequel. In all cases, we must keep track of the horse, the mahisị̄, and
three or so other queens. The four episodes are quadrangulated in the
following table:
Table 1
Rāmāyaṇa
Book 1 Aśvamedha: Daśaratha’s Aśvamedha Book 7 Postwar
supplemented by a Putrīya Isṭị performed by Aśvamedha of Rāma
Ṛśyaśṛṅga, which enables the births of Rāma (Rām 7.75–89)
and his three brothers (Rām 1.8–17)
Mahābhārata
Book 1 Crypto-Aśvamedha scenes: Vyāsa’s Book 14 Postwar
niyoga with the two Kāśi princesses that Aśvamedha of Yudhisṭḥ ira
enables the births of Dhṛtarāsṭṛa and Pāṇḍu (Mbh 4.87–91)
(Mbh 1.99–100). (Sequel) Kuntī’s anti-niyoga
tale of King Vyusịtāśva told before she reveals
her mantra, which enables the births of the
five Pāṇḍavas (Mbh 1.112)
260 chapter nine
Finally, a fourth move is to ask, Who would these knowing allusions
be known to? Here, my first and only necessary candidates are the epic
poets, who could, moreover, be familiar with the way that Ṛgvedic
poets handled similar things—if, as I do, we may believe Stephanie
Jamison (1996, 74–88) that the potent monkey Vṛsạ̄ kapi is a veiled
Aśvamedha horse in ṚV 10.86, and Joel Brereton (2002) that the race
of Mudgala and Mudgalānī is a veiled complement to a niyoga ritual in
ṚV 10.102. Moreover, since I believe the Mahābhārata is a little earlier
than the Rāmāyaṇa, I think we may suspect that in squaring off our
symmetry, Vālmīki would have understood the Aśvamedha overtones
of our main episode and its sequel. He seems to make economy of a
number of the vaster epic’s structural features to tell a far less ambigu-
ous tale about a perfect man and woman.1 Granted, these four moves
will be a little too quick. But considering the alternatives, better to be
brief than labored. I will first treat the two postwar Aśvamedhas and
then the two Book 1 scenes.
A. Postwar Aśvamedha of Rām 7.75–89
Rāma chooses a postwar Aśvamedha because Bharata, one of his broth-
ers, says it is less destructive than a Rājasūya, and Laksṃ ana, another
of his brothers, says that it removes all sins (Rām 7.75.2).2 Laksṃ ana’s
point recalls the rationale for Yudhisṭḥ ira’s postwar Aśvamedha.3
But in Rāma’s case no explicit sins are mentioned, other than that
Laksṃ ana tells how Indra’s Aśvamedha removed his Brahmanicide of
killing Vṛtra.4 Rāma orders Bharata to lead a procession trailed by all
1 See Hiltebeitel 2005a, 460–61 on the two epics’ similar structural features, and
further discussion in Hiltebeitel, forthcoming, chapter 8.
2 It is curious that Rāma considers a postwar Rājasūya, having never, of course, per-
formed one. Bharata’s point recalls the conversation in Mbh Book 2 where Yudhisṭḥ ira
chooses the Rājasūya over the Aśvamedha, despite Nārada’s warning of its greater
danger. See Gehrts 1975; Hiltebeitel 1977b.
3 Yudhisṭḥ ira seeks benefit from the Aśvamedha’s sin-cleansing property because
he suffers from massive war-guilt, Mbh 14.70.15–16; see Hiltebeitel [1976] 1990, 292;
Jamison 1996, 76.
4 This could, however, like the threat of the Brahman carrying his dead son brought
about by the tapas of Śambūka (7.64), allude to Rāma’s Brahmanicide in killing Rāvaṇa,
a Brahman descendent of the sage Pulastya. Rāma now tells Laksṃ ana to gather Vasisṭḥ a
and other court Brahmans to officiate, to invite all their monkey and Rāksạ sa friends,
and the great Ṛsịs together with their wives, and to prepare a vast sacrificial enclosure
at Naimisạ Forest (7.82.14).
epic aśvamedhas 261
their mothers (who come from the inner quarters) and “my golden
wife (kā̄n̄canīm mama patnīm) worthy of dīksạ̄ in sacrificial rites”
(82.19ab). “All the mothers” must include Kausalyā, Kaikeyī, and
Sumitrā. These three widows seem extraneous to Rāma’s Aśvamedha.
But since Rāma is monogamous, they come in handy as shadow fig-
ures of the three subordinate Aśvamedha queens who would accom-
pany the mahisị̄, who has been replaced by the golden statue. Even
while Sītā is still alive in Vālmīki’s hermitage, Rāma has had this statue
of her prepared, it seems, for this very rite.
Rāma then assigns Laksṃ aṇa to follow the horse,5 and the last we
hear of them is that Laksṃ aṇa protected it while it wandered (83.9).
With the spotlight on Rāma’s hearing the Rāmāyaṇa,6 one never hears
that Laksṃ aṇa or the horse returns!7 Further horse news comes only
after Sītā vanishes into the earth.8 During Rāma’s ten thousand year
reign, “in sacrifice after sacrifice there was a golden Janakī for the sake
of a wife” (89.4cd). He performed at least one more horse sacrifice, ten
Vājapeyas, and other Śrauta rites while dedicating himself to dharma
(89.1–7)—presumably using the same golden Sītā.
Clearly, having replaced Sītā with a statue and forgotten the horse,
Vālmīki has no interest in having Sītā lie down with a dead horse.
Rāma’s continued use of a golden Sītā also seems to help him get over
his despair at her loss. And from Sītā’s point of view, vanishing was no
doubt better than this one more indignity that an Aśvamedha would
have required. Her mind on Rāma, her last words ask the earth to
engulf her (88.10) with no thought about a horse.
B. Postwar Aśvamedha of Mbh 14.87–91
Unlike Laksṃ aṇa’s disappearance with the horse, Arjuna’s return with
one is “marked”; unlike Sītā, Draupadī does seem to think about the
5 He goes with his other two brothers to the sacrificial site (83.1–2).
6 And his eventual realization that the two boys reciting it are his sons. For now
they are called “sons of the Muni.” The phrase munidārakau (dāraka meaning “boy,
child, son”) is used thrice rapidly (7.85.9d, 17d, and 19b) just after Vālmīki has told
the boys, “If Kakutstha [Rāma] should ask, Whose two children (dārakau) are you?’
you may tell the lord of men so: ‘Just the disciples of Vālmīki’” (vālmīker atha śisyau
hi brūtām evaṃ narādhipam).
7 It is Bharata whom Rāma addresses at 7.85.12–13, telling him to pay the twin
singers, and not Laksṃ aṇa, as the Shastri translation has it (1970, vol. 3, 612).
8 It does say here that “the sacrifice was concluded” (avasāne).
262 chapter nine
horse;9 and unlike Rāma, Yudhisṭḥ ira has explicit sins.10 As we enter
the proceedings, Kṛsṇ ̣a has just told Yudhisṭḥ ira that Arjuna is return-
ing, emaciated after many fights. Yudhisṭḥ ira is glad to hear of Arju-
na’s imminent return. But troubled by the report of his gaunt look, he
asks Kṛsṇ ̣a whether Arjuna bears some “unfavorable—anisṭ ạ —mark
by which he experiences such miseries (anisṭ ạ ṃ laksạ ṇaṃ kṛsṇ ̣a yena
duḥkhāny upāśnute)” (14.89.4ef). Ever the entertainer, Kṛsṇ ̣a replies:11
O king, I surely do not detect this one’s having anything unfavorable
except that this lion among men’s cheekbones are overly developed (na
hyasya nrpate kiṃcid anisṭ ạ m upalaksạ ye/ṛte purusạ siṃhasya piṇḍike
‘syātikāyatah). On account of these two, this tiger among men is always
hitched to the roads (nityam adhvasu yujyate). I do not see anything else
by which this Jaya has a share of misery. (14.89.7–8)
Yudhisṭḥ ira is satisfied.
But Kṛsṇ ̣a Draupadī indignantly glanced askance at Kṛsṇ ̣a (krsnā tu
draupadī kṛsṇ ̣am tiryak sāsūyam aiksạ ta). The Slayer of Keśin, Hṛsị̄keśa,
approved that showing of her affection (pratijagrāha tasyās tam praṇa-
yam) as if he were Dhanaṃjaya in person (sāksạ̄ d iva),12 a friend of a
friend (sakhyuḥ sakhā). Having heard, Bhīma and the other Kurus and
Yādavas there took pleasure in this story about Dhanaṃjaya whose man-
ner was amusing13 (remuḥ śrutvā vicitrārthā dhanaṃjayakathā vibho).
(14.89.10–11)
Note that the Vulgate reads yājakās, “sacrificial priests,”14 rather than
yādavās, which would give us,”. . . the yājakas there took pleasure” in
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s story.
What about this sakhyuḥ sakhā, “friend of a friend”? Who is whose
friend? Georges Dumézil, discussing the facial contortions of Indo-
European warriors, takes it as referring to Kṛsṇ ̣a as the friend of Arjuna
(1970, 164). This is plausible, since sakhyuḥ is masculine. But K.M.
9 For an earlier treatment of his section, see Hiltebeitel 2007a, 126–35 (toward the
end of chapter 8 above). For notes on linguistic points, see that chapter.
10 See Mbh 12.27.4–22, where he mentions his part in the slayings of his grandfather
Bhīsṃ a, his guru Droṇa, his brother Karṇa, and the Pāṇḍavas’ princely children. See
discussions in Hiltebeitel 1976 [1990], 240–41; 2001a, 66–69; forthcoming, chapter 8.
11 See chapter 8, n. 65. Biardeau 2002, 2: 631–32, begins her discussion of this
exchange noting that Kṛsṇ ̣a is “le grand illusioniste,” and takes it as an ironic reference
to the daiva (fate as divinely ordained) and to Kṛsṇ ̣a’s relation to Arjuna as Nara.
12 “Visibly, really, actually; with his own eyes.”
13 ‘Whose goal was varied; whose concern, manner, or meaning was charming,
entertaining, amusing, colorful.
14 Mbh 14.87.12d; Kinjawadekar 1929–33, vol. 6, Āśvamedhikaparvan, p. 119.
epic aśvamedhas 263
Ganguli takes it to refer to Kṛsṇ ̣a (the sakhā) as the friend of Draupadī.
Somewhat in favor of this reading, the preceding genitive tasyās, in
“showing of her affection,” could point to Draupadī in the genitive
masculine sakhyuḥ, which three Malāyalam manuscripts15 replace with
sakhyāḥ to make it explicit that it means “of a female friend.” Actually,
it is ambiguous, for as Whitney observes, “forms of sakhi are some-
times found used with feminine value” ([1889] 1960, 342).
But Draupadī could have more to be indignant about than just this
slight of Arjuna, whose return with the horse signals that she must
now ramp herself up for this Aśvamedha highlight:
When the bulls among yājakas had made the horse agree [i.e., killed
it], they caused Drupada’s wise daughter to lie down beside it for three
minutes (kalābhis tisṛbhis) according to rule. (14.91.2)
Vyāsa is a supervising priest at both Yudhisṭḥ ira’s Rajasūya and his
Aśvamedha, and would thus be one of the chief “bulls among yājakas”
present.16 It is also striking that Kṛsṇ ̣a’s friendship with Draupadī
comes into play explicitly only through two scenes of royal ritual: one,
his response to her calling on him at her disrobing, itself an outcome
of the dice match as a Rājasūya sequel; and this one where she is the
mahisị̄ exposing herself to the horse. I suspect that in each case Kṛsṇ ̣a
intervenes to lighten Draupadī’s sexual humiliation and attenuate her
role as mediatrix and victim within the arena of the great Vedic royal
sacrifices. For as Jamison (1996, 256) demonstrates, the “sacrificed”
sacrificer’s wife plays the role of mediator between men and gods. This
may be the Vedic ground of Draupadī and Kṛsṇ ̣a’s friendship. As we
have seen, Vālmīki spares Sītā such complications, for which Rāma is
ill-equipped to intervene like Kṛsṇ ̣a.
But what about the horse? Kṛsṇ ̣a seems to be referring not only to
Arjuna but to the horse. If he is reading into his “friend” Draupadī’s
mind, he would be hinting that Arjuna and the horse have a somewhat
fused profile as they approach together. While piṇḍikā can designate
‘a globular swelling or protuberance’ on a man’s cheeks, I dare say it
could also describe the same on a horse. Kṛsṇ ̣a’s wit would thus be
appreciated by the Yādavas who, as Kṛsṇ ̣a’s kinsmen, would know him
better than most. Or alternatively, it would be especially amusing to
15 Those called M 1–3 in the apparatus of the Pune Critical Edition.
16 See Sullivan 1990, 31–34; Hiltebeitel 2001a, 50–51, 77–79.
264 chapter nine
the Yājakas, who are thinking not only of Arjuna but moreso of the
horse he is bringing to be sacrificed. Indeed, the bull among Yājakas
Vyāsa would be the first to understand such doubletalk. As “author,”
Vyāsa oversees the whole Aśvamedha. It is curious that this especially
“knowing” variant is found only in Nīlakaṇtḥ a’s Vulgate.
The narration and Kṛsṇ ̣a’s own words offer further equine clues.
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s name Slayer of Keśin is curious here, since Keśin is a horse
Kṛsṇ ̣a slew in his childhood. The name Hṛsị̄keśa can mean “Master of
the Senses” (Biardeau 2002: 1, 595) and, with that, convey the familiar
Upanisạ dic image of “yoking” the senses like horses. But most tell-
ingly, Kṛsṇ ̣a says that Arjuna’s facial protuberances come from his
being “always hitched to the roads (nityam adhvasu yujyate)” like a
family workhorse. If so, no wonder Draupadī looks at him askance.
Note that Draupadī goes it alone with no co-wives slapping their
thighs, etc. She has some, but her main co-queens are Arjuna’s wives.
Arjuna’s other three wives are important in Book 14: Subhadrā sees
her grandson revived by Kṛsṇ ̣a while the Pāṇḍavas are getting the
wealth to perform this costly rite; Citraṅgadā’s son nearly kills Arjuna
while he is guarding the horse in her domain; and Ulūpī resuscitates
Arjuna in that episode. These three even appear for the horse sacrifice
(14.89.25–90.2) to welcome back the weary Arjuna, and can be related,
as Madeleine Biardeau observes, to Arjuna’s having four wives as the
“ideal king” and “real sacrificer” among the Pāṇḍavas (2002, 2: 615,
636). Indeed, their earlier Book 14 roles could be Aśvamedha-related:
Subhadrā as Arjuna’s Vāvātā; the estranged Citraṅgadā his “discarded”
Parivṛktī; and the nāgī Ulūpī his lower class Pālāgalī.17 But Yudhisṭḥ ira
is the real king for whom Draupadī has ritual duties.18 Draupadī is
thus as narratively exposed as Sītā, but at least she gets to stay alive.
Let us also note how both epics connect their postwar Aśvamedhas
with the continuity of their chief royal lines. Kṛsṇ ̣a revives Pariksịt,
and Rāma discovers Kuśa and Lava as his recovered heirs. When Sītā
attests to her purity so that the earth engulfs her, she also ratifies the
legitimacy of Rāma’s sons.
17 According to Bhatt, “the lowest wife of the king” and “daughter of a messenger
or a courier” (1960, 445); “the fourth and least respected wife of a prince” (Monier-
Williams).
18 These others would not have Aśvamedha obligations where Yudhisṭḥ ira is the
yajamāna, and may have been excused co-wife roles for that reason.
epic aśvamedhas 265
C. Rām 1.8–17
Securing royal progeny is thus implied in these Aśvamedha scenes,
and may also be inferred from the ritual texts. Several texts say the
king should remain chaste sleeping between the Vāvātā’s thighs during
the horse’s year of wandering, while the horse itself is to be kept away
from mares.19 Daśaratha makes this inference explicitly. After sixteen
thousand years of sonlessness, he thinks, “Why don’t I offer worship
by a horse sacrifice for the sake of a son (sūtārthaṃ vājimedhena kim
arthaṃ na yajāmy aham)?” (1.8.2).20 Promised four sons if he brings
the sage Rśyaśṛṅga, he sets out with his wives (10.8–13). Returning,
After showing Rṣ́ yaśrṇ ġ a honor as per the śāstras, the king had him enter
the women’s quarters. (10.10ab)
—where his queens would be (10.28–29).21 When spring comes,
Ṛśyaśṛṅga says it is time to release the horse,22 and Daśaratha orders
19 See Jamison 1996, 84: there is a penance if the horse impregnates a mare. See
ibid. 66, 76 on our Episode B and 242–43 on fertility parallels between thigh-slapping
rites involving the four Aśvamedha queens and those done on the Mahāvrata day in
the Gavāmayana sacrifice. Jamison interprets Ṛgveda 10.86 about Indra’s monkey-
companion Vṛsạ̄ kapi “as a veiled Horse Sacrifice” that describes among the benefits
brought by “Indraṇī’s mating with Vṛsạ̄ kapi” the restoration of Indra’s worship with
bulls and soma, the reaffirmation of his power, his recovery of good erections, and his
attainment of sons (74–88 quoting 81, 82–83). As preeminent victim, the Aśvamedha
horse, identified with both the royal yajamāna and Prajāpati, imparts through the
queens, and the mahisị̄ in particular, a mysterious embryo that takes the form of
“progeny and cattle” for the king and the kingdom; see Dumont 1927, 17; Śatapatha
Brāhmaṇa 13,2.8.5; Hiltebeitel 1991a, 378. Goldman 1984, 74–75, 292, 298–99, makes a
difficulty over the association of Daśaratha’s Aśvamedha with fertility and offspring, but
his hesitation accompanies an argument that the whole episode is an interpolation.
20 Sumantra then tells him of a prophesy he has heard that Daśaratha would one
day call upon Ṛśyaśṛṅga to perform a sacrifice (unspecified) that would bring him four
illustrious sons and heaven, and relates what Robert Goldman calls a “generally prudish”
Ṛśyaśṛṅga tale that may be bowdlerized from a more colorful Mahābhārata version.
Ṛśyaśṛṅga had stored up great chastity as a young innocent performing tapas until
King Romapāda sought him to end a twelve-year drought in Aṅga, where Ṛśyaśṛṅga
married Romapāda’s daughter after doing so.
21 The three are also there at Rām 1.15.23–25 when Daśaratha brings them the
pregnancy potion.
22 Once Daśaratha sets his heart on beginning the rite “for the sake of the conti-
nuity of the dynasty (saṃtānārthaṃ kulasya),” Ṛśyaśṛṅga says, “You may gather all
the necessary articles and release the horse (sambhārāḥ sambhriyantāṃ te turagaś ca
vimucyatām)” (11.3cd). Daśaratha summons Brahman experts in the Vedas—Kāśyapa
(presumably Rṣ́ yaśrṇ ġ a, who is from that gotra), Vasisṭḥ a, and others (4–6)—and directs
them to perform the horse sacrifice he has resolved on for the sake of a son ‘accord-
ing to the rite prescribed in the śāstras (śāstradṛsṭẹ na karmaṇā)” (8–9). Again he is
266 chapter nine
an escort.23 After about a year (12.1), all the earth’s law-abiding
(dhārmikāḥ; 17) friendly (snigdhāḥ) kings arrive from the four direc-
tions.24 But nothing is said of the horse’s wandering, much less its
having met any resistance.25 When the horse has been returned, the
Veda-wise priests led by Ṛśyaśṛṅga see correctly to the Vedic prescrip-
tions in the king’s “great Aśvamedha sacrifice” (aśvamedhe mahāyajne;
13.2–3).26 Great detail is then given to the preparation of the twenty-
one sacrificial posts (yūpas) for the three-hundred animals to be
sacrificed. Indeed, as Goldman points out, one reaches the total of
twenty-one yūpas, the usual number prescribed in Vedic texts, only
by counting the posts mentioned (1984, 305; Bhatt 1960, 444). As at
promised he well get four sons. Putting Ṛśyaśṛṅga in charge, the experts repeat, “You
may gather all the necessary articles and release the horse (sambhārāḥ sambhriyantāṃ
te turagaś ca vimucyatām)” (11.11cd), and tell Daśaratha that since he has made this
law-abiding resolution to obtain a son (dhārmikī buddhir iyam putrārtham)” (11.12cd),
he is sure to have four of them, confirming the prophesy.
23 Daśaratha orders the horse set free to be “guarded by strong men and attended
by our preceptor”—apparently Ṛśyaśṛṅga. He also directs that the sacrificial terrain
(yajñabhūmi) should be carefully set out on the northern bank of the Sarayū, and every
caution be taken to perform the rite unerringly (1.11.14–18).
24 They all arrive from the four directions by the time craftsmen have prepared the
site. This is one of the few places where Vālmīki mentions a cohort of kings contem-
porary with his story. Other than Janaka, Romapāda, and the as yet unnamed Kaikeya
king with his son (already Daśaratha’s father-in-law, with his son Yudhājit [Goldman
1984, 301]), the rest are irrelevant to the Rām story.
25 Goldman 1984, 301 makes the interesting observation “that none of the famous
kings of the lunar dynasty, the central royal house of the MBh, are mentioned. This
tends to support the notion that even the later strata or the Rām are ignorant of the
longer epic.” But Goldman also suggests that Vālmīki’s bowdlerized version of the Mbh’s
Rṣ́ yaśrṇ ġ a story is part of the same “later strata.” I think that Vālmīkī produces such
effects intentionally, knowing that the Mbh itself mentions few other kings and makes the
Rāma story more ancient. Moreover, only “friendly kings” are mentioned. The kings stay
through the horse sacrifice and its sequel, the Putrīya Isṭị or putrakāmesṭị (1.17.3).
26 The same locative phrase occurs at 37c and at Mbh 1.113.12a. On the mahāyajn̄a
as a technical term describing both great Śrauta rites and the five daily offerings of a
Brahman, and not only in Brahmanical but Pāli Buddhist texts, see Tsuchida 1991, 72,
88–89. The Rām indicates familiarity here with the kalpasūtras, Brāhmaṇas, and śāstras,
and mentions that additional rites were included: a Pravargya and Upasad (4) and a
Morning Pressing (prātaḥ-savana) (5) are mentioned at the beginning. And after the
horse is sacrificed, with an account or the treatment of its remains (28–32.), there is
a summary indicating that this phase took three days of prescribed rites (Catusṭọ ma,
Ukthya, and Atirātra), plus rites ‘prescribed in the view of some authors of ritual texts”
(Jyotisṭḥ oma, Āyus rites, two Atirātras, Abhijit, Viśvajit, and Aptoryāma [33–35]), fol-
lowed by a conversation about the appropriate compensation (nisḳ raya), i.e., daksịṇā
(36–44). For days there is munificent giving, and in the intervals numerous philosophi-
cal debates or perhaps brahmodyas (hetuvādān bahūn; 14), as would better befit an
Aśvamedha (Goldman 1984, 305).
epic aśvamedhas 267
the Mahābhārata’s postwar Aśvamedha, an Agnicayana-like fire altar
is also built with eighteen layers of bricks in the shape of a golden-
winged Garuḍa three times the usual height (17–24).27 Finally, the
three queens go into action:
Kausalyā walked reverently around the horse and then with the greatest
joy cut it with three knives.28 Her mind unswerving, with her love of
dharma (dharmakāmyayā) Kausalyā passed one night with the horse.
The hotṛ, adhvaryu, and udgātṛ saw to it that the mahisị̄ as well as the
parivṛtti and vāvātā were united with the horse (hayena samayojayan).
(13, 26-28)
Since vāvātā fits Kaikeyī,29 Sumitrā would be the parivṛtti. This term
has no clear meaning, but it probably replaces parivṛktī, the “disliked
or despised one” (from patri-√vṛj; MW), and Vālmīki may use it to
spare Sumitrā this probably undeserved Aśvamedha title.30 Kausalyā’s
“love of dharma” seems to be Vālmīki’s way of giving her “Vedic” moti-
vation, and anticipates that her son will be the paragon of dharma. Yet
her aggression toward the horse before uniting with it is surprising.31
Her wielding of three knives may condense a rite called asi- pantha or
“paths of the knife,” yet this should come after the mahisị̄ lies with the
horse.32 Most striking is how the priests of the three older Vedas have
27 Cf. Mbh 14.90.30–31: isṭạ kaḥ kān̄caniś cātra cayanārthaṃ kṛtābhavan/śuśubhe
cayanaṃ tatra daksạ syaiva prajāpateh//catuā cityaḥ sa tasyāsīd asṭạ̄ daśa karātmakaḥ/
sa rukmapaksọ nicitas triguṇo garuḍākṛtiḥ.
28 Rām 1.13.26cd: kṛpāṇair viśaśāsa enaṃ tribhiḥ paramayā mundā. A kṛpāṇa is a
sword or sacrificial knife.
29 Even if it is the only usage of this term for anyone in either epic.
30 As Goldman points out, there are difficulties with this solution (1984, 306–8).
Cf. Bhatt 1960, 445 and Jamison 1996, 66, 87, 274 n. 104, favoring an amendment to
parivṛktī. There is of course no fourth wife or Pālāgalī.
31 C.V. Vaidya took an interesting slant on this moment: “And what should we
think when we are told that Kausalyā killed by her own hands the sacrificial horse
with three sword strokes. . . . She must have been very strong and a true Rajput lady
indeed” ([1906] 1972, 9; cf. Hiltebeitel 1998a, 398–99). But I think some kind of sexual
aggression would be more plausible. Or perhaps she was possessed. See Rāma’s last
image of his mother as he departs for exile. “Kausalyā came weeping after the chariot,
crying ‘Rāma, Rāma! Oh Sītā, Laksṃ aṇa!’ He glanced back often at his mother, who
seemed to be dancing (nṛtyantīm iva mātaram)” (Rām 2.35.32).
32 This rite, which, according to the ritual texts makes the bridge to heaven, is,
however, performed not by one queen with three knives but by three queens using
needles: the mahisị̄ uses gold needles, the vāvātā silver ones, and the parivṛktī copper
or lead ones to trace the path that the carver (śamitṛ) should follow with his knife in
cutting up the victim (see Bhatt 1960, 445; Malamoud 1996, 173–74; Hiltebeitel 1991a,
377). If so, the sequencing is anomalous, since Kausalyā cuts the horse herself using
the three knives before she lies with it. Moreover, since Vālmīki supplies no other
268 chapter nine
the other two queens unite with the horse after the mahisị̄. This would
have no Vedic precedent, and must be preliminary to the impregna-
tion of all three by what turns out to be an Atharvanic rite, the Putrīya
Isṭị that generates the celestial pāyasam that Visṇ ̣u infuses for the three
queens to eat.33 As Ṛśyaśṛṅga soon says,
To procure sons for you, I must perform the son-producing sacrifice.
It must be done in accord with the instructions of the ritual texts and
rendered efficacious by potent verses proclaimed in the Atharvaśiras
(atharvaśirasi proktair). (14.2)
Rounding off with the fourth Veda indicates that the two rites form a
whole. But the best proof of an elision comes when Ṛśyaśṛṅga says a
single Aśvamedha dīksạ has carried Daśaratha through both of them.
Daśaratha also transitions to the Putrīya Isṭi by smelling the smoke from
the horse’s fat (vapā) to free himself from sin (29–30). Goldman trans-
lates vapā, “omentum,” as “fat” since a horse does not have an omen-
tum (Goldman 1984, 151, 308; Bhatt 1960, 445). It is expertly extracted
from the horse by the chief ṛtvij. Daśaratha is now svakulavardhanaḥ,
“an increaser of his lineage” (36b). Wrapping up by going through the
motions of giving away the earth to the priests (ṛtvijas) and settling
on the more appropriate compensation (nisḳ raya) of “a million cows,
a hundred million gold pieces and four times that amount in silver,”
which the priests hand over to Ṛśyaśṛṅga and Vasisṭḥ a to apportion
among them (41–43), he is “content at heart at having obtained that
greatest of sacrifices (prāpya yajn̄am uttamam)” (44)—which I take to
mean “having obtained” or “reached” the results of this rite in prepar-
ing for the impregnation of his wives. The poet now makes an elision
between the Aśvamedha proper and the Putrīya Isṭị that will complete
what has all along been the stated purpose of this Aśvamedha. When
the Isṭị is finished Ṛśyaśṛṅga says the Aśvamedha is now finished
(nirvṛtte tu kratau; 17.1ab), and indicates that Daśaratha’s dīksạ̄ has
ended (samāptadīksạ̄ niyamaḥ; 17.2a); everyone, the kings included,
can go home (17.2–5). Daśaratha also makes this elision himself after
he has “obtained” the Aśvamedha: King Daśaratha then spoke to
account of the horse’s killing (which the same carver should do by suffocation), it
would seem that Kausalyā actually kills the horse, perhaps right at the sacrificial stake
where it was last mentioned.
33 1.14.18gh–19ab: visṇ ̣o putratvam āgaccha krṭvātmānaṃ catur vidham//tatra tvaṃ
mānusọ bhūtva pravṛddham lokakaṇtạ kam.
epic aśvamedhas 269
Ṛśyaśṛṅga, “You are true to your vows. Please act so that my line may
be extended (kulasya vardhanam)” (45).
Now as Bob Goldman says, Rṣ́ yaśrṇ ġ a “is perhaps viewed as serv-
ing the purpose of Vyāsa or the other Mahābhārata practitioners of
niyojana, or levirate, only through an act of sacrifice in place of direct
sexual liaison with the king’s wives” (Goldman 1984, 77; see n. 42). I
would extend this point to say that just as Rṣ́ yaśrṇ ġ a’s Aśvamedha has a
hidden niyoga agenda, Vyāsa’s niyoga has a hidden Aśvamedha agenda.
Moreover, if a niyoga agenda is hidden with regard to Rṣ́ yaśrṇ ġ a, it is
less so with regard to Visṇ ̣u, who is twice said to have been “appointed”
(ni-√yuj) to intervene:
“O Visṇ ̣u, we shall appoint you (niyoksỵ āmahe) out of a desire for the
welfare of the worlds” (1.14.17cd); After Visṇ ̣u Nārāyana was appointed
(niyuktaḥ) by the best of gods, he asked them about the means. . . .
(1.15.11ab)
The Putrīya Isṭị effected by Ṛśyaśṛṅga is thus a quasi-niyoga through
Visṇ ̣u,34 and calls for no genetic intervention by a smelly author.
D. Mbh 99–100
On to our main event, Ambikā and Ambālikā are, of course, the
younger of three sisters, their elder being the accursed Ambā. When
Bhīsṃ a abducts them, his intention and that of the queen dowager
Satyavatī is to bring three “Mothers” into the lineage. As both Jamison
and Biardeau have recognized, these three names in combination must
be related to their use in the Aśvamedha, where they are invoked in
34 If Vālmīki picks up on an Aśvamedha innuendo in Mbh Book 1, it could be on
this point. If we allow that Vālmīki makes economy by having the four brothers born
in one generation rather than two, we can see that Ṛśyaśṛṅga and Visṇ ̣u supply much
the same requisites as Vyāsa and Durvāsas, who supplies the mantra that empowers
Kuntī and Mādrī to get pregnant by gods in another quasi-niyoga. Ṛśyaśṛṅga has a
reputation for tapas that seems not only to enhance his fertilizing powers to bring a
drought-ending rain (1.9.28–29), but, at least in the Rām, to be able to extend this
fertilizing power to the area of sexuality—even though, unlike Vyāsa, he deploys this
power ritually rather than by sleeping with anyone. Moreover, if Vyāsa is about to
remind us of a horse, Ṛśyaśṛṅga’s name means “Having deer antlers.” See Goldman
1984, 296, supplying a commentarial legend of his birth from a doe who imbibed some
of his father, the sage Vībhāṇḍaka’s, semen, as told also in Mbh 3.110.11–116. With
a bemused look, he bears a single antelope horn on his forehead in a nice old bust at
the Mathura Museum.
270 chapter nine
a special formula that is uttered while the mahisị̄ lies with the horse.
A clean version is used when the mahisị̄ is led up to the dead horse
accompanied by her cowives: “O Ambā, Ambālī, Ambikā [var. Ambā,
Ambikā, Ambālikā]. No one is leading me. The horsikins is sleeping.”35
Then, before the Adhvaryu covers the mahisị̄ and the horse with a
linen blanket, she “lies down beside the horse and invites it to stretch
out its forefeet along with hers,”36 and either the Adhvaryu or the king
(her husband) utters the most erotic of all the rite’s mantras, focusing
on her sexual pleasure. Covered by the blanket,37 the mahisị̄, having
“manipulate[d] the dead horse into some sort of copulatory position,”
in some texts modifies her mantra with yabhati (“is fucking”) instead
of nayati (“is leading”). With or without these words, which “mock”
or “scold” the horse, the rite clearly invites the dead horse to regain
its sexual stamina (Jamison 1996, 66–69, 76; cf. 242). Meanwhile, the
cowives and their attendants circulate back and forth around the horse
and the mahisị̄ slapping their thighs and fanning with their hems, and
then exchange “slangy and crude” riddling mantras with the priests
(65–66, 69–70).
In importing these three names into a dynastic crises, the Mahābhārata
thus draws on the Aśvamedha’s reputation for assuring lineage conti-
nuity. This overlaps with what Bhīsṃ a and Satyavatī continue to wish
from the two younger sisters even after they have become widows. But
as Jamison and Biardeau recognize, the link is obscure, in part because
with Vicitravīrya dead there is no king to perform an Aśvamedha.
Jamison proposes that the usage can be illumined by a “husband-find-
ing” (pati-vedana) rite linked with the autumn Sākamedha, in which
a Traiyambaka Homa to Rudra can remove a woman’s lack of mari-
35 Jamison 1996, 67, trans. TS 7.4.19.1ab; the usual opening line ambe ambāly ambike
has, as Jamison observes (1996, 274 n. 107; 304 n. 87), a precise Mbh nomenclature and
sequence in VS 23.18: ámbe ámbike ’mbālike, with the same but for the initial vocative
in MS 3.12.20. According to Jamison (243), the three vocatives are taken as variants on
affectionate terms for ‘mother,’ but together they also add up to the ‘three Ambikās’
of Rudra Tryambaka and its vṛddhi derivative, the Traiyambakahoma.” “Leading”
(nayati), according to Jamison (67, 274 n. 108), probably suggests the mahisị̄ is being
led, as it were, into matrimony.
36 See Jamison 1996, 67. How that would help achieve a position for sexual contact
is not made clear.
37 Biardeau says, “It seems that the queen complains at being looked at in the sexual
act” (2002, 1: 220).
epic aśvamedhas 271
tal success and secure her first unborn descendant.38 Biardeau pro-
poses that the rite’s triple name would evoke one woman, the mahisị̄,
“transformed into three” as the Kāśi sisters, and that the one would
be Ambikā not only as the mahisị̄, but in anticipation of her name’s
becoming “one of the most frequent names of the Goddess.”39
I believe these are pieces to a puzzle that our epic poets have inten-
tionally left incomplete, and that three more pieces crop up from the
text.40 First, Vyāsa stipulates that the two widows undergo a year-
long vow before he lies with them; second, he will then give his dead
brother sons like Mitra and Varuna.41 The year-long vow replicates the
Aśvamedha requirement that the queens remain abstinent during the
year the horse wanders.42 And the pair Mitra and Varuṇa certainly has a
Vedic ring. Vedavyāsa43 could be alluding to ways that the Aśvamedha
identifies the king with dharma,44 and also that the Rājasūya invokes
Mitra as “lord of truth” and Varuṇa as “lord of dharma in a nnouncing
38 See Jamison 1996, 242–46: it uses a mantra to Tryambaka found in RṾ 7.59.12 that
the girl modifies to request a husband. As Jamison points out, both rites resemble the
movements of fire-circling servant maids on the Mahāvrata day of the Gavāmayana.
There is also more thigh-slapping.
39 Biardeau calls Ambikā here “the mother of Pāṇḍu,” but must mean the mother
of Dhṛtarāsṭṛa (2002, 1: 220).
40 Jamison 1996, 304 n.94 “assumes that some version of the epic story of Ambā
and her sisters already existed in early Vedic and that these girls were associated with
the three Ambikās belonging to Rudra. Despite the difficulties. . . . I think this is more
likely than assuming that a later epic poet simply made up the story of the abduction
and its aftermath and named the female protagonists by plucking some designations
out of the onomastic repository of Vedic ritual.”
41 Vyāsa tells his mother, “Satyavatī, you know both the higher and lower dharma.
And since your mind is set on dharma and is beneficent to the living, I shall indeed
do what is needed with respect to dharma, and by your appointment (tvam niyogāt)
do what you desire. For this is found to be the ancient practice. I shall give my brother
sons the likes of Mitra and Varuṇa. Both ladies must punctiliously submit to a vow,
which I shall describe, for the space of a year, so that they become sanctified. For no
woman may lie with me without carrying out the vow (saṃvatsaraṃ yathā nyayaṃ tatah
śuddhe bhavisỵ atah/na hi mām avratopetā upeyāt kācid aṅganā)” (Mbh 1.99.36–39).
42 See Jamison 1996, 84: “During the year when the horse is journeying, the king lies
nightly with his favorite wife (Vāvātā) but does not have sex.” In ŚB 13.4.1.9, he thinks,
“May I, by this austerity (anena tapasā), reach the end of the year successfully.”
43 It is important to remember who is speaking here and what he has been doing.
The last we heard of Vyāsa before Satyavatī recalled him as needed was that he had
gone off to the Himalayas to divide the Vedas and impart the Mahābhārata as the fifth
Veda to his five disciples, who were to proclaim it as the Bhārata (1.57.73–75).
44 Bowles 2007, 93 n. 47 cites the Taittirīya Saṃhitā version of a formula that equates
the Aśvamedha king with dharma: “with my two shins and my two feet I am dharma
(dhármo ‘smi), the king fixed firmly on his people.”
272 chapter nine
the newly consecrated Bharata king (MS 2.6.6; TS 1.8.10.1–2).45 As
with its postwar Aśvamedha, where the Mahābhārata also gives an
enigmatic shape to the horse, it is in the domain of Vedic allusion that
we must explain why Vyāsa would be encrypting himself as a sacrifi-
cial horse. Such occultation occurs where Vedic practices are of dark
and doubtful dharma from the standpoint of post-Vedic Brahmanical
culture. Vyāsa also makes a singular appearance in the Nārāyaṇīya,
which, I have argued (Hiltebeitel 2006a, 249–50), offers a bhakti
encryption of Vedic and purāṇic allusions.46 The Nārāyaṇīya comes
to its deepest disclosure47 when Vyāsa tells Janamejaya,48 just now told
to perform a Horse Sacrifice on top of his Snake Sacrifice (12.334.8–9),
about Nārāyaṇa’s manifestation, called Harimedhas, as the Horse’s
Head (Hayaśiras). Janamejaya learns how Nārāyaṇa places the Horse’s
Head as a “repository of the Vedas” and source of world-oriented
dharma (pravṛttidharma) in the northeastern ocean.49 Vyāsa says he
was50 originally born of Harimedhas, the “sacrificial sap (medhas) of
Hari,”51 which seems to identify him with the cosmic Veda-chanting
Aśvamedha Horse’s Head.52 All this deepens Vyāsa’s horseplay.
45 Such a momentary fusion of elements from the two great royal rituals would fit
our scene, since Vyāsa would be engendering just such a king—or two.
46 Vyāsa’s Horse’s Head story (below) is called a “purāṇa equal to the Veda (purānaṃ
vedasammitam)” (Mbh 12.335.7b).
47 It does this by dipping to the outermost dialogue frame of Śaunaka and Ugraśravas
so that Śaunaka can ultimately hear what Vyāsa said to Janamejaya about the very same
matter—the Horse’s Head—that has made Śaunaka curious. As I show (Hiltebeitel
2006a) with reference to these dips, and as Grünendahl confirms particularly with refer-
ence to this third dip (1997, 52–53), the Pune Critical Edition errs in substituting the
Vaiśampayana-Janamejaya frame for the Ugraśravas-Śaunaka one. Indeed, in coming
to this disclosure in the fourteenth of its eighteen adhāyas (as reconstituted from the
Pune Critical Edition’s misguided attempt to make it nineteen), the episode may occur
at a specifically designed narrative core; see Brodbeck 2006. 29–30.
48 This is the only occasion where Vyāsa explicitly addresses Janamejaya at his
snake sacrifice. Vyāsa is addressed by Janamejaya on two other occasions (1.54.18–22;
15.42–43), but he responds there mainly through actions rather than words. See Hilte-
beitel 2006a, 246 n. 59.
49 Mbh 12.335.10–72, quoting 54c, 69d. The Horse’s Head retrieves the Veda from
two cosmogony-disrupting demons, Madhu and Kaitạ bha, who had sought to hurl it
into the ocean.
50 Vyāsa reveals that he himself was first “born of that god Harimedhas’ grace” before
he was born again “by Nārāyaṇa’s grace” as Vyāsa (337.54–55).
51 Perhaps the “tawny/yellow/reddish (hari) sacrificial essence” (see Hiltebeitel
2006a, 249 n. 70).
52 A Horse’s Head with its neck formed by Kālarātrī, the Night of Time (Mbh
12.334.44–48).
epic aśvamedhas 273
Now Vyāsa only says he will sire sons the likes of Mitra and Varuṇa
(Mbh 1.99.38b). We would love to know how this would have turned
out, but he does not get to do this because Satyavatī says matters are
too pressing to give the widows a year for such a vow. Our third puz-
zle piece crops up here where things have been willfully set askew.53
Before Satyavatī asks Vyāsa to do it, she first tries to appoint (vi-ni-
√yuj) Bhīsṃ a to sire sons with his brother’s “two mahisị̄s” (mahisyau;
1.97.9a). Can there be two mahisị̄s? This is the only dual of mahisị̄
in either epic. As we just observed, the Rāmāyaṇa’s first Aśvamedha
incongruously has three queens lie with the horse, but on unequal
terms: the two non-mahisị̄ queens apparently do so only briefly on
the same busy night.54 Just as the Rāmāyaṇa has reasons to give each
one time with the horse, the Mahābhārata has reasons to have two
mahisị̄s55—curious ones, though, since neither Ambikā nor Ambālikā
would be a mahisī if Ambā were still around. It is Satyavatī who men-
tions “two mahisị̄s,” not Vyāsa. Her usage in speaking to Bhīsṃ a
may be a reminder that Ambā’s unavailability as a Mother comple-
ments Bhīsma’s as a Father, and is an intimation that despite the legal
53 Instead of being a case of lost Vedic symmetries. Dumézil seems to ignore this
verse, perhaps because it does not help his case that an original set of incarnations has
been effaced: that Pāṇḍu would originally have incarnated Varuṇa:, Dhṛtarāstra and
Vidurā likewise the two “minor sovereigns” Bhaga (god of destinies) and Aryaman
(god of Ārya clans); and Yudhisṭḥ ira would have been sired by Mitra were it not that
a “clumsy retouch” replaced Mitra by Dharma (1968, 146–48, 152, 159–60, 170–74).
Dumézil was convinced that he could recover a Mbh whose “primary form [was]
contemporary with the oldest Vedic times, or anterior” (172).
54 Vyāsa also comes to Ambikā in the dead of night (Mbh 1.100.2–6).
55 Both epics use the term mahisị̄ almost exclusively for single chief queens, and
where they do otherwise it is with similar notes of discordance that spell misfortune for
the real mahisị̄. Thus the gallivanting Arjuna, already among those wed to Draupadī,
exclaims to Kṛsṇ ̣a what good fortune he has that Subhadrā will be his mahisī (Mbh
1.211.19)—a discordance on top of an anomaly, since Yudhisṭḥ ira, speaking for all five
Pāṇḍavas, had said that Draupadī “will be the mahisị̄ of us all” (1.187.22ab). Similarly,
when the troublemaking Mantharā tells Kaikeyī she (rather than Kausalyā) is Daśaratha’s
mahisị̄ (Rām 2.7.19), Kaikeyī is so imperious that Sumantra as her messenger speaks
for her as the mahisī when he tells Rāma that she and Daśaratha want to see him
(14.11); and when Rāvana invites Sītā to be his mahisī, it is with the odd qualifier
that she will be his agramahisị̄, “primary chief queen” (3.4.24; 5.18.16)—a term used
nowhere else in either epic’s critical edition (the Southern Recension makes Śakuntalā
an agramahisị in two interpolations, at Mbh 1.69.41 and 684* line 15; and Mandodarī
would seem to have that position in the Rām, although the term is not used for her).
On the other hand, in two plural usages it means mainly “woman” (Mbh 1.187.26;
Rām 2.36.7; see 36.1).
274 chapter nine
incongruity, to speak of Ambikā and Ambālikā as two mahisīs gives
them an equal chance to become the mother of the one desired heir.
Here Biardeau and Jamison’s puzzle pieces may also reenter the pic-
ture. Ambikā should now be the single mahisī, empowered like Durgā
in the Devī-Māhātmyā. And hers is the main name in Rudra’s epi-
thet Traiyambaka, the one “possessing three Ambikās.”56 Our main
event may allude to this Homa,57 whose “‘husband-finding’ spell” is
performed at an inauspicious crossroads for a spinster running out of
time in finding a mate.58 Our Ambikā is in some such predicament.
And it is the result of her larger failure to meet the reduced vow
demanded by Vyāsa of bearing “my smell, my looks, my garb, and my
body” (99.43ab) that her son will be born blind and unfit to rule.
Jamison also relates the Traiyambaka Homa to Bhīsṃ a’s abduction
of the three Kāśi sisters on two interesting points. But she assumes
that an older version of the epic story complemented this ritual
(cf. above n. 52). In favor of positing an older version, she suggests
that without one, “the epic maidens would provide bad role mod-
els for the husband-seeking girl of the Sākamedha” (245). But if we
take things as we find them and ask what the epic poets might have
made of the model of the older Vedic rite, the “husband-finder” of the
Traiyambakahoma would be a good role model, given her bad situa-
tion, for something untoward to go further haywire in an epic series
of turnabouts, which would include Bhīsṃ a’s turning of a husband-
finding ritual into a wife-finding ritual—something even more basic
56 Jamison 241, 303 n. 76. Although “Tryambaka” may—as usually translated—refer
in the epic to Śiva’s having three eyes (see Scheuer 1979, 237–36, 255–56), the matter
is uncertain (Hopkins [1915] 1969, 220), and in the one case where the Mbh gives an
etymology (Vyāsa is telling Arjuna how Śiva preceded his chariot in battle), it refers
to his having three goddesses: “And since the Lord of the universe possesses three
goddesses—Sky, Waters, and Earth—he is remembered as Tryambaka” (7.173.89).
57 See Jamison 1996, 243. The Mbh never mentions the pativedana or the Traiyam-
baka Homa. Generally, the epics seem to overlook the Caturmāsyāni rites. The Mbh does
mention a Traiyambaka Bali (7.56.1–4, esp. 3d): according to Scheuer 1982, 255–63,
it is probably offered nightly throughout the war on Arjuna’s behalf by his servants,
after which Arjuna sleeps on the ground surrounded by weapons. Cf. also Scheuer
258 n. 23 on the Pāṇḍavas’ offering (upahāra, bali) to Rudra Tryambaka (14.8.23–24;
64.1–8) after a night’s fasting to get hold of the wealth needed to perform their post-
war Aśvamedha. Ambikā as Rudra’s sister is linked with autumn, which in some texts
is Rudra’s season of “special murderousness” due to her influence (cf. 241, 245, 304
n. 94). The Mbh does know Śiva as [Pārvatī-] “Ambikā’s husband” (ambikābhartre),
yet a brahmacārin (7.57.53).
58 See Jamison 1996, 240–44; 303 n. 80.
epic aśvamedhas 275
than his turning a “woman’s-choice” svayaṃvara into a man’s-choice
svayaṃvara, which, as Jamison notes, he does with verbal precision
(1996, 299 n. 38). Jamison then says that while Ambā became a mur-
derous avenger after the abduction caused her to lose her husband,
“[e]ven Ambikā and Ambālikā, though they settled happily enough
into their married life after their unexpected abduction. . ., might not
have chosen this particular method of pati-vedana [husband-finding]
if they had their druthers” (245). But we know they did have their dru-
thers. They too were going to have a svayaṃvara. It would seem that
as personifications of “the tryambaka,” the three Kāśi sisters would be
embodiments of a “husband-finding” by svayaṃvara that goes awry,
at least for them, because Bhīsṃ a carts them off Rāksạ sa style to find
their rather limited un-chosen husband Vicitravīrya, whom Ambā in
fact rejects. Of course here we have a way to suggest that if the epic
poets recall both Vedic rites, it is separately: the “husband-finding”
ritual would underlie the beginning of the three sisters’ adventure into
the Kuru dynasty; the “Aśvamedha” would underlie the two younger
sisters’ nights with Vyāsa.
In any case, the allusion to the Aśvamedha’s “three mothers invo-
cation” would underline that, rather than Ambā, it is Ambikā and
Ambālikā and Ambikā’s Śūdra servant who lie with the smelly author.
Three mothers once again, and again something askew with the Śūdra
servant replacing Ambā, setting the stage for the next set of three
queens, Gāndhārī, Kuntī, and Mādrī.
E. Kuntī’s Anti-Niyoga Aśvamedha Tale (Mbh 1.112)
Gāndhārī and Kuntī are again rivals to bear a single legal heir. But
before Kuntī will tell Pāṇḍu that the Ṛsị Durvāsas gave her a secret
mantra that will enable him to win this race, she must divert his demand
that she perform niyoga, even if her solution smacks of another quasi-
niyoga in that she will be calling in the intervention of gods.59 When
Pāṇḍu tells her about a woman who goes at night to a crossroads (like
a pati-vedana spinstress) with a flower in her hand until she finds a
niyoga partner (1.111.33–36), Kuntī answers him with an equally out-
rageous story of her own, called the Vyusịtāśva-Upākhyāna (1.112).
59 See Doniger 1995; Dhand 2004.
276 chapter nine
Like Vicitravīrya, King Vyusịtāśva died sonless of “consumption”
(yaksṃ āṇam) after a bout of lust with his wife, Bhadrā Kāksị̄vatī
(112.16–17). The term yaksṃ āṇam is used in the epics only for these
two kings.60 Famed as a yajamāna (8) in numerous Soma sacrifices
(9, 14), the glory of King Vyusịtāśva’s reign’s was an Aśvamedha at
which he “became Indra among kings, endowed with the strength of
ten elephants” (12). Lamenting and wanting to join him in the next
world, Bhadrā says, “Faithful as a shadow, I shall ever do your will,
always loving to please you (nityam priyahite ratā)” (23).61 His name
with -aśva means “the Daybreak Horse,” and perhaps also “One Who
is Inhabited or Possessed by the Horse.”62 The first meaning resonates
when Kuntī calls him a rising sun before his Aśvamedha (10) and a
setting one after it (17b), dying after his amours with Bhadrā during
which they would have been making up for a year’s lost time after she
(or another queen) lay with the horse. The name “Daybreak Horse”
is enough for an Aśvamedha innuendo. But “possession” may also be
in the air since Vyusịtāśva can speak from his corpse with an “inner
voice” (vāk . . . antarhitā) and impregnate Bhadrā.63 Recall that the king
may utter the most erotic mantras to the mahisị̄ while she is lying with
the Aśvamedha horse. Possession is also hinted on Bhadrā’s side: utter-
ing a long lament in which she vows to lie on kuśa grass “possessed
(āvisṭ ạ ) by sorrow and intent on seeing you” (27), she “embraces the
corpse” (taṃ śavaṃ samparisvajya) and gets his instructions on her
bath and timing for intercourse (29–31). “By that corpse the lady gave
60 See 1.96.57d and 5.145.23f on Vicitravīrya, always with the same verb samapadyata.
61 A mahisị̄ is formulaically “dear” (priya) to her royal husband. Draupadī is the
“dear” (priya) mahisị̄ of Yudhisṭḥ ira (Mbh 4.15.31, 16.12; 10.11.17) and of all the
Pāṇḍavas (4.20.19, 5.80.22); so is Sītā to Rāma (Rām 4.48.18, 5.12.43–44, 13,46; Mbh
4.20.10 according to Draupadī), Śakuntalā at their happy ending to Duḥsạ nta (1.69.43);
Indrānī to Indra (5.11.13; 12.22, while coveted by Nahusạ ); and Tārā was dear to Vālin
according to their son Aṅgada (Rām 4.54.3). Both Draupadī (Mbh 4.19.10; 20,10, 19;
5.80.9) and Sītā (Rām 6.38.3) speak of the title with pride, and Vālmīki uses it even
when he welcomes the banished Sītā to his āśrama (7.48.8). When Vyusịtāśva’s corpse
impregnates Bhadrā she is also a pativratā (32b).
62 See MW 1040–41. As a neuter noun, vyusịta, “daybreak,” derives from vi-2.√vas
“to shine forth” (from vi-us,̣ “to dawn”). But as an adjective from vi-5.√vas, “to abide,
dwell, live,” it can mean “inhabited by” in compounds.
63 On the prominence of possession in the Mbh, see Smith 2006, 250–55, 259, 265–68,
272–75, with discussion of āveśa and derivatives of ā-√viś, an additional example of
which is cited below.
epic aśvamedhas 277
birth to her sons, the three Śālvas and the four Madras, O best of
Bhāratas” (33)!
In brief, Kuntī answers Pāṇḍu not in the name a niyoga like that
incurred after the death of Pāṇḍu’s father Vicitravīrya, but with refer-
ence to an Aśvamedha king who is like Pāṇḍu’s father in one way but
unlike him in another. Like Vicitravīrya, Vyusịtāśva died of “consump-
tion.” Unlike him, he remained potent in death like an Aśvamedha
horse. Kuntī thus fills out our quadrangle with this Aśvamedha gloss
on Vyāsā’s nights with the “two mahisị̄s.” The means she will use to
get pregnant is also Atharvanic, like the Putrīya Isṭị through which
Ṛśyaśṛṅga gets Daśaratha’s three queens pregnant by the “appoint-
ment” of Visṇ ̣u. The mantra that Kuntī gets from Durvāsas is some-
thing “heard in the Atharvaśiras” (atharvaśirasi śrutam; Mbh 3.289.20),
and is, in particular, said to be “sorcerous” when Pāṇḍu calls on her
to use it to sire their first son through the god Dharma (1.113.34, 39,
42cd). As one would now expect, the Rāmāyaṇa scene is again cleaner,
omitting any suggestion of sorcery, not to mention possession, in the
birth of Rāma.
F. Knowing Vedic Allusions
If it can be shown that such epic usages are matters of knowing allu-
sion, one possible conclusion worth exploring would be that, rather
than the standard view that the epics’ references to Vedic ritual, and
particularly Vedic royal rituals, are distanced by desuetude and confu-
sion about them, we should look at epic depictions of Vedic rituals,
at least where they are narrated, as deft and cunning. Van Buitenen’s
(1972) treatment of the Mahābhārata’s Book 2 Rājasūya-and-Dice
Match sequence has been a supple illustration of this point for over
thirty years now.
The Mahābhārata poets do indeed devalue the Aśvamedha, Rājāsūya,
and Vājapeya relative to pilgrimage in Book 3, and debunk Yudhisṭḥ ira’s
Book 14 Aśvamedha relative to the practice of gleaning. But these
asides come by way of exalting pilgrimage and gleaning in the name
of the ordinary man who cannot afford Vedic rituals much less spon-
sor royal ones. It may also be that when the Mahābhārata poets speak
of morally superior substitutes or equivalents for the Aśvamedha,
Rājāsūya, etc., that these rites were decreasingly performed during
the time that the Mahābhārata was composed. But whether or not
278 chapter nine
doing other things like pilgrimage or gleaning were deemed morally
superior, and whether or not these royal rituals were becoming less
common if not necessarily less prestigious during the period of epic
composition, this would not seem to have diminished the epic poets’
interest in referring to them in ways that deepen their stories. More-
over, the Aśvamedha seems to have been revived under the Śuṅgas
by Pusỵ amitra, and remained on tap for later Brahmanically inclined
kings such as Samudragupta (Thapar 2002, 284, 296), and the early
Pallavas (329, 335). No doubt these kings and their priests would also
have made knowing ritual adaptations. One also finds what seem to
be traces of the Aśvamedha, and in particular some likely evocations
of the ritual scenes we have been describing, in popular rites and folk-
lores that are traceable, at last hypothetically, to regional kingdoms.64
Here we come to a different problem: that of accounting for continuity
in circumstances where Vedic allusions seem to be unknown.
64 See Biardeau 2004, 174–76, 183–85, 217–22, 223 n. 169. Generally, Biardeau posits
that local goddess traditions, often linked with the Mbh, offer some explanation.
CHAPTER TEN
AUTHORIAL PATHS THROUGH THE TWO SANSKRIT EPICS:
VIA THE RĀMOPĀKHYĀNA
In advancing the arguments of this article, I want to acknowledge at
the outset that I am emboldened to make them because I have been
persuaded that Madeleine Biardeau has recently cleared up some basic
and satisfactory working premises for scholarship on the two San-
skrit epics. To the point: I agree with her chronological positioning
of the Mahābhārata as older than the Rāmāyaṇa (Biardeau 2002, I:
700–701 and ff., 726; 1999: xxxiii–xxxv), though with some differences
between us as to relative dating, manner, and time span of compo-
sition that I need not go into fully here.1 I also agree with her that
each epic received its basic contents and design in the process of its
first composition, and that there is nothing to be gained by excavating
or surgically peeling back from their “extant” texts to uncover cores,
interpolations, and strata—here again with some further differences
as to the merits and implications of the Mbh’s Critical Edition, on
which I am more positive than Biardeau and some others.2 Further, as
Biardeau sees, one must address not only the relation between the two
epics as provisional wholes but as provisional wholes including parts.
For this paper, that is especially relevant to the Rāmopākhyāna, the
Mbh’s main version of the Rāma story, which Biardeau regards as an
integral part of the Mbh, and thus in principle earlier than the Rām.
Moreover, to theorize this relation, it should be pertinent, she says,
that the Rāmopākhyāna, along with the Bhagavadgītā, the Nārāyaṇīya,
1 See Hiltebeitel 2001a: 15–31, 165; 2004c.
2 See Hiltebeitel 2004c on the distinction between excavation and surgery, for which
Fitzgerald (2003a) is an advocate, and Hiltebeitel 2005c for some discussion of the
merits of the Critical Edition. Fitzgerald’s negative remarks on the “unsuccessful effort
to arrive at a critical edition” (Fitzgerald 2002: 89, n. 1) would seem connected to his
view that the recovery of the political intent of the first written Mbh requires surgical
excision to remove bhakti segments that would have been among the features added
as late as the Gupta period (see also Fitzgerald 2001). But the attempt to defer epic
bhakti to a vague lateness that extends to the Guptas is an old ploy of epic “analysts”
that has no external, and thus no internal, evidence to support it; see Hiltebeitel 2001a;
2004c; 2006a; and indeed Fitzgerald 2004a: 141.
280 chapter ten
and the Sauptikaparvan, is one of the units of the eighteen-parvan
Mbh to have eighteen adhyāyas: that is, it has an eighteen-to-eighteen
part-to-whole relation.3 This numerology suggests that each of these
units can be viewed as one or another kind of epitome. Further, in
Biardeau’s terms, the Rāmopākhyāna is one of three “mirror stories”
in the Mbh’s Forest Book that the Pāndavas and Draupadī hear (the
other two being “Nala” and “Sāvitrī”).4 From an inside-out perspec-
tive, the Mbh’s Forest Book is thus the Rāmopākhyāna’s frame story.
This means that I now take a position on the priority of these two
texts. Before this recent turn, I regarded the Rāmopākhyāna as to some
extent intelligible simply as being first and foremost the Mbh’s main
version of the Rāma story, and considered the question of priority
between it and the Rām to be inconclusive. But I now believe there are
good reasons to accept the view (if not all the arguments) of scholars
who have considered the Rāmopākhyāna to be prior: notably, in the
most recent discussions, P. L. Vaidya (1971: xxxi–xxxvi), J. A. B. van
Buitenen (1975: 207–214), and Biardeau.5 But let us see what this pri-
ority might mean.
Authors, Heroines and the Ends of Tile Paths
There has been some interest over recent decades in similarities in
design between the two Sanskrit epics,6 perhaps enough to begin
noticing how the similarities relate to differences. I will argue that one
of the areas of tension by which the two epics betray significant differ-
ences is in their respective treatments of the way the “author” of each
epic is positioned in relation to other ṛsịs and to the lead heroine, and
3 Biardeau 2002, I: 700, Vaidya (1971: xxxi) notes the Rāmopākhyāna count without
comment on it, though perhaps as prelude to his view that it is “a genuine part of the
Mahābhārata” (p. xxxii). On the Nārāyaṇīya, see Hiltebeitel 2006a.
4 As “Nala” is a mirror story recalling primarily the dice match and anticipating
primarily the Pāṇḍavas’ year in disguise, “Rāma” is a mirror story recalling the abduc-
tion of Draupadī and anticipating primarily the war.
5 Disagreeing with criticism of Vaidya and, after Rāghavan’s study (1973: 2–31), of
van Buitenen, see Goldman 1984: 33–39, and Brockington 1998: 473–477. Of the older
discussions mentioned by these authors, I have reviewed (the English translation of)
Jacobi [1893] 1960: 69–84; Hopkins 1901: 58–84, alone here in favoring the priority
of the Rāmopākhyāna; Winternitz 1927, I: 500–507; and Sukthankar 1939 and 1941:
472–487.
6 See Hiltebeitel 2001a: 6, n. 27, citing Pollock 1986: 38–42 and Biardeau 1997:
77–119.
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 281
that this positioning can be traced through notions of a path through
each of the two texts. I will try to establish at the outset that this is a
potent configuration, and then demonstrate some of the particulars by
which it can be traced.
A provocative first difference is this: Whereas in the Mbh the author
appears in person to introduce the heroes to the heroine by showing
the path that leads to her before they meet her at the debut scene
where she will “choose” a husband, in the Rām the author appears
in person only in the last stages of the heroine’s path from the point
where he receives her at his hermitage to the final scene where she calls
on the earth to engulf her. More specifically, in the Mbh Vyāsa makes
three of his forty-one appearances in a row to advance Draupadī’s
story. First, he tells the youthful forest-wandering Pāṇḍavas the Over-
anxious Maiden story that introduces Draupadī as destined from her
previous life to marry five husbands (Mbh 1.157.6–16); then he shows
up again to keep them “on the path” (pathi) to Pañcāla (176.2–3);
and third, he shows up in time to narrate the stories that explain how
Draupadī’ s polyandry is virtuous, dharmic (187.32–190.4). And in the
Rām, Vālmīki not only receives Sītā after Rāma has banished her (Rām
7.44–48), but receives her pregnant with the twins Lava and Kuśa,
helps her raise these boys, teaches them the Rām and brings them to
Rāma’s Aśvamedha (7.84.5) to sing it—whereupon Rāma realizes their
song is about him and wishes to be reunited with Sītā; Vālmīki then
brings Sītā before Rāma, attests to her purity as a dharmacāriṇī, one
who “fares in dharma” (7.87.14–20), and tells Rāma that “she will give
proof of her fidelity” (pratyayaṃ dāsyate; 87.15c and 20d) by the act
of truth that then ends her life (88.10).7
I would propose that the two texts work this configuration along
with a common design and a largely overlapping vocabulary. When
we realize that Vyāsa makes no further appearances in the main story
that concern Draupadī as the person most directly affected,8 and that
Vālmīki makes no appearances in the main story at all until the events
7 See Hiltebeitel 2001a: 318–322.
8 Two of Vyāsa’s forty-one other appearances affect Draupadī immediately, but
are not primarily concerned with her: When he appears with Nārada between the
weapons of Arjuna and Aśvatthāman, he changes the terms that affect Draupadī’s
revenge against Aśvatthāman for slaying her children—terms that leave Draupadī
barren (see Hiltebeitel 2001a: 62–64); and she is among those whom Vyāsa enables to
see her slain sons when he brings forth a vision of the slain warriors from the Gaṅgā
(Hiltebeitel 2001a: 81).
282 chapter ten
just described, we may say, in brief, that not only do the “authors”
stories follow paths defined by their heroines, but that the authors
appear at these two decisive doubtful end-points precisely to vouch for
the purity, fidelity, and chastity of the heroines on whose paths their
narratives proceed. Along the way, each epic will be full of reminders,
with words like mārga, pathā, pantha, vartman, adhvan, padam, and
in the Mbh the additional word padavī, that the heroines’ movements
define such a “path”, and that she walks it as a dharmacāriṇī, a vibrant
phrase, at least when used in narrative contexts, that I believe could be
well glossed as “one who moves gracefully in dharma”.9 Moreover, if
Vālmīki appears only at the end of his story, vouchsafing for Sītā there
by this very phrase, there is also the indication at its beginning, where
his poem is introduced, that the composition he imparted to Kuśa
and Lava to sing to Rāma is called sītāyāścaritam mahat (1.4.6b)—that
is, if I may translate it in the same vein, literally “The Great Course
of Sītā”.10
Pivotal to making the case for such a path through each epic will
be the Forest Books, with their preludes and sequels. For it is there
that the heroines’ paths take them and the heroes on their longest and
profoundest journeys.
B. Walking the Path of Draupadī
In the Mbh, it is in and around the forest that we meet that epic’s
distinctive use of the term padavī, “footstep, path, way”, used with
the roots car or gam, “move” or “go”, and modified by draupadyāh,
“Draupadī’s”, or, if Draupadī is speaking herself, by mama, “my”, to
describe “walking on the path of Draupadī” (as I will translate it).
9 In the Mbh, it has the following uses for Draupadī. Vidura (who incarnates
dharma) establishes after the dice match in words to Yudhisṭḥ ira: “And Draupadī
walks in the Law and is wise both in Law and Profit” (dharmārthakuśalā caiva
draupadī dharmacāriṇī) (2.69.9cd; van Buitenen 1978: 163). And just after this, once
the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī have left for the forest, Dhṛtarāsṭṛa reveals his anxieties to
Saṃjaya, and Saṃjaya replies: “Though warned by Bhīsṃ a, Droṇa, and Vidura, [not]
to bring in Draupadī, the Pāṇḍavas’ beloved wife, who walked in the Law (draupadīṃ
dharmacāraṇīm), your foolish son Duryodhana sent the son of a sūta as an usher”
(2.72.6–7; van Buitenen 1978: 167). See also 3.222.58; 4.15.35; 18.1.9 and 18.2.11 (as
described by Yudhisṭḥ ira, not finding Draupadī in heaven). For the Rām as designat-
ing Sītā, see 1.72.17 (dharmacārī, a short form, as described by her father to Rāma at
their wedding); 2.23.19; 2.109.21 (as perceived by Anasūya); 7.87.14 (as attested to by
Vālmīki at the end of her road, as already cited).
10 As others have taken the term Sītāyana.
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 283
Although the Mbh is, of course, a text of many crisscrossing paths and
doors,11 I will let this idiom suffice to make my case that Draupadī’s
path is the one that the Mbh marks the most carefully. On the verge
of entering the forest, the first occurrence comes with Nakula’s oath
of revenge after the dice match:
At the command of Dharmarāja, walking the path of Draupadī (nideśād
dharmarājasya draupadyāḥ padavīṃ caran) I shall soon empty the earth
of the Dhārtarāsṭṛas (2.68.45).
Then, most tellingly, Draupadī uses these terms twice herself in the
Forest Book in the episode of her abduction by Jayadratha, just before
he grabs her:
I am very strong (mahābalā), but here it is as if the Sauvīra king thinks
me powerless—that, convinced by subjugation, I would speak here piti-
fully to the Sauvīra king, (I) whose path the two Kṛsṇ ̣as will surely walk
(yasyā hi kṛsṇ ̣au padavīṃ caretām), the two companions stationed on a
single chariot—not even Indra could carry her (tām) off, how then a mere
miserable man? When Kirītịn, the slayer of enemy heroes, stationed on the
chariot, shattering the foes’ minds, pervades your army on my account,
burning deadwood like a summer fire, Janārdana’s heroic Vrṣ ṇ ̣i followers
and all the great Kekaya bowmen too, indeed, all these princes of pleas-
ing form will walk my path (ete hi sarve mama rājaputrāḥ/prahṛsṭạ̄ rūpāḥ
padavīṃ careyuḥ; 3.252.13–16).
Note that Draupadī is describing how Jayadratha will be killed in the
Mahābhārata war, not how her husbands will rescue her now from his
grasp, which the immediate sequel does not fail to describe in related
terms. For as Indrasena, Yudhisṭḥ ira’s charioteer says on learning with
the Pāṇḍavas of her abduction,
Even if the queen has entered the earth, ascended to heaven or plunged
in the sea, the sons of Pṛthā will follow her path, for so surely tortured
is Dharmarāja (tasya gamisỵ anti padaṃ hi pārthās/tathā hi saṃtapyati
dharmarājaḥ). . . She’s the walking heart of the Pāṇḍavas! (bahiścaraṃ
hṛdayam pāṇḍavānām) (3.253.12 and 13f ).12
11 See Hiltebeitel 2001a: 1, n. 3 on “forking paths”, and p. 20, citing 12.342—the end
of the Śāntiparvan on the many doors to heaven. At the beginning of the Śāntiparvan,
consider the play on contending “roads” and “paths” (12.8.37–12.9 and 11) in the
disagreement between Arjuna, who has just had Kṛsṇ ̣a to set his course (i.e., drive
his chariot) through the eighteen days of war, and Yudhisṭḥ ira, who now has some
decisions to make on his own.
12 Slightly modifying van Buitenen 1978: 715, but keeping his translation “tortured”,
which elegantly conveys the sentiment behind what would be a more literal “for so
surely does Dharmarāja burn . . .” Among further iterations of the path theme in this
284 chapter ten
Next, such terms occur twice in Book Five on occasions when Kuntī
tells Kṛsṇ ̣a to remind Arjuna that, with the war still ahead, “the path
of Draupadī” has a ways yet to go (5.66.79; 135.19):
Having gone, strong-armed one, say to the best of all weapon-bearers,
the hero Arjuna Pāṇḍava, “Walk the path of Draupadī” (draupadyāḥ
padavīṃ cara; 5.88.79);
and again,
Strong-armed one, say to that best of all weapon-bearers, the tiger among
men Arjuna Pāṇḍava, “Walk the path of Draupadī” (draupadyāḥ padavīṃ
cara; 135.19).
And the terms last occur at the end of the war when Bhīma describes
Duryodhana’s death to Yudhisṭḥ ira as a resolution toward which
Draupadī’s path has led:
By good luck, the sinful Duryodhana has been slain with his followers in
battle. By good luck, you have gone the path of Draupadī’s mass of hair
(draupadyāḥ keśapaksạ sya disṭỵ ā tvam padavīṃ gataḥ; 12.16.25).13
Draupadī’s path is a dark one, foreseen by the incorporeal voice that
announces at her birth that she will be the destruction of the Ksạ triyas.14
As the passages further indicate, though the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as”15 and indeed
“all the princes” follow this path, it is especially Dharmarāja who keeps
them all to it with his indestructible yet “tortured” love for this woman.
And finally, just because that is the case, it means that the text follows
the path of Draupadī until the very end, when Yudhisṭḥ ira asks to
question Draupadī even when he is in heaven,16 that is, even when she
is no more.
passage, the Pāṇḍavas “take to the path (padavīm) at once” (17d) and are thrice said
to follow Jayadratha and Draupadī’s tracks (vartmaṇī: 256. 16a, 20e, 22b).
13 See Hiltebeitel 1981: 200–201.
14 1.155.41–46; see Hiltebeitel 2001a: 187.
15 See Hiltebeitel 1984. As these passages remind us, it is also a path defined by
the interwoven threads that link the actions of all the epic’s Kṛsṇ ̣as: the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as”,
Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a; Draupadī Kṛsṇ ̣ā (her name at birth); and the author Kṛsṇ ̣a
Dvaipāyana, “the Island-born Kṛsṇ ̣a”, who set the Pāṇḍavas on this path in the first
place, as earlier noted.
16 18.3.8; see Hiltebeitel 2001a: 276–277.
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 285
C. The Seven Ṛsịs and Agastya
In the Rām, the term padavī is very rarely used, and never with the
same meanings or with reference to Sītā.17 Rather, the path theme is
developed in two phases divided by Sītā’s abduction: the first defined
primarily by ṛsịs; the second traced mainly by animals. As we approach
the first, we must get our bearings on the contrasting treatments of ṛsịs
in the two epics.18
As E. W. Hopkins has shown, as a class ṛsịs form a rather elastic
grouping; I quote him because he permits us to narrow things down
rather quickly:
Among Ṛsịs some are Devaṛsịs and Dānavaṛsịs; some are Mahaṛsịs,
some are Paramaṛsịs (the arcisṃ antaḥ or very bright stars around the
polar star); others, like Triśaṅku, are Rājarsịs, of kingly extraction; or
Brahmaṛsịs (Vipraṛsịs), of priestly origin. The most famous group is that
of the Seven Seers of the North (Hopkins 1915: 177).
Now, in both epics there are times when the ṛsịs appear in all their
variety to witness some great event. But there are also moments and
situations where they are, as it were, represented by those “most
famous” Seven, or by some significant variation thereof. These Seven
have three major traits, all of which are functional and interrelated in
the two epics.
First, they represent the religious authority of Veda; five of them
have names that can be given to the “family books” of the Ṛgveda
(Viśvāmitra [Book 3], Gotama [4], Atri [5], Bharadvāja [6], Vasisṭḥ a
[7]), and the other two (Kaśyapa19 and Jamadagni) are known as
poets of various hymns as well, as is Agastya, whom we must begin
to keep track of along with the Seven. Jamadagni is the only one who
has minimal association with the Vedic corpus (ṚV 9.65 being attrib-
uted to him or Bhṛgu), but he is of course a descendent of Bhṛgu,
this latter being mentioned in a number of Ṛgveda hymns (8.43.13;
17 I find only three usages of padavī in the Rām, with different verbs and meanings:
“come to the aid of” (padavīm āgatān [3.19.4d]; padavīm prāpta [3.20.12c], on which see
Pollock 1991: 128, 131); the “region of the gods. etc.” (padavīṃ devatānām . . . gamisỵ asi)
that, according to Aṅgada, Rāvaṇa will attain when he is slain (6.31.41).
18 The gist of §§ C.-E. of this essay was presented in 1979 at an American Academy
of Religion panel I organized on the two epics, with Madeleine Biardeau, Wendy
Doniger O’Flaherty, and Robert P. Goldman as co-speakers. Twenty-five years later,
perhaps it will be more timely. See Hiltebeitel 1979b.
19 Some would add him as well to the short list of five as the ṛsị of Book 9.
286 chapter ten
10.14.6; 92.12) and associated still more closely with the Atharvaveda.
One may thus say that the Seven (who are themselves credited as co-
authors of two hymns [ṚV 9.67; 10.13720]) and Agastya are the Vedic
ṛsịs par excellence. Their importance here is related to their identity as
the eight pravaraṛsịs, the eponymous ancestors of the eight Brahman
gotras—that is, the ones to whom all Brahman families make invoca-
tion (pravara), and to whom they trace their line of descent. These
eight gotras were the basis for the system of sept-exogamy, or marriage
outside one’s “eponymous clan”. By classical times, the Seven ṛsịs plus
Agastya thus represent not only the authority of Veda, but the very
human tissue of Brahmandom.
Second, both epics regard these ṛsịs as having āśramas in the for-
est, where they live as vānaprasthas, still sometimes in the company
of their wives where the texts take in interest in such matters. But
there is a difference. In the Rām, these ṛsịs, or important members of
their lines, are still living relatively earthly lives, and can thus readily
interact with the hero and heroine. But in the Mbh their stories belong
largely to the past—a past not so long distant in terms of generational
time, though long in terms of ordinary human years. Their interac-
tions with the heroes are thus more indirect.
Third, in the cosmological domain that epic scholars mostly ignore
or shuttle aside, the Seven ṛsịs and Agastya are important stars: the
Seven form the Great Bear or Big Dipper, which moves around the Pole
Star (dhruva, the Fixed) and is identified with the devayāna, the sote-
riological path to moksạ . Agastya, however, is the star Canopus, sec-
ond brightest star in the southern skies which are associated with the
pitṛyāna,21 the path of reincarnation, and with Yama, god of the dead
and lord of the southern region.
20 On these hymns I thank T. P. Mahadevan for the following information and
quoted comments: ṚV 9.67.1–21 has contributions from the Seven “amounting to
three gāyatri verses [each] except Jamadagni’s three dvipadā gāyatri. The order of the
ṛsịs is: Bharadvāja, Kaśyapa, Gotama, Atri, Viśvāmitra, Jamadagni, and Vasisṭḥ a. This
order, if it is a sign of the relative importance or prestige of the clans at redaction of
the Ṛgveda, changes by post-Vedic times to the order [found here in this essay]. That
order dates from the sūtra period and the subsequent purāṇa period. . .” The tenth book
ṛsịs hymn is “a seven-verse hymn with each ṛsị getting one aṇusṭụ bh verse. The order
of ṛsịs is the same” as in Book 9.
21 See Hiltebeitel 1977a: 347–350.
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 287
D. The Seven Ṛsịs and Agastya in the Mahābhārata
Before we consider the treatment of these Seven ṛsịs plus Agastya in
the Rām, we can thus expect to learn something from their contrast-
ing treatment in the Mbh. Unlike the Rām, the Mbh does not present
them as living concurrently with the heroes of the main story. The
Seven ṛsịs and Agastya’s involvements with the main narrative of the
Mbh are limited to visits from the heavens where they have already
attained their stellar status (a partial exception may be Vasisṭḥ a,
who has a rather low-profile identity as a guru of Bhīsṃ a [1.44.32;
12.46.15]; but considering that Bhīsṃ a has spent time with his celestial
mother Gaṅgā, we have no guarantee that this discipleship occurred
on earth).22 The Seven ṛsịs do occasionally visit Mbh events en masse
from above, as at the birth of Arjuna: “The Seven Seers Bharadvāja,
Kaśyapa, Gautama, Viśvāmitra, Jamadagni, Vasisṭḥ a, and he who rises
as the sun goes down, the blessed lord Atri came there too” (1.114.41).
But they do not structure the Pāṇḍavas’ itinerary during their forest
exile or elsewhere, and are not their major Brahman interlocutors
there or anywhere else.
Yet they have another importance in this epic. Although we find
stories about them widely dispersed, they repeatedly make signal con-
tributions to the dynastic past, contributing to the great confluences
of cosmic and societal forces, including mixture of caste, that recur
through the lunar dynasty down to and into the Mahābhārata cri-
sis. They do this over a long period, but with a seeming incremental
intensity that marks their connection with the line at its major turn-
ing points or crises. According to a tradition that is found largely in
post-epic texts, Atri, as the father of Soma, is the progenitor of the
Lunar Dynasty itself. The epithet “he who rises as the sun goes down”
is, however, surely connected with these lunar associations, which the
Mbh knows (see Hopkins 1915: 90–91). As a group, the Seven ṛsịs and
Agastya all appear in the story of Nahusạ , father of Yayāti, who, when
he becomes king of heaven at the fall of Indra, makes the Seven pull
his carriage, until he arrogantly touches Agastya’s head with his foot.23
The Bhārgavas then intermarry into the line through Yayāti when the
22 See Hiltebeitel 2001b.
23 See 5.11–17, 12.329.29–41 (Nārāyaṇīya), and 13.101.44–103.37; Hiltebeitel 1977a.
288 chapter ten
latter marries the Bhārgava Śukra’s daughter Devayānī; their son Yadu
is not an ancestor of the central branch of the dynasty, which descends
from his younger brother Pūru, the first of the line’s eponymous ances-
tors, but Yadu’ s descendants—the Yādavas—twice recombine with the
central branch in the epic’s main narrative: first, when Kṛsṇ ̣a’s aunt
Kuntī, a Yādava, marries Pāṇḍu and becomes the mother of the eldest
three Pāṇḍavas (1.71–78); and second, when Kṛsṇ ̣a’s sister Subhadrā
marries Arjuna, with their recombinant Paurava-Yādava descendants
providing the dynasty’s sole heirs.24 Meanwhile, Viśvāmitra and the
Apsaras Menakā were then the parents of Śakuntalā, who bears with
King Duḥsạ nta another famous eponym of the line, Bharata (1.65–69).
And drawing still closer in time to the events of the epic, Vasisṭḥ a is
the father of Śakti, grandfather of Parāśara (1.169.1–8), and thus great
grandfather of Vyāsa, who is the father of Dhṛtarāsṭṛa, Pāṇḍu, and
Vidura, not to mention their non-dynastic elder half-brother Śuka.
Meanwhile, off-center from the dynastic line but still contributory to
the Kaurava camp and the build-up of the main epic crisis, one finds
Bharadvāja directly siring Droṇa, and Gautama as either the grand-
father, or a more distant ancestor, of Kṛpa and Kṛpī (1.120–21), with
Aśvatthāman being the outcome of the marriage of Droṇa and Kṛpī—
all these fighting Brahmans contributing to the crisis by siding with
the Kauravas.
The only one of the Seven ṛsịs, or ṛsị families, not contributing
genealogically to the crisis is Kaśyapa. But then this most highly gen-
erative ṛsị has a hand in the regeneration of all the Ksạ triyas after
their destruction by Bhārgava Rāma (12.49). He is also a still more
primordial progenitor: partner of Aditi in bearing the Ᾱdityas and, in
other contexts, of incarnations of Visṇ ̣u. He is also, as the husband of
Kadrū and Vinatā (1.14.5–7), the father of all snakes and birds. Thus
if, as it seems, there is a connection between the Kauravas and snakes,
Kaśyapa’s progeny may have taken another route into the lineage. Per-
haps it is thus fitting that one of his descendants should make the
effort to cure the Pāṇḍavas’ heir Pariksịt of snakebite, without how-
ever succeeding (1.46.38–39). And it is curious that the two somewhat
disreputable Brahman brothers Yāja and Upayāja who officiate at the
24 See Defourny 1978. There is, of course, much more extensive Bhārgava material
in the Mbh, one major upshot of which is that Bhārgava Rāma is still hanging around
to teach weaponry to various heroes. See most recently Fitzgerald 2002.
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 289
sacrifice that produces the births of Dhṛsṭạ dyumna and Draupadī are
both Kāśyapas (1.155.7). Thus while Kaśyapa and the Kāśyapas present
the largest exceptions to the main pattern by which the Seven ṛsịs and
Agastya are treated, we find them marked by traits that still contrib-
ute to the pattern: those of primordiality, generativity, and willingness
to use that generativity in the performance of an unusual but vital
sacrifice.
Two more contrasts thus emerge. In the Rām, the Iksṿ ākus’ solar
line is without such repeated Brahman interventions as these, which
include several Brahman adulterations of the Ksạ triya stock. All this
will allow us to say, secondly, that whereas in the Mbh the Seven ṛsịs
and Agastya mainly map time, in the Rām they mainly map space.
E. The First Part of the Rāmāyaṇa Path: The Seven Ṛsịs
and Agastya
With these themes in mind, we can now look at these ṛsịs as a relay
system in the Rām, for it will be my contention that Vālmīki defines
the first part of Rāma and Sītā’s path precisely by this group of seven
plus one, allowing in two cases, already anticipated by what we have
just culled from the Mbh, for replacements by their descendants. More
specifically, Vālmīki maps these ṛsịs onto the story as the main rep-
resentatives and spokesmen for all the ṛsịs, who are to be the benefi-
ciaries of the divine plan to have Rāma eradicate the rāksạ sa nuisance
that disturbs their forest āśramas—a mission for which the abduction
of Sītā will be necessary and a cause for the ṛsịs to rejoice.25
This pattern begins somewhat inconspicuously with two Brahmans
who provide the ṛsịs with their generative “home base” in Rāma’ s
family, in effect suspending their vānaprastha mode of life while they
serve the royal line. Thus, most importantly, Vasisṭḥ a and Ṛśyaśṛṅga
Kāśyapa (descendent of Kaśyapa) oversee the rites of Rāma and his
brothers’ births (Rām 1.9–1 6),26 along with several other Brahmans
named. After this, both Vasisṭḥ a and a Kaśyapa (it is doubtful this
25 The moment Rāvaṇa lifts Sītā off, all the paramaṛsịs of the immediate Daṇḍaka
Forest are “thrilled and agitated”—prahrṣṭạ̄ vyathitāścāsan (3.50.11a). I believe Shastri’s
“filled with joy” (1969: 110) and Raghunathan’s “glad” (1981: 112) are closer to the
sense of prahṛsṭạ than Pollock’s “shuddered” (1991: 196).
26 On the pair in combination, see notably 1.12.33–34; 13.42.
290 chapter ten
would still be Ṛśyaśṛṅga, but the continued home-base presence of
a Kāśyapa is still of interest) accompany Rāma’s wedding party to
Mithilā (68.4), where Vasisṭḥ a recites the Iksṿ āku lineage (69.14–15)
to which Rśyaśrṅga has so crucially contributed in the case of Rāma
and his brothers. A Kāśyapa is then also among the Brahmans advising
Vasisṭḥ a at Ayodhyā, along with others named (2.61.2). Vasisṭḥ a and a
Kāśyapa are then in attendance, along with five other ṛsịs,27 at Rāma’s
enthronement (6.116.55), and finally they are among the first four of
the seventeen (in the Critical Edition) ṛsịs named when Rāma invites
“all the ṛsịs”28 to his aśvamedha to witness what he believes will be
Sītā’s conclusive oath of chastity, but which will instead be the end of
her life and her earthly path. Vasisṭḥ a is a fixture in his role as purohita
of the Iksṿ ākus under Daśaratha, Bharata, and Rāma (e.g., 1.11 .6c;
2.61.3d), as is probably also implied in the Rāmopākhyāna, as we shall
see below. This thread of Kāśyapas, beginning with Ṛśyaśṛṅga, seems
to be a theme launched by Vālmīki.29 Let me just suggest that in map-
ping the Seven ṛsịs, the Rām handles the Kāśyapas much as the Mbh
does by having them contribute to the pattern but from the greatest
remove. Vālmīki thus solves his most difficult problem adroitly and at
the beginning by replacing Kāśyapa—the primordiality of whose sto-
ries perhaps dates him beyond the range of Vālmīki’s Rām history—
primarily by Ṛśyaśṛṅga, who is also a Kāśyapa in the Mbh (3.110.2b
etc.) but without any connection there to the Rāma story, or more
particularly with the Rāmopākhyāna, and who shares with Kaśyapa the
traits one finds among Kāśyapas in the Mbh of extraordinary genera-
tivity and the availability to use it in an unusual but vital sacrifice.
For the other five of the Seven ṛsịs, however, their Rāmāyaṇa life
is in the forest. While Rāma is but a youth, Viśvāmitra appears to
demand his aid in slaying the rāksạ sas who disturb his hermitage.
There this ṛsị, the Ksạ triya who had become a Brahman, becomes Rāma
and Laksṃ aṇa’s guru, “initiating” the boys into the mastery of weap-
ons that unite the brahman and ksạ tra powers and testing them with
their use against the youngsters’ first rāksạ sa opponents— including
27 Vāmadeva, Jābāli, Kātyāyana, Gautama, and Vijaya.
28 rsīn sarvān—the others named in the Critical Edition being Vāmadeva, Jābāli,
Viśvāmitra, Dīrghatapas, Durvāsas, Agastya, Śakti, Bhārgava, Vāmana, the “long-
lived Mārkaṇḍeya”, Maudgalya, Cyavana, Śatānanda, Bharadvāja, and Agniputra
(7.87.1–4).
29 As noted above and explored further below, it is not found in the Rāmopākhyāna.
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 291
the female rāksạ sī Tātạ kā, whom Rāma kills at Viśvāmitra instruc-
tion. Then, just as Vyāsa does in directing the Pāṇḍavas to Draupadī,
Viśvāmitra, now satisfied, informs the young men about the forth-
coming marriage ceremony of Sītā and leads them to Mithilā, where,
“protected by the son of Kuśika” (guptaḥ kuśikaputreṇa; 1.67.15),
Rāma wins Sītā’s hand. Along the way, Viśvāmitra has facilitated the
transition between Rāma’s killing of Tātạ kā and his marriage to Sītā
by imparting instruction about the dangers of female sexuality,30 and
this has culminated, just before reaching Mithilā, with their passage
through the hermitage of Gautama. There Rāma leams that this ṛsị
has long abandoned this retreat after cursing his wife Ahalyā for her
affair there with Indra: she would remain there immobile and invis-
ible, doing penance until she should be freed from the curse and puri-
fied by the presence of Rāma. Once Ahalyā is restored, she is rejoined
by Gautama, who bestows “great homage” on Rāma before the latter
“proceeded on to Mithilā” (1.47.11–48.22; Goldman 1984: 218). Prob-
ably Rāma thus restores the marriage relation between this ṛsị and his
wife in anticipation of his marriage with Sītā, with it likely reshadowed
that his own marriage will also be one to suffer from long separations
and a question of infidelity.
Upon the conclusion of the wedding,31 Viśvāmitra takes leave of
Rāma (1.73.1), or—more exactly—yields way, just as Rāma is con-
fronted by Rāma Jāmadagnya (Bhārgava Rāma, Paraśurāma) in a terri-
fying apparition. Concerning Rāma’ s meetings with the Seven ṛsịs, this
is Vālmīki’s only other adjustment after his handling of the Kāśyapas.32
Vālmīki places Rām events in the aftermath not only of Jamadagni’s
killing, but the slaughters by Rāma Jāmadagnya that avenge it. This
30 Thanks to Sally Sutherland on this point, which she discusses in S. J. S. Goldman
2004: 55–76.
31 It is to be noted that Gautama’s son Śatānanda is King Janaka’s purohita (1.69.1),
and officiates, along with Vasisṭḥ a and Viśvāmitra, at Rāma and Sītā’s wedding.
32 Indeed, the two adjustments bear a temporal correlation—at least in the Mbh.
For in the Śāntiparvan account of the Jamadagni-Rāma Jāmadagnya story, Kaśyapa
figures as the ṛsị who enables the Ksạ triyas’ regeneration after Rāma Jāmadagnya has
slaughtered them in revenge for his father’s slaying. While Vālmīki could allow Rāma
to meet Kaśyapa under these conditions, he is not willing to let Rāma meet Jamadagni,
whose earthly career has been terminated too early in this episode, which, at least in
this version, has Kaśyapa’s intervention in its conclusion. Vālmīki thus leaves the mat-
ter of Rāma’s status as a regenerate Ksạ triya to be worked out, without reference to
Kaśyapa, in Rāma’s face-off with Rāma Jāmadagnya, who now appears before Rāma
to challenge him.
292 chapter ten
Rāma Jāmadagnya has thus now already—that is, long before the
Mbh,33 which makes so much of it—slain the earth’s Ksạ triyas twenty-
one times over, and now he threatens Rāma with the same extermina-
tion. He has heard Rāma has won Sītā by breaking the bow of Śiva; he
now appears with the bow of Jamadagni himself, which had descended
to Jamadagni from Visṇ ̣u. If Rāma can string it without breaking it,
the two can then fight. Rāma strings the bow without breaking it, and
with the arrow destroys the worlds that Rāma Jāmadagnya has won
with his tapas. Rāma Jāmadagnya is thus defeated without a fight, and
gracefully accepts his eclipse by Rāma Dāśarathi (1.73.16–76.3).
The fact that it is the mastery of the bow of the ṛsị Jamadagni as well
as that of Śiva makes this encounter all the more significant. For it was
Jamadagni who had the restraint that checked, for one generation, the
fateful combination of Brahman energy with Ksạ triya inclinations that
appeared in his son Rāma Jāmadagnya. That Rāma Dāśarathi should
destroy the worlds of asceticism of Rāma Jāmadagnya with the bow of
Jamadagni is thus an indication of this restoration of restraint over the
power of destruction.34 Rāma holds the combination of brahman and
ksatra powers as the disciple of Viśvāmitra (Rāma Jāmadagnya’s great
uncle, the two being the recipients of opposing destinies). That is, he
is the disciple of the exemplary Ksạ triya who is oriented toward the
brahman power; not of Rāma Jāmadagnya, the exemplary Brahman
who is oriented toward the ksạ tra.35 Rāma thus shows his mastery of
the two bows differentially and correctively. In one case, it is not only
Śiva’s bow but that of a Ksạ triya, Janaka, and he breaks it, still under
the tutelage of Viśvāmitra, the Ksạ triya who had become a Brahman.
In the other, it is not only Visṇ ̣u’s bow but that of a Brahman (Jama-
dagni), and he leaves it unbroken, destroying the worlds of the Brah-
man with too much of the Ksạ triya in him.
33 Which could suggest the Rām’s knowledge of the Mbh.
34 See further Biardeau 1976: 190–197, appreciating these and other interrelated
themes in this episode: an affirmation of the complementarity of Śiva and Visnu,
Rāma now having strung both their bows; further indications of the superiority of
Visnu over Śiva (the episode invokes a myth to this effect), and of restraint over the
power of destruction; and more particularly the eclipse of the destructive avatāric role
of Paraśurāma by the restorative avatāric role of Rāma Dāśarathi. Cf. Thomas 1996 on
Paraśurāma’s durability.
35 A description that also befits Droṇa, Rāma Jāmadagnya’s most prominent Brah-
man disciple in the Mbh.
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 293
After this encounter, Rāma returns home and faces the circum-
stances that lead to his banishment: a series of affairs again highlight-
ing Vasisṭḥ a. As he is about to depart, his mother Kausalyā says to
him, with suggestive transparency,
May the Seven ṛsịs and Nārada guard you everywhere, my wise son, may
all the constellations, and all the planets with their presiding deities, as
you wander in a muni’s garb through the great forest (2.22.5).
Kausalyā’s words effectively bring out the Seven ṛsịs’ (and Nārada’s)
double link with the stars (constellations and planets) above and the
forests that loom ahead, and also bridge Rāma’s movements from
his princely upbringing (to which Ṛśyaśṛṅga Kāśyapa, Vasisṭḥ a,
Viśvāmitra, Gautama and Ahalyā, and Rāma Jāmadagnya have all con-
tributed) to his banishment to the forest, where the meetings with the
rest of the great ṛsịs will continue.
First, shortly after having set out, Rāma, Sītā, and Laksṃ aṇa encoun-
ter Bharadvāja, who, at Rāma’s request that he “think of some good
site for an ashram in a secluded place” (2.48.23; Pollock 1986: 188),
directs them to go ten krośas ahead to Mount Citrakūtạ , “a meritori-
ous (puṇyaḥ) place frequented by maharsịs” (2.48.25 [22–36]), where
they will make their first real residence in the forest. But Bharadvāja’s
main contribution soon follows when Bharata passes through his her-
mitage on the way to his meeting with Rāma to ask Rāma to return to
Ayodhyā. Bharadvāja conjures up a sumptuous feast and a royal palace
for Bharata, but Bharata rejects the royal seat, thus anticipating his stew-
ardship of Rāma’s throne (2.84–85). Once Bharata has proved his wor-
thiness, Bharadvāja again gives the directions to Citrakūtạ (2.86.8–13),
this time so that Bharata can find Rāma there.
Second, when Rāma, Sītā, and Laksṃ aṇa leave Citrakūtạ , it is by way
of the hermitage of Atri. There the main interaction is between Sītā
and Atri’s now aged wife Anasūyā, who informs Sītā about the duties
of a faithful wife or pativratā, and then bestows on her the apparel
that Sītā will wear henceforth in the forest (2.109.5–111.20)—add-
ing to the jewels that Daśaratha gave Sītā on her departure (2.33.14;
34.15–18). Again Rāma receives directions. Just as Bharadvāja directs
him and his companions on the path to Citrakūtạ , the ascetics at
Atri’s hermitage now direct him on “the path through the forest
which the maharsịs use when they go to gather fruits” (esạ panthā
maharsị̄ṇām phalānyāharatāṃ vane; 2.111.19)—all other routes, they
say, being treacherous, as if the fruits to be gathered by Rāma will not
294 chapter ten
be treacherous too. The trio is, in fact, directed toward the danger-
ous, rāksạ sa-infested Daṇḍaka Forest. There they will spend ten years
visiting hermitages, including those of two rather extreme ascetics
named Śarabhaṅga (a Gautama: 3.6. 14d), who is mentioned in the
Rāmopākhyāna unlike the second, Sutīksṇ ̣a, who finally tells them the
way they should proceed southward (3.10.36) through this forest to
the hermitage of Agastya.
Rāma has thus encountered the Seven ṛsịs, five directly and two
through their descendants, in the following order: Vasisṭḥ a, Ṛśyaśṛṅga
(for Kaśyapa), Viśvāmitra, Gautama, Rāma Jāmadagnya (for Jama-
dagni), Bharadvāja, and Atri.36 At last he is directed on to Agastya,
who, added to the Seven, completes the list of the eight pravarsịs.
Upon seeing Agastya’s hermitage, Rāma says,
This must be the ashram of that seer whose power made the rāksạ sas look
on this southern region with terror and give up their hold on it. From the
moment the virtuous sage set foot in this region, the nightstalkers ceased
hostilities and grew peaceable (3.10.80–81; Pollock 1986: 109–110).
Agastya is, of course, the ṛsị of South India, regarded as the bringer of
Brahmanical civilization to the south, and supposedly still resident on
Mount Podiyil in Tirunelveli District, Tamilnadu. When Rāma asks
him where he and his companions can find a peaceful spot, Agastya
reflects for a moment and then directs them toward Pañcavatị̄, near the
Godāvarī River (3.12.15–18). When they take up this “path by which
the great seer had directed them”,37 they are going into an uncharted
territory in which, from here on, their path will no longer be pointed
out by great or lesser intermediary ṛsịs, but by generally inauspicious
creatures, beginning with the vulture Jatạ̄ yus. From Pañcavatị̄, Rāma
will begin in earnest his extermination of the rāksạ sas at Janasthāna,
and it will be at Pañcavatị̄ that Sītā will be abducted. Indeed, Agastya
has directed them into a southern realm filled with inauspiciousness
and death where, once Sītā is soon abducted, the first help available
in recovering the path—which will now be the broken path of Sītā’s
abduction—comes from deer, a headless trunk, vultures, monkeys and
36 Durvāsas, a son of Atri, will also mark the end of Rāma and his brothers’ lives,
urgently demanding food in circumstances that prematurely end Rāma’s sequestered
conversation with Time (or Death, Kāla; 7.93–95). The episode begins describing Rāma
as “firm on the path of dharma” (rāme dharmapathe sthite; 93.1b).
37 Pollock 1986: 115; Rām. 3.12.25cd: yathopadisṭẹ na pathā maharsịṇā prajagmatuḥ
Pañcavatị̄m samāhitau.
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 295
so-called “bears”, plus a strange cavewoman. For present purposes, it
will suffice to recover this track through the directions of the vulture
Jatạ̄ yus and the headless trunk.
F. The Second Part of the Rāmāyaṇa Path:
The Uncharted Territory
After Rāma and Laksṃ aṇa learn from the dying vulture Jatạ̄ yus of Sītā’s
abduction, they proceed, as the bird has directed them, in a southerly
direction on an “untrodden path” (aviprahatam. . . panthānam; 3.65.2).38
Having exhausted their visits to the hemitages of all the famous Vedic
ṛsịs down to the southernmost and last, Agastya, they now go into
uncharted forest that is, if one may so put it, Vedically unmapped.
Passing through several thick woods, they meet Kabandha, the “Head-
less Trunk”, a Dānava suffering from a curse who guards the way past
him (3.65.15–24).39 Once Rāma has helped him to regain his beauty
by cremating him, he tells Rāma that Rāvaṇa’s abode may be found if
Rāma forms an alliance with Sugrīva (68.10–22; cf. 67.20). Kabandha
then provides them with an itinerary to Sugrīva’s haunt on Mount
Ṛsỵ amūka near Lake Pampā, and on the way they must pass Mataṅga’
s Wood (mataṅgāraṇya; 3.69.27c; mataṅgavanam; 3.70.17c), where
the non-Vedic ṛsị Mataṅga had his hermitage (mataṅgasyāśramam;
4.11.41 d).40 Within that hermitage all the ṛsịs (including Mataṅga)
have passed away—all but one: a “mendicant woman” (śramaṇī,
3.69.19; also a siddhā, 3.70.6 and 9) named Śabarī—in whose name
we may read “the Tribal Woman”.41 The rest of them, Mataṅga and
38 Some of what follows in this paragraph is modified or summarized from Hilte-
beitel 1980c: 200–211.
39 As does the rāksạ sa Kirmīra when the Pāṇḍavas first enter the forest (Mbh 3.11.23,
12.7–15). Moreover, at the beginning of Book 3, after the Pāṇḍāvas have killed Kirmīra,
they realign themselves along their implied path by “placing Kṛsṇ ̣ā first” (kṛsṇ ̣ām
puraskṛtya) as they enter the Dvaita Forest (3.12.68).
40 The “safe path” (śivaḥ panthā; 69.2) Kabandha recommends for their approach
will be remarkable, past flowering trees and lotuses that make unfading garlands but
which no man has ever picked. Explains Kabandha: “The disciples of Mataṅga there
were well-adorned ṛsịs. When they were overheated (abhitapta) by the burden of
fetching forest produce for their guru, the drops of sweat from their bodies that fell to
the ground quickly were born as flowers from the munis’ tapas. Produced from their
drops of sweat, they do not die, Rāghava” (3.69. 16cd–18).
41 Śabaras are now the Saoras. See Lutgendorf 2001.
296 chapter ten
his other disciples, as Śabarī will soon corroborate, ascended to heaven
just when Rāma and company had reached Citrakūtạ .
Rāma and Laksṃ aṇa thus “set out in the forest on the path to Pampā
shown them by Kabandha” (tau kabandhena tam mārgam pampāyā
darśitaṃ vane; 70.1 ab). They head toward Mount Ṛsỵ amūka by way
of Mataṅga’s hermitage, where they find Śabarī still there, awaiting
Rāma’s arrival so that, as Mataṅga had promised her, the sight of him
would bring her heaven. This she soon enough obtains, rejoining her
maharsị preceptors there after Rāma gives her permission to enter fire
(hutvātmānaṃ hutāśaṇe; 3.70.26)—thereby indexing an association
between fire-entry and purification that will later apply also, implic-
itly, to Vālmīki’s Sītā. Rāma and Laksṃ aṇa then leave Mataṅga’ s her-
mitage itself, and with a sense of a favorable turn, meet Sugrīva and
company on Mount Ṛsỵ amūka.
Yet however favorable the turn, the story of Mataṅga’s vacating
of his hermitage still defines this place, for in Mataṅga’s name and
story lie enigmatic references to untouchability, buffalo sacrifice, and,
as already noted, impurity. Sugrīva can find asylum there because
Mataṅga, before dying, cursed Vālin, Sugrīva’s brother and enemy,
for befouling the āśrama with the blood drops of a huge buffalo named
Dundubhi, whom Vālin had slain. Although Rāma has thus arrived
too late to meet this “untouchable” ṛsị, the place remains one where
Rāma can show his grace and prowess with respect to the residues
of such impure presences, blessing the “Tribal”, Śabarī, and kicking
away Dundubhi’s buffalo bones with one toe to impress Sugrīva that
he, Rāma, will be up to the task of dispatching Vālin (4.3–12). Rāma
thus forges his “friendship” with Sugrīva42 in this portent-ridden
place, which, beyond the range of the Vedic ṛsịs, now marks the end
of the trail as defined by ṛsịs of any kind. Henceforth the path must
be divined from the signs left by Sītā; the words of another vulture,
Sampāti; the cavewoman Svayamprabhā; and the reconnoitering of the
monkeys and bears, which the friendship with Sugrīva will have made
possible. Through all this, though, the path is defined primarily by Sītā:
the quest for her, begun when Rāma learns from the monkeys that she
had dropped her garment and jewels to mark her trail as she passed
over the monkeys on Mount Ṛsỵ amūka.
42 I discuss the differing treatments of this friendship in the Rāmopākhyāna and
Vālmīki in Hiltebeitel 2004b and 2004d.
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 297
G. The Rāmopākhyāna
As noted, it is the Forest Books of the two epics that bring the path
theme to central stage. The Mbh, however, goes further in providing
a touchstone for this theme: one that I have already signaled as the
most salient moment in that epic’s use of the distinctive phrase “fol-
lowing the path of Draupadī”—Draupadī’s abduction by Jayadratha
Saindhava. It is this episode that elicits the Rāmopākhyāna: a narrative
in which the heroes and heroine of the one epic take consolation from
hearing the story of the hero and heroine of the other—or, to put it, I
think, more accurately, a narrative in which the Mbh auditors hear a
story that Vālmīki will soon make the subject of that other epic.
As noted at the beginning of this paper, from an inside-out perspec-
tive, the Mbh’s Forest Book is the Rāmopākhyāna’s frame story. And
indeed, it is a rather beautifully designed frame in which our path
theme is one of the major linking threads. Here is how the Mbh author
gets into the eighteen-adhyāya Rāmopākhyāna and out of it. First,
from the Mbh’s own inner frame, Janamejaya begins a short connec-
tive adhyāya asking Vaiśampāyana: What did the Pāṇḍavas do “after
they had incurred incomparable trouble because of Kṛsṇ ̣ā’s abduc-
tion” (evaṃ hṛtāyāṃ kṛsṇ ̣āyām prāpya kleśam anuttamam; 3.257.1).
Vaiśampāyana describes the scene. As “Dharmarāja Yudhisṭḥ ira sat
with the throngs of munis” who attend the Pāṇḍavas’ forest travels,
he asks, “in the midst” of those “listening and commiserating great
ṛsịs” (tesạ̄ m madhye maharsị̄ṇām śṛnvatāṃ anuśocatām): Unless it
is the workings of time, fate, or predestination (kāla, daivam, vidhi,
bhavitavya),
how indeed could such a happening touch (bhāva . . . saṃspṛśed) our
dharma-knowing wife, one who fares in dharma (dharmacāriṇī), as a
false charge of theft (might touch) a pure man? Surely no sin is commit-
ted, not a blameworthy deed anywhere; even among Brahmans the great
dharma is well fared (sucarito) by Draupadī (3.257, 1–6).
Be it noted that Yudhisṭḥ ira starts out with the question “how could
this happen to Draupadī”, fully defending her, and not “how could
this happen to me?” Even though he turns shortly to this second
question, it is the subordinated one. Yudhisṭḥ ira begins with a ques-
tion and a defense that are not, I think, typical of Rāma-or at least of
Vālmīki’s Rāma. Now addressing Mārkaṇḍeya among the throng of
ṛsịs, Yudhisṭḥ ira observes further that having one’s wife abducted is
298 chapter ten
miserable, as is this forest life caused by lying kinsmen, and asks, “Is
there indeed a man less fortunate than I, have you ever seen or heard
of one before?” (7–10).
In response to this, Mārkaṇḍeya begins the Rāmopākhyāna in
medias res:
Immeasurable misery (apratimaṃ duḥkham) was obtained by Rāma,
O Bhārata bull. His wife Jānakī was abducted by a powerful rāksạ sa . . .
(3.258.1).
Then, eighteen adhyāyas later, Mārkaṇḍeya has another short adhyāya
to wrap things up and move on to the Forest Book’s third “mirror
story”, “Sāvitrī” (3.277–83). Mentioning first that Rāma too met
with “exceedingly terrible calamity” (vyasanam atyugram) during
his vanavāsa (“forest residence”) (276.1), he brings the focus back to
our theme:
Do not grieve, tiger among men, you are a Ksạ triya, enemy-burner; you
are traversing a path of blazing resolve that relies on heroism of arms
(bāhuvīryāśraye mārge vartase dīptanirṇaye); indeed, not the slightest bit
of guile (vṛjinam) is seen in you. On that path (asmin mārge) even the
gods and asuras with Indra might despair (2–3).
As is the case elsewhere, the main path through the Mbh relies on
Yudhisṭḥ ira’s guileless or uncrooked resolve to follow it, but also on
maintaining the force of arms that comes from keeping his brothers
together, as Mārkaṇḍeya continues to emphasize (4–7) while thus
turning to the heart of the matter:
And now look at her (itaśca tvamimām paśya)! Abducted by the ill-souled
Saindhava, strong and drunk with heroism, Draupadī Krṣ ṇ ̣ā was recovered
by those great-souled ones [your brothers], having accomplished a very
difficult feat . . . Rāma recovered Vaidehī without such companions . . . His
allies were monkeys43 and black-faced bears, creatures of a different species
(jātyantaragatā), king—think that over in your mind (7–11).
Both sides of the Rāmopākhyāna’s frame thus have the same structure,
moving in from Draupadī to Dharmarāja, and out from Dharmarāja
to Draupadī: it is Yudhisṭḥ ira’s guileless questions44 and his resolve
43 Literally “deer of the trees”, śākhāmṛga (3.276.11a).
44 This is an important strain (or trope) that carries through the Śāntiparvan:
e.g., Yudhisṭḥ ira’s reflections on the dashed “hopes” that he had for Duryod-
hana (12.125.1–7); his horrified and stunned reaction to the “robber morality”
(dasyumaryādā) that Bhīsṃ a has unveiled as law for times of distress ̣(140.1); his
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 299
that keep things to the path, but it is “looking at her”—something he
has done from its beginning45—that defines it. As an eighteen-adhyāya
epitome, one might thus consider the Rāmopākhyāna as a model les-
son on sticking to the path not only in the face of adversity, but when
the path is broken.
Now within the Rāmopākhyāna itself, while it allows one to trace
a path theme that is sometimes explicit and more often implicit, it
is, in Rām terms, only the second part of the path—from Kabandha
on—that can be traced with any consistency. For the first part, there is
to begin with no Vālmīki, and of course a different frame story. And
from there on, of the Seven ṛsịs, the only one to make an appearance
is Vasisṭḥ a, who, as hinted earlier, is probably already a fixture in the
Rāmopākhyāna when Daśāratha hails his purohita, without naming
him, in announcing his determination to make Rāma his successor
(Mbh 3.261.14), and who thereafter appears by name twice.46 We may
note that the Rāmopākhyāna thus has no earlier roles for Vasisṭḥ a.
And for the rest of the ṛsịs, next to nothing. There is no Ṛśyaśṛṅga,
or for that matter Vasisṭḥ a, at the boys’ birth; instead, just this from
Brahmā: “For that purpose the four-armed Visṇ ̣u has descended at my
command” (tadartham avatīrno ‘sau manniyogāc caturbhujaḥ/visṇ ̣uḥ;
260.5). There is no Viśvāmitra, Atri, Rāma Jāmadagnya,47 or for that
matter Vasisṭḥ a involved in the stories of youth and marriage; just this:
“In the course of time his sons grew up very vigorous, and became
fledged in the Vedas and their mysteries and in the art of archery.
They completed their student years, and took wives” (261.4–5b; van
Buitenen 1978: 731). There is no Bharadvāja; just this of Bharata: “He
found Rāma and Laḳsmaṇa on Mount Citrakūtạ ” (216.63cd). From
Citrakūtạ to Pañcavatị̄ (which is not named) there is not a peep from
Atri or Agastya. Sītā drops her jewels over the monkeys when she is
abducted (263.7), but there is no mention that she might have gotten
claim not to “understand those who are cruel and their action” (nṛśaṃsān na vijānāmi
tesạ̄ m karma ca; 158.1cd).
45 See 1.182.11–15 on first seeing her; 2.58.33–37 describing her as he is about to
wager and lose her.
46 Where the Rām would lead one to expect him: attending Bharata into the forest
to find Rāma (261.43) and performing Rāma’s coronation after his return from Laṅkā
(275.65)—both times with Vāmadeva.
47 The Mbh knows a clear departure from or variant of this story only in a clear
interpolation (3, Appendix I, no. 14), on which see Sukthankar 1936: 20– 21; Fitzgerald
2002: 94, n. 12; Magnone 2004.
300 chapter ten
some of them from Atri and Anasūyā. Nor does Atri give any direc-
tions to the Daṇḍaka Forest, which Rāma enters via the hermitage of
Śarabhaṅga, the only forest ṛsị mentioned (261.39), to settle down by
the Godāvarī (40). And from there his movements continue with no
Sutīksṇ ̣a or Agastya to give directions until the battle at Janasthāna has
left Khara and Dūsạ na killed and Śūrpaṇakhā disfigured (41–44)—it
does not say by whom. Further on, as we now see, there is no Mataṅga
ṛsị either.
Once Rāma has “made this dharma-forest by the Godāvarī safe
again” (cakre ksẹ mam punar . . . dharmāraṇyam; 3.261.43cd), it doesn’t
stay safe for long, since it is there that Sītā is soon abducted (262.40).
Whereupon the path theme blooms openly. First, by reading the head
gesture of the dying Jatạ̄ yus, Rāma gleans that Sītā has gone south
(263.20c–21b). And then comes Kabandha, of whom Vālmīki tells
quite a different, more attenuated story and revelation: that Rāma
may find Rāvaṇa’ s abode if he forms an alliance with Sugrīva, though
Vālmīki also gives Kabandha the role of being the first to mention
Mataṅga’s Wood. In the Rāmopākhyāna, the killing of Kabandha
sets free a purusạ that not only reveals Kabandha’s prior identity to
have been that of the gandharva Viśvāvasu cursed by Brahmā to pass
through a rāksạ sa womb (34–38), but the following priceless, if partly
erroneous, information:
Sītā has been abducted by King Rāvaṇa, who dwells in Laṅkā. Go to
Sugrīva, he will render you help. Close by Mount Ṛsỵ amūka there is a
Lake Pampā . . . Sugrīva lives there with four councillors; he is the brother
of the monkey king Vālin, of the golden garlands. This much I can tell
you: you shall see Jānakī. The monkey king surely knows Rāvaṇa’s seat
(3.263.39– 42; van Buitenen 1978: 737).
Of course Sugrīva turns out not to know Rāvaṇa’s seat, and soon enough
sends the monkeys out to the four directions to find not only Sītā but,
one must presume, Laṅkā (266.15–19). But for the rest Kabandha gives
reliable information that does not complicate Rāma’s path to Sugrīva
with a forest or hermitage of Mataṅga or anything having to do with
it such as meeting with Śabarī, or hearing the stories of Vālin’s fights
with Māyavin and the buffalo demon Dundubhi.48 Indeed, Kabandha’s
48 Curiously, the Rāmopākhyāna gives this name in the feminine as that of the
Gandharvī who takes birth as Mantharā to carry forward the gods’ mission and the
plan of Brahmā (see 3.260.7–10).
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 301
words seem to remain continually useful beyond Kisḳ indhā. Rāma is
reminded of them before he learns that Sugrīva has sent out the mon-
key search parties (266.4cd), and, after some explicit input on the path
(pathā; 3.266.41d) from a female ascetic named Prabhāvatī rather than
Svayamprabhā, they would seem to have been recalled when Jatạ̄ yus’s
vulture brother Sampāti finally tells that he knows where Laṅkā and
Rāvaṇa are, giving specifics that Hanumān uses to jump the ocean
(266.54). Thereafter, the Ocean allows Rāma to extend the “path”
(mārga; 267.31a, 36a, 37a) to Laṅkā by a bridge.
And where does the path end up? Not of course with Vālmīki at Sītā’s
second ordeal, of which the Rāmopākhyāna is silent. It ends up at the
only ordeal for Sītā that the Rāmopākhyāna knows. “Putting Sītā in front,
who was put before Vibhīsạ ṇa” (sītām puraskrṭ ya vibhīsạ ṇapuraskṛ tām;
275.6ab), the kindly rāksạ sa Avindhya49 invites Rāma, “Receive your
queen Jānakī of good conduct” (sadvrṭ tām; 7). But seeing “her body
caked with dirt, wearing a black robe” (śokakarśitām/malopacita . . .
krṣ ṇ ̣avāsasam; 9), Rāma suspects her of having been touched and
spurns their reunion with the meanest words. It may be that having her
come forth in black was a bad idea; Vālmīki has her emerge in costly
jewels and “wearing a very costly robe” (mahārhāmbaradhāriṇīṃ;
Rām 6.102.13d), though with no better results. So I think it more
revealing to note that her appearance provides one of several remind-
ers that Draupadī, who will soon begin her period in disguise entering
the kingdom of Matsya “wrapped in a single large black garment that
was very dirty” (vāsaśca . . . kṛsṇ ̣aṃ sumalinaṃ mahat; Mbh 4.8.2), is
listening—and that Sītā’s path here overlaps with hers. Indeed, per-
haps Draupadī has taken the cue from Sītā on this element of her
disguise50 in the hope that it will turn men off. In any case, it is now
that Brahmā appears along with Indra, Agni, Vāyu, Yama, Varuṇa,
Kubera, Bhagavat, the spotless Seven ṛsịs, and Daśaratha, along with
other gods and gandharvas, crowding the heavens “like the autumn
sky dotted with stars” (3.275.18–20). Agni, Vāyu, and Varuṇa come
49 There is no Avindhya in this role in the Rām. See van Buitenen 1975: 212 and
Vaidya 1971, who make this an argument for the priority of the Rāmopākhyāna, one
which I believe still weighs in their favor despite Goldman’s dismissal of it, draw-
ing on Raghavan, that an Avindhya has lesser roles in the Rām (Goldman 1984: 37;
Raghavan 1973: 18).
50 On Draupadī and the Pāṇḍavas taking cues for their disguises from “Nala”, see
Hiltebeitel 2001a: 237–239.
302 chapter ten
to vouch for Sītā’ s innocence; Brahmā and Dasạ ratha for other stated
reasons;51 Bhagavat, rather unexpectedly;52 and the Seven ṛsịs—for
what? They would seem to be among the stars here. But perhaps they
are also an inspiration for Vālmīki to bring them down to earth into
the life of the hero and heroine. In isolation, the point is frivolous, but
it is in their company, following the attestations by the elemental gods,
that Brahmā tells Rāma,
Son, for you to act here like this is not strange in you who obey the dharma
of the royal ṛsịs (rājarsịdharmiṇi) and are strict in staying on the path of
good conduct (sādho sadvṛttamārgasthe) (275.29a–c).
Brahmā is in effect saying that Rāma’s behavior is up to code for
one who strictly follows the royal ṛsịs’ path, but that, now knowing
Sītā to be innocent, he should (in the imperative) “Take her back”
(pratīcchemām; 34b). Rāma should be accompanied on his “path of
good conduct” by his wife “of good conduct”—both sadvṛtta (274.7
and 29), a term with some similarity to dharmacārin.
H. Bhakti, Dharma, and Kāvya
In treating how author, heroine, ṛsịs, and “path” are positioned, I have
shown that the Rāmopākhyāna and Rām differ widely. But do the dif-
ferences reveal anything significant? Some scholars have noted the
absence in the Rāmopākhyāna of some, but not all, of the ṛsịs threaded
through the Rām,53 but none have seen a pattern there and none
51 Brahmā, among other things, to tell Rāma that he protected Sītā against Rāvaṇa’s
touch by Nalakūbara’s curse; Daśaratha to hail his son and confirm him as heir.
52 This usage could just refer back to Kubera, but more likely, in my opinion, it refers
to someone additional, leaving Visṇ ̣u among the more surprising possibilities.
53 Biardeau (2002, I: 724) observes the absence of Viśvāmitra, Ᾱtreya and Anasūyā,
and Agastya, but not the others; Vaidya (1971: xxxii) notes the absences of Viśvāmitra
and “the episode of Ahalyā”, which figures Gotama; Goldman (1984: 36), while criticiz-
ing Vaidya, remarks only on the absence of Viśvāmitra. For van Buitenen (1975: 211),
without mentioning the ṛsịs at all, “Rāma and Rām, are wholly parallel till the death of
Jatạ̄yu”! For Brockington, “the Rṣ́ yaśrṇ ġ a episode probably has an independent origin”,
and the Bhārgava Rāma encounter is an “interpolated” “grotesque story” (apprecia-
tively quoting Sukthankar 1936: 21 to the latter effect) (Brockington 1998: 478–479).
In another Brockington study, the Bharadvāja and Agastya episodes are “examples of
interpolated episodes completely lacking in the Rāmopākhyāna” (Brockington 2000a:
299). Curiously, the only serious attention I know of to the related Rām themes of
“Encounter holy hermit” and “Description of route through forest to goal” is Richard
Gombrich’s very suggestive comparison of the Rām with the Vessantara Jātạ ka, whose
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 303
even mention the absence of Vālmīki in this connection, although
van Buitenen makes a good point about him when he says that the
Rāmopākhyāna authors either did not know the Rām or knew that
their own story was different from it, for
[o]therwise it is hard to explain why they should not simply have placed
the narrative in Vālmīki’s mouth; The Book of the Forest does not hesitate
to recruit a sage out of the blue to tell a story, witness Bṛhadaśva and
the story of Nala. The Mbh does know Vālmīki as a sage (van Buitenen
1975: 214).
For most treatments of the relation between the two epic Rāma texts,
it has been as if such features were secondary to the development
of “real” Rāmakathā: that is, a heroic story about a king. With the
exception of Biardeau, both scholars who have advanced the argu-
ment for the priority of the Rāmopākhyāna and those who have made
good points while advancing the opposite position have weighed the
discussion down with notions about source-dependence relations54
and, above all, arguments about stages of growth, with the assump-
tion that one or, better, both texts can be dissected to align portions
of each along the timeline of a hero-story becoming mythologized
by Rāma’s divinization,55 to which John Brockington adds an argu-
ment about recessional variation.56 While I do think Vālmīki has the
Rāmopākhyāna as a source, I believe the evidence of an archetype for
both epics nullifies arguments for textual strata, for the hero-to-god
timeline, and for recessional variation as a measure of early growth
rather than simply just recessional variation. Yet when I say I believe
that Vālmīki has the Rāmopākhyāna as a source, it must also be said
that he almost certainly knew a variety of Rāmakathā sources,57 as
verse portions he dates to no “later than the 3rd century B.C.” (Gombrich 1985: 428,
433 and passim). But the comparison goes only so far into the Rām as the Bharadvāja
episodes, and concerns only that one Rāmāyaṇa ṛsị.
54 See Sukthankar 1939: 300–303; 1941: 487; van Buitenen 1975: 208. Goldman
(1984: 34) starts his argument with Vaidya and van Buitenen’s “revival of the theory
that the Rām is not the source of the Rāmopākhyāna”.
55 This is now mainly Brockington’s project (1998: 476–477; 2000: 297–300), which
goes back to Jacobi [1893] 1960 and Hopkins 1930. But see also van Buitenen 1975:
209, 213; Goldman 1984: 38.
56 See Brockington 1998: 474–476; 2000: 290–291.
57 See Hiltebeitel 2005c for a discussion of non-epic genres in which the Rāma story
was probably known before Vālmīki. See also Hopkins’ not implausible argument that
Rāma is originally a golden age king of legend whose story is only secondarily put to
epic purposes (Hopkins 1930: 88–92).
304 chapter ten
would the Rāmopākhyāna author as well, if from nothing else than
from the dispersal of varied Rāma story material in the Mbh. Indeed,
as Brockington observes, the number of similes drawn on the Rāma
story in the Ᾱraṇyakaparvan and the battle books “implies consider-
able familiarity with the story on the part of the audience as well as the
performer” (Brockington 1998: 472). As the Rāmopākhyāna itself says,
“Even now ‘Nala’s Bridge’ is famous on earth” (nalasetur iti khyāto
yo ‘dyāpi prathito bhuvi; Mbh 3.267.45ab). It is thus not necessary to
rely on van Buitenen’s notion of an “improbable proto-Rāmacarita”
(Goldman 1984: 39) that the Rāmopākhyāna first summarizes before
it grows further and “becomes known as the original poem (ādikāvya)
of Vālmīki” (van Buitenen 1975: 211). We are surely not dealing with
a linear cumulative development.
But yes, I do think the differences reveal something significant,
and limit myself to three areas of more than a little consequence for
Vālmīki: bhakti, dharma, and kāvya.
With regard to the first, the Rāmopākhyāna, like the Nalopākhyāna,
keeps its story focused on the human plane of the hero and hero-
ine, which is appropriate to their context as “mirror stories” for the
Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī. But like the Nalopākhyāna, it also makes a
bare but sufficient allusion to its context amid the epic’s wider bhakti
idioms or conventions. Thus in the Nalopākhyāna Nala is accompa-
nied by a superfluous charioteer named Vāṛsṇ eya described as avatīrya
vāṛsṇ eyo, “Vāṛsṇ eya descending” (3.71.18), when he “descends” from
the chariot, suggesting his role as a double for Vāṛsṇ eya Kṛsṇ ̣a, avatar
and chariot-driver for Arjuna.58 And in the Rāmopākhyāna, Brahmā
tells the gods and ṛsịs how Rāvana will be killed: “For that purpose
the four-armed Visṇ ̣u has descended (avatīrṇo . . . visṇ ̣uḥ) at my com-
mand” (260.5) as already quoted, with Brahmā going on to command
the hosts of gods to take birth on earth as “Visṇ ̣u’s companions”
(visṇ ̣oḥ sahāyān; 260.6–7).59 The chief difference is that whereas the
Nalopākhyāna is intentionally cryptic (as it is frequently) in evoking
an incarnation who is superfluous to its story, the Rāmopākhyāna can
only be straightforward since it is introducing the hero as an incarna-
tion. These are bare references, but the Rāmopākhyāna ones are not
58 See Biardeau 1985: 5–6, 8–9, 16–17, 31–32; Hiltebeitel 2001a: 219, 232; and further,
the discussion of a “descent convention” in Hiltebeitel 2004c.
59 The same term is used by Vaiśampāyana in the Rāmopākhyāna’s “frame story” to
describe the monkeys, bears, Pāṇḍavas, and allies of Indra (276.5–10—four times).
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 305
isolated, as has been argued by Brockington.60 There is also, as we
have seen, the strange appearance by “Bhagavat” among those who
reunite Rāma and Sītā (275.18); and when Vasisṭḥ a and Vāmadeva
consecrate Rāma, he is called “the Vaisṇ ̣ava hero” (taṃ vaisṇ ̣avaṃ
śūram; 275.65). If Vālmīki had the Rāmopākhyāna among his sources,
he would have been able to recognize a bhakti strain to improve upon,
and also a model for restricting obvious bhakti references to scenes at
the beginning and end of Rāma’s story. The reasons for this economy
in explicit reference to Rāma’s divinity, which are especially pertinent
in Vālmīki but also implicit in the Rāmopākhyāna, have been made
clear by Pollock (1984).
As regards dharma, that is surely the primary subject that Vālmīki
has enriched by introducing the Seven ṛsịs plus Agastya, and by
inversion the ṛsị Mataṅga, as guides and signposts along the hero and
heroine’s path. For as representatives of Veda, the Seven and Agastya
are now, for Vālmīki, the highest authorities on dharma, which is, in
one way or another, what they and their wives communicate to Rāma
and Sītā along that path. The striking thing, however, is that whereas
the Rāmopākhyāna keeps the Rāma-Sītā story within the ambiguous,
problematic, and somewhat forgiving (that is all Rāma has to do at
its end) dharma of the Mbh, Vālmīki—it would almost seem—seizes
on the Rāma story to present dharma as a much more rigorous and
uncompromising affair: monogamy as the model; a dharma of the
limit situation (maryādā)—a term never used in the Rāmopākhyāna
but vital to Vālmīki’s portrayal of Rāma.61 One of the other person-
ages absent from the Rāmopākhyāna but emphasized by Vālmīki is
60 Brockington 1998: 476: “The sole exception” [Brockington 2000a: 300: “the only
exception”] to Rāma being mainly a human and exemplary figure, “the position reached
in the middle of the second stage of growth of the Rāmāyaṇa”, “is the brief adhyāya
260 where Visṇ ̣u incarnates as Rāma, and the other gods beget” monkey and bear sons.
Brockington finds it “the more significant that the Rāmopākhyāna does not allude to
Rāma’s divinity in its closing chapter”, but it is hard not to read Brahmā’s closing
words as just such an allusion: “Like an immortal, you have accomplished a great feat
of the gods” (kṛtaṃ tvayā mahatkāryaṃ devānām amaraprabha; 3.275.34cd). In any
case, as quoted just below, it is in the same closing adhyāya that Rāma is consecrated
“the Vaisṇ ̣ava hero” (65).
61 See Rām 2.103.3 (Rāma speaking on “the man who is beyond the limit”
(nirmaryādas . . . purusạ ḥ, pointing toward his post-epic title of Maryādā Purusọ ttama);
4.18.25 (Rāma’s new excuse for killing Vālin is the latter’s “transgression of the limit”);
5.33.11 (Hanumān to Sītā: “Lovely lady, Rāma is the guardian of the four classes of
society and enforcer of the norms of social behavior” [maryādānāṃ ca lokasya kartā
kārayitā ca saḥ]; Goldman & Goldman 1996: 201).
306 chapter ten
the Śūdra Śambūka, killed by Rāma for the offense of practicing tapas
(Rām 7.66–67).62 The Rāmopākhyāna’s Kisḳ indhā is uncomplicated
by stories of impure buffalo blood and implications of untouchabil-
ity contaminating a nearby Mataṅgavanam. The Rāmopākhyāna gives
Sītā only one ordeal, the first, and it is not by purifying fire as it is in
Vālmīki; and thereafter Rāma has no second thoughts about her—the
story is over. Yet in the Rām it is precisely at the second ordeal, not
found in the Rāmopākhyāna, and “crucial”, as Shulman says, “to any
understanding of the poetics of the work as a completed whole” (Shul-
man 2001: 34), that Vālmīki makes himself present at the end of the
road to introduce his own final twist on the problematic character of
dharma and Rāma’s strict adherence to it: that it cost Rāma his wife.
As to kāvya, there are two ideas that have tied debate over these mat-
ters in knots. The first is that either the Rāmopākhyāna is some kind
of résumé or abridgment of the Rām63 or that the Rāmāyāṇa is some
kind of embellishment of the Rāmopākhyāna. The issue has seemed
inconclusive precisely because so much ingenuity has been expended
in nuancing and making good arguments for both positions. The best
argument for abridgment is that there certainly are passages in the
Rāmopākhyāna that look like they need some fuller version to unpack
them, and that the Rām, being a text one can cite in such cases, is a
more convincing candidate than some “improbable proto-Rāmacarita”.
That is Goldman’s argument (1984: 38–39). But I am no longer con-
vinced that it levels the playing field.64 For one thing, too much weight
62 Cf. Biardeau 2002, I: 275; Hopkins 1930: 101: The Rāma-Śambuka (sic) story is
mentioned at Mbh 12.149.62.
63 Recently, this is Shulman’s view: “Western scholarship has laboured valiantly to
make the relationship between this résumé and the text of the Rāmāyaṇa intelligible—
but there is still no consensus”—that is, while there is no consensus on intelligibility, the
Rāmopākhyāna is a “reś umé”, to which Shulman adds, “the significant fact remains that
one epic cites at length the story of the other” (my italics). Shulman speaks of “certain
minor but interesting divergences” between the two Rāma narratives without saying
what they are (Shulman 2001: 22).
64 Recognizing that this is a vulnerable point in my argument, I would, at least at
this point, recommend that we approach individual cases from one or the other of two
angles. Either the Rāmopākhyāna would probably be drawing on a Rāmakathā tradi-
tion that later makes it into the Rāmāyaṇa, as in the crow story discussed by Goldman
(1984: 38), or it may only appear as an ellipsis because we know the Rāmāyaṇa, but
actually makes sense on its own—as when Śūrpaṇakhā is defaced without it being told
how (Mbh 3.262.44), which looks like a fragment, but, in its context, could have taken
place while fighting alongside her brothers Khara and Dūsạ na—like Tātạ kā. Similarly,
Hanumān only faces (and kills) one marine rāksạ sī (266.57).
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 307
has been put on the claim that differences are “easily explainable as
examples of the Rāmopākyāna’s somewhat awkward and often pedes-
trian condensation of the tale as told by Vālmīki” (Goldman 1984: 37;
cf. Brockington 1998, 474: “a rather careless abridgement”). The differ-
ences are not so easily dismissed and the Rāmopākhyāna is perhaps
not so awkward or careless. More than this, those maintaining the
priority of the Rām have never answered why a poem condensing or
abridging that text would persist in eliminating so many of the scenes
and characters for which it is famous, many already mentioned, such
as Sītā’s agniparīksạ̄ , banishment, and final ordeal; Śambūka, Kuśa,
Lava, Vālmīki himself and the creation and transmission of the poem;
others not yet mentioned, such as Sītā’s birth in a furrow; Hanumān
“bringing the mount Droṇācala (sic) with its medicinal plants to
revive Laksṃ aṇa hit by Indrajit’s missile” (Vaidya 1971: xxxii);65 and
indeed, some of which are among those that best exemplify the Rām
as kāvya: Rāma’s madness upon Sītā’s abduction; Hanumān’s view-
ing of Rāvaṇa’s harem and his telling Sītā her husband’s story; all the
scenes of grief upon Rāma’s departure from Ayodhyā—grief being the
Rām’s underlying sthāyibhāva or “stable aesthetic emotion” in relation
to karuṇā, “pity” as its pre-dominant aesthetic flavor (aṅgīrasa).66
The second idea to have tied up debate is that the Rām as kāvya—
indeed ādikāvya, “the first poem”—is to be differentiated from the
Mbh as itihāsa, something like “history”. This idea has been advanced
along with different arguments. Vaidya, for instance, picking up on
the “history” connotation of itihāsa, argues that
the poet Vālmīki introduced into his epic poem an innovation of Sītā’s
test by fire against the epic and historical background of Vāyu assuring
Rāma of Sītā’s purity (Vaidya 1971: xxxv).
That is, since the Rāmopākhyāna is “a part and parcel of a work called
Itihāsa”, its account featuring Vāyu makes a “historical statement”
65 See Biardeau 2002, 1: 725.
66 Ram̄ 1.2.17; cf. 4.8. See Goldman 1984: 71–72; Tubb 1991: 174–179. There are only
four uses of the word śoka in the Rāmopākhyāna, all at telling points but centered only
on Rāma and Sītā: Rāma’s grief at Sītā’s abduction (Mbh 3.263.23); Sītā’s “grief for her
husband” in Rāvaṇa’s aśoka grove (264.48); a description of Sītā as “thin from grief’
as she is surrounded there by rāksạ sīs (265.30); and finally another as Rāma sees her
“drawn with grief’ just as he is about to repudiate her (275.9). There are no scenes of
grief in “Ayodhyā” paralleling those in the Ram̄ ’s second book. Vālmīki also emotionally
deepens Rāmopākhyāna relationships in this direction, such as his construal of Rāma
and Sugrīva’s “friendship” as one of commiseration (see Hiltebeitel 2004b; 2004d).
308 chapter ten
(p. xxxv). As Goldman says, Vaidya’s point can be counted among
the “absurdities” to have arisen in this debate, since the itihāsa/kāvya
genre distinction is useless in claiming one or the other to be “more
or less valid historically”.67 On the other hand, stressing the kāvya side
of the distinction, Shulman calls on the opposition to remind us that
India provides no genre term for both works that would cover over
the felt differences between them in the manner of the Western term
“epic” (Shulman 2001: 39).
My working premise for this chapter has been a simple one: that the
Rām poet knowingly develops his poem as a single-genre work out of,
and over against, the multi-genre precedent of the Mbh, which char-
acterizes itself not only as itihāsa but purāṇa, ākhyāna, upākhyāna,
saṃvāda, śāstra, upanisạ d, saṃhitā, great jñāna, and fifth Veda. I
believe that the selection of itihāsa as the genre term for the Mbh
could only have arisen once classifying minds selected that term out of
this welter of genre terms, and that such a reduction could only have
been made once it became a matter of aesthetic interest to distinguish
the Mbh from the Rām and the latter’s reputation as kāvya.68 As with
his narrowed down articulations of dharma, Vālmīki invents a purer
model, that of single-genre poetry.
Yet no one would say there are not fine poetic moments in the Mbh,
or even in the Rāmopākhyāna. Moreover, the epic has some interest-
ing things to say about kavis, poets. Near the beginning of its very
first adhyāya, before the bard Ugraśravas opens his storytelling, he
announces to the Naimisạ Forest sages,
I will proclaim the thought entire of the infinitely splendid Vyāsa
(pravaksỵ āmi mataṃ krṭsnaṃ vyāsasyāmitatejasaḥ). Some poets (kavayaḥ)
have told it before, others tell it now, and others too will tell this his-
tory (itihāsa) on earth. It is indeed a great erudition (mahaj jñānam)
established in the three worlds that is held (or “possessed”: dhāryate)
by the twiceborn in its particulars and totalities (vistaraiś ca samāsaiḥ)
(Mbh 1.1.23–25).
Then, a little further along, toward the end of the second adhyāya, the
bard adds,
Having heard this upākhyāna so worthy of being heard no other will
please him, just as the crow sounds harsh after hearing the male cuckoo.
67 Goldman 1984: 35. On the genre issue, see further Goldman 1995: 75–76; Hilte-
beitel 2001d.
68 Aspects of this argument need to be reconsidered in the light of chapter 4.
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 309
From this supreme itihāsa arise the inspirations of poets (jāyante
kavibuddhayaḥ), just as the three dispositions of the world69 arise from
the five elements. Purāṇa turns in the compass of this ākhyāna, O twice-
borns, just as the four classes of creatures (turn) in the compass of space.
Works of every quality resort to this ākhyāna even as the interacting
senses resort to the manifold workings of the mind. There is no story
(kathā) on earth that hasn’t resorted to this ākhyāna, even as support
for the body comes from resorting to food. This ākhyāna is lived on by
all the best poets (idaṃ sarvaiḥ kavivarair ākhyānam upajīvyate) even
as a lord is born with servants wishing for promotion (udayaprepsubhir
bhṛtyair abhijāta iveśvaraḥ).70
Taken together in sequence, these two passages first have the bard
locate the text as a possession of Brahmans. Then he indicates that
now that he has heard it recited by Vaiśampāyana at Janamejaya’s
Snake Sacrifice, that is, at its debut recital in the world of men, from
which he has travelled to the more or less celestial Naimisạ Forest,
domain of the celestial ṛsịs,71 it is now in that world of men for others
to tell, and, more than that, for others to be inspired by as they seek
to supercede it. Indeed, it is almost as if the bard senses in the second
passage that a work such as Vālmīki’s is competition coming over the
horizon. I believe this possibility should be seriously considered. What
is the relation between the Rām poet and the sage Vālmīki mentioned
fairly frequently in the Mbh?72 Considering the largely overlapping
69 Van Buitenen (1973: 43) translates “the configurations of the three worlds”;
Ganguli & Roy 1884–96, 1: 35: “the formation of the three worlds”. According to the
Vedanticizing construal of Nīlakaṇtḥ a, ādhyātmādhibhūtādhidaivānāṃ saṃyagvidhayo
racanāḥ (Kinjawadekar 1929–33, 1: 39).
70 Mbh 1.2.236–241: śrutvā tvidam upākhyānaṃ śrāvyam anyaṃ na rocate/
puṃskokilarutaṃ śrutvā rūksạ̄ dhvānksạ sya vāg iva// 236 //
itihāsottamād asmāj jāyante kavibuddhayaḥ/
pañcabhya iva bhūtebhyo lokasaṃvidhayas trayaḥ// 237 //
asyākhyānasya visạ ye purāṇam vartate dvijāḥ/
antariksạ sya visạ ye prajā iva caturvidhāḥ// 238 //
kriyāguṇānāṃ sarvesạ̄ m idam ākhyānam āśrayaḥ/
indriyāṇāṃ samastānāṃ citrā iva manaḥkriyāḥ// 239 //
anāśrityaitad ākhyānaṃ kathā bhuvi na vidyate/
āhāram anapāśritya śarīrasyeva dhāranaṃ// 240 //
idaṃ sarvaiḥ kavivarair ākhyānam upajīvyate/
udayaprepsubhir bhṛtyair abhijāta iveśvaraḥ// 241 //
71 See Hiltebeitel 2001a: 92–176.
72 See 1.50.14 (Vālmīki praised by Ᾱstīka for his gentle firmness). 2,7.14 (among
many famous ṛsịs in Indra’s sabhā or hall), 3.83.102 (among select ṛsịs waiting for the
Pāṇḍāvas on pilgrimage), 5.81.27 (among illustrious ṛsịs attending Kṛsṇ ̣a’s departure
for Hāstinapura to confront the Kauravas), 5.99.11 (a son of Garuḍa. and thus prob-
ably someone else), 12.200.4 (among ṛsịs cited by Bhīsṃ a regarding Govinda), and
13.18.7 (addressing Yudhisṭḥ ira regarding Śiva, who absolved Vālmīki of a charge of
310 chapter ten
reading communities created by these two works, it is not impossible
that “Vālmīki” could be a nom de plume taken up from the Mbh by a
Rām poet highly familiar with that text. Indeed, if the Mbh is a work
of composite authorship, “Vālmīki” may have been an apprentice-
contributor, or someone at least familiar with the project. To speak
of the temporal priority of the Mbh over the Rām is thus not to rule
out the possibility that the latter might have been started before the
former was finished. We are a long way from making such speculation
worthwhile, but I offer it because I believe that it points in a reason-
able direction.
Yet this allusion to new ambitious kavis coming along, and possibly
to Vālmīki as the first among them, was at some point no longer felt
to be sufficient to characterize Vyāsa’s inspiration of other poets, or
indeed the relation of his work to the Rām. Thus the famous interpola-
tion in which Brahmā appears to Vyāsa to recommend that Gaṇeśa be
his scribe was introduced between these two passages, though much
closer to the first, to make the point that the Mbh is indeed a kāvya.
For present purposes, what matters is that the whole passage is an
Brahmanicide and told him, “Your fame shall be foremost (yaśas te ‘gryaṃ bhavisyati;
8f). One problematic reference, however, is included in the Pune Critical Edition
under questionable conditions, since it is not found in one Kāśmīrī manuscript. K4. At
7.118.48ab, Sātyaki, having taken criticism for the manner in which he has dismembered
Bhūriśravas, attributes to “Vālmīki” the following “śloka” (even though it is only a half-
śloka, and is referred to otherwise in many mss.): “what causes pain to enemies, that
should be done” (pīḍākaram amitrāṇāṃ yat syāt kartavyam eva tat; 7.118.48cd = Rām
6.68.27cd). This epigrammatic line gets inflated with further Rām echoes in various
mss. by an extra line to make it quotable as a “śloka”, raising the likelihood that it has
been overlaid not only by these echoes but by the attribution to Vālmīki. See Hopkins
1926: 216–217; 1930: 86–87, and Brockington 1998: 480, going over some of the same
ground from different angles. Brockington (1998: 480) also mentions an identifica-
tion by Albrecht Weber of the “Bhārgava” cited at Mbh 12.57.40–41 as Vālmīki, and
concurs with Weber that the verses attributed to this “Bhārgava” are “based on” Rām
2.61.1. But given the extensive differences between the two passages, the identification
cannot carry much weight. Fitzgerald identifies this Bhārgava as “= (probably) Śukra”
(Fitzgerald 2004a: 302 and notations). Curiously, the only other problematic passage I
know of implying direct reference to the Rām, one mentioning the work’s title rather
than its author, is also found in three lines (Mbh 3.147.11c–12d) omitted by the same
Kāśmīrī manuscript that omits the attribution to Vālmīki, K4. Here, quite plausibly
interpolated between lines that have Bhīma relate that he and Hanumān are brothers,
Bhīma further describes Hanumān as “renowned in the Ram̄ ” (rāmāyaṇe ‘tivikhāyātaḥ:
147.11c) for the leap (already just mentioned by Bhīma at 147.9d) that rescued Sītā. In
retaining these passages, the editors (S. K. De for Book 7 and V. S. Sukthankar for Book
3) seem to follow, without comment, Sukthankar’s poor evaluation of K4 as “carelessly
written” with some noteworthy insertions (Sukthankar 1933: xii, li; Prolegomena to
Book 1). But Sukthankar does not address the value of K4’s omissions.
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 311
interpolation within an interpolation.73 First there was an interpola-
tion featuring Brahmā’s confirmation that Vyāsa has composed a
kāvya. Says Vyāsa,
O Blessed one, I have created this highly venerated kāvya (kāvyam
paramapūjitam) in which I have proclaimed the secret of the Vedas
(vedarahasyam) and other topics (Vulgate 1.1.61–62; Pune Critical Edi-
tion 1, App. I, lines 13–14),
to which Brahmā replies,
I know that since your birth you have truthfully given voice to the brah-
man. You have called this a kāvya. and therefore a kāvya it shall be.74
No poets (kavayo) are equal to the excellence of this kāvya (Vulgate
1.1.72–73b; Critical Ed. 1, App. 1, lines 33–35).
—more or less repeating what the second of the older passages had
said about emerging rival poets, but substituting kāvya for the genre-
terms itihāsa and ākhyāna. Second, twenty lines were subsequently
inserted into this first interpolation for Brahmā to recommend that
Vyāsa call upon Gaṇeśa to be his scribe.75 While the Brahmā interpo-
lation is concerned with kāvya, the Gaṇeśa interpolation within it is
concerned with writing and mentions kāvya only in its lead-in verse.
Now as Shulman says, the Brahmā interpolation was “clearly com-
posed under the influence of the Rām frame story, [in having] Brahmā
visit Vyāsa just as he is said to have come to Vālmīki”, adding further
that it was “an attempt to bring the Mahābhārata in line with the
kāvya tradition” (Shulman 2001: 33, n. 10). One might assume that
at least the Gaṇeśa modification would have been made rather late
in the Mbh’s manuscript history. Lüders observes that it is clearly a
northern interpolation, and mentions references to the Gaṇeśa legend
by the 9th century C.E. as a terminus ante quem (Lüders 1929: 1144).
More interesting, however, are his remarks on the Brahmā interpola-
tion. Based “not only on its occurrence in all Grantha, Telugu, and
Malayālam manuscripts (with the exception of Mi), but also on the
mention of Pāśupata philosophy” (Lüders 1929: 1144 [my translation])
in it, Lüders argues that the Brahmā interpolation was almost certainly
introduced in south India. Although I doubt that Pāśupata p hilosophy
73 See Lüders 1929: 1144–1145.
74 That is, Brahmā treats Vyāsa’s word as generating an act of truth.
75 Vulgate 1.1.74–83; Critical Ed. 1, App. 1, apud line 36. See Lüders 1929: 1144;
Sullivan 1990; Hiltebeitel 2004d.
312 chapter ten
can identify the passage as south Indian, since Pāśupatas are also men-
tioned in the Nārāyaṇīya (Mbh 12.337.59b and 62d), the manuscript
evidence for the southern origins of the Brahmā interpolation is cer-
tainly sound. It is particularly its occurrence in all but one76 of the
Malayālam (M) manuscripts that is striking. Here I would like to draw
on the current work of T.P. Mahadevan (forthcoming), who attempts
to link the migrations of two Brahman groups—the Pūrvaśikhās (those
with forelocks) and Aparaśikhās (those with topknots to the back)—
from north to south India with the north-to-south migrations of the
epics. Mahadevan argues that the M version—long recognized as the
shortest version in the Southern Recension, and similar in at least that
regard to the shortest Northern Recension versions (the Śāradā and
Kāśmīrī)—is connected with those who made the first migration, the
Pūrvaśikhas, and that the more inflated other manuscript groupings
of the Southern Recension (the Telugu and Grantha manuscripts)
reflect the overlay upon M that follows from the arrival south of the
much later (mainly) Aparaśikhā migration. Mahadevan argues that
the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans would have brought a Mbh probably close
to the Kāśmīrī-Śāradā recension which they fashioned into the oldest
Southern archetype and later developed into M in Kerala after (or even
during) the so-called Kalabhra interregnum of the 4th to 7th centuries
A.D. (Monius 2001: 3). Because the Brahmā story is so widespread in
Southern manuscripts, it would be likely to have originated from the
pre-Kalabhra times when M was not yet separate from the Southern
Recension,77 and to have also traveled north even to be found in some
of the Kāśmīrī manuscripts. We thus get a quite early pre-4th century
date as likely for the Brahmā interpolation, with its concern to estab-
lish Vyāsa’s Mbh on a par with Vālmīki’s Rām as a kāvya. And indeed,
it would not be an insignificant fact for it to be in a south Indian set-
ting that the two epics would be for the first time felt in India to be of
a single genre, for that is what I have heard them called in south India:
irentu kāppiyam, “the two kāvyas”.78 In this regard, Shulman seems to
76 Note that the issue here differs from that raised in footnote 72 above concerning
the two omissions from one Kāśmīrī manuscript. This omission only reflects what is
clearly an interpolation as a whole, and could suggest a state of things in the south
prior to the interpolation’s being made there.
77 The statement here is corrected in line with the new notes near the end of chapter
7. The original article read that M “was establishing the groundwork of the Southern
Recension.”
78 I have not yet been able to learn how old this usage is—in particular, in relation
to that of kāppiyam as the genre term for classical Tamil epics. See Encyclopaedia of
authorial paths through the two sanskrit epics 313
have reached a selective conclusion when he writes in the next-to-last
sentence of his essay on the historical poetics of the Sanskrit epics,
“the Indian tradition is, in any case, clearly right to class the two epics
separately, in different genres reflecting very distinct visions—even if
to us both are surely ‘epic.’ ” (Shulman 2001: 39). In South India, they
can both be kāvya.
Finally, what happens if we add the theme I have explored most
extensively in this essay—the unfolding of Rāma and Sītā’s path by
posting the Seven ṛsịs plus Agastya along the way—to our examples
of how the Rām as kāvya surpasses not only the Mbh but, with it,
and more specifically, the Rāmopākhyāna? Here Mahadevan’s research
into the initial Pūrvaśikhā migration opens another intriguing angle.
Whereas the Pūrvaśikhās, as first to arrive in the south, go by the
primary pravara names of the Seven ṛsịs plus Agastya (the latter is
included, but only barely), the Aparaśikhās, as subsequent arrivals,
take on only secondary and tertiary pravara names. That is to say,
the pravara names used by the Pūrvaśikhās as the first Brahmans to
migrate to the south are the very same names as those of the Vedic
Rām Brahmans who guide Rāma and Sītā to the south. This coinci-
dence would do nothing to discourage the idea that the Vālmīki Rām
has something to do with “Brahman colonization” of the south. Indeed,
in giving these Vedic ṛsịs the trailblazing role in mapping the exten-
sion of Rāmarājya to the south,79 Vālmīki, probably reflecting condi-
tions in which that first migration had already begun, may go beyond
the Rāmopākhyāna, and the Mbh, precisely to create a charter myth
for this unfolding process.
In any case, considering how many have overlooked it, the marking
of Rāma and Sītā’s path by these ṛsịs is clearly not the most memorable
or “poetic” of Vālmīki’s inspirations. But it is the one by which he sets
forth the path of Sītā and Rāma as both a ṛsị’s path and a poet’s path
that leads, in more ways than one, ultimately to him.
Tamil Literature (1990): 138, 200–211, 342–353. But in harmony with what is said
there, the Tamil Lexicon (1926–39): 2, 868 gives a definition of kāppiyam that certainly
accommodates both Sanskrit epics: “kāppiyam, n. < kāvya. A narrative poem dealing
with aṟam, porul,̣ iṉpam, and vītu [i.e., and mutatis mutandis, with dharma, artha,
kāma, and moksạ ] and describing the exploits of a hero, being of two kinds, viz.,
peru-ṅ- kāppiyam and ciṟukāppiyam [i.e., big kāvya and small kāvya].”
79 This is the brunt of what Rāma has to tell Vālin at 4.18.6–11 and 23–24: while in
exile, Rāma extends the law of Bharata—itself, of course, anchored by Bharata’s devo-
tion to Rāmarājya via Rāma’s sandals—throughout the world.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
MAPPING BHAKTI IN THE SANSKRIT EPICS:
FRIENDSHIP, HOSPITALITY, AND SEPARATION
In a review of my book Rethinking the Mahābhārata, Jim Fitzgerald
calls me “a fierce defender of the divine Kṛsṇ ̣a and Kṛsṇ ̣a-bhakti”
in the Mahābhārata (Fitzgerald 2003, 803).1 I am fine with “fierce,”
and happy to see that being a defender of “the divine Kṛsṇ ̣a” in the
Mahābhārata places me in the esteemed company of Bimal K. Mati-
lal, whose seminal article “Kṛsṇ ̣a: In Defence of a Devious Divinity”
(2002) defends Kṛsṇ ̣a for doing what he could, given that a Hindu
god is not omnipotent, and that he was working with humans. But I
do not take Matilal to have been defending Kṛsṇ ̣a-bhakti. Of course
Kṛsṇ ̣a-bhakti does not need me to defend it, especially as it is enriched
in vernacular traditions. But I do think it has been underestimated not
only in the Mahābhārata but in both Sanskrit epics.
Yet those who see things differently always raise a problem, which
I will call the intermittency problem: why do the epics’ explicit bhakti
signposts appear only intermittently? Following up some hints from
my book, Fitzgerald suggests that I would attribute this intermittency
to the composers’ “lax process and . . . [their] love of concealment”
(idem). That is a good start, but it is possible to be more specific.
Since that discussion, I have carried forward the effort to be more
specific under the rubric of “Mapping Bhakti in the Sanskrit Epics,”
the lead title of this presentation. With the subtitle “Friendship, Hos-
pitality, and Separation,” I mean to indicate three stepping stones that
my mapping project has located. This presentation will treat meanly
the third stepping stone, separation, by which I mean of course the
bhakti idiom of love of God in separation (viraha). But to get to that
“third step,” we must walk the first two. The leading thought of today’s
1 This chapter retains its orally presented character. It was delivered at the collo-
quium “Approaching God: A Symposium on Hindu Devotion” held at the Princeton
University Center for the Study of Religion, February 6–7, 2009. It can be read as the
conclusion of series of three articles on bhakti and friendship; see Hiltebeitel 2007a,
press- a and b.
316 chapter eleven
presentation is that, while the first two steps help reduce the intermit-
tency problem, the third step explains them all.
A. Hospitality and Friendship
Now if one seeks to map bhakti in the two epics, what kind of car-
tography best suits this double terrain? Clearly, it will not just be a
matter of mapping bhakti terms or even themes, which can always be
set off as pericopes in the name of higher criticism. One wants to get
into the bones of these works, whose “governing intention”—and on
this, I agree with Fitzgerald not only regarding the Mahābhārata—
was “concerned to provide ideological and narrative grounding for
a brahmanical conception of kingly rule and hierarchical society in
the wake of the Mauryan empire” (2003, 811). But if a post-Mauryan
Brahmanical ideology puts kingship front and center in both epics,
and may even be said to be where the poets put their money, this is
not, in either text, how they played the game. How society is ordered
is one thing. How people get along is another. That was encouraged by
invoking hospitality and friendship among the more open and flexible
civilizational discourses and practices familiar as custom throughout
South Asian Ārya culture under endless local and regional variations.
The dharmasūtras and Laws of Manu both harked back to the Veda
in reformulating hospitality and friendship as dharma, and so did the
epics. But the epics could give them far more nuanced treatment by
telling stories, among others, about how God was once among men. In
so doing, they could enliven these practices and discourses in narra-
tives that were far more compelling than incessant topheavy remind-
ers that the four social classes were created from Purusạ . For present
purposes, this means that the first two stepping stones, hospitality and
friendship, invite us to walk bhakti along with dharma.
For the most part, the basic vocabularies on hospitality and friend-
ship are shared by the epics and the dharma literature. But the epics
also innovate and archaize. Let me say a few words about these basic
vocabularies.
First, regarding hospitality, atithi is the main old word for guest,
and ātithyam for hospitality, while there is no consistent term for host,
that concept being more contextual. In the epics, a host may be found
in a house, a sacrifice, a performance, perhaps on a chariot, in a heart,
etc. In Paul Younger’s terms, we can recognize that these locations
mapping bhakti in the sanskrit epics 317
anticipate the bhakti idiom of “playing host to deity” in temples and
festivals where God is both guest and host at once (2002, 13–14). But
a few pre-epic usages are also of interest. Keeping in mind our image
of stepping stones, we might make something of Laurie Patton’s dis-
cussion of Visṇ ̣u as “the ‘guest’ par excellence” in the ātithyesṭ ị, the
ātithya or “guest offering rites” rites mentioned in certain Brāhmaṇa
and Śrautasūtra texts, which “call the gods to mind,” and to which
Visṇ ̣u is “invited” by the acchāvāka or “inviter” priest, a deputy of
the hotṛ, by reciting the Ṛgveda, praising Visṇ ̣u for “traversing three
times,” he whose “power . . . is like a terrifying, hungry, wild animal
who dwells in the mountains (or in speech), the one of many hymns”
in whose “three steps, all worlds abide” (Patton trans., 2005, 151). Also
on guests, Āpastamba Dharmasūtra is suggestive in the same vein:
‘Whether you hold them dear or not,’ it is stated, ‘guests lead you to
heaven.’ When a man gives food in the morning, at noon, and in the
evening, they constitute the three pressings of Soma; when he rises as his
guest gets up to leave, it constitutes the final rite of the Soma sacrifice;
when he addresses the guest with kind words, it constitutes the praise of
the priestly fee; when he follows the guest as he leaves, it constitutes the
Visṇ ̣u steps; and when he returns, it constitutes the final bath (Olivelle
trans., 1999, 50).
Friendship, meanwhile, is more multi-toned. Several Sanskrit words
are often translated by “friend,” two of which are important to differ-
entiate: sakhi and suhṛd. I translate sakhi as “friend.” But it is important
to note that Mahābhārata usages draw on Vedic precedents in giving
this term two senses, which I call “pact friendship,” as when Indra
makes pacts with demons such as Vṛtra and Namuci, and “intimate
friendship,” as when Indra is helped to defeat Vṛtra by his “intimate
friend” Visṇ ̣u (índrasya yújya sákhā). Gautama Dharmasūtra may suf-
fice to show how sakhis, like fathers and teachers, are not ordinary
guests or dependants, but should be treated as such at their discretion:
“He should give food first to guests (atithi), children, the sick, preg-
nant women, females in his household, and the old, as well as menials.
When his teacher, father, or friend (ācāryapitṛsakhīnām) is visiting,
however, he should check with them before cooking the meal” (GDhS
1.5.24–25/5.26–27). I am well aware that with the exception of the
friendship of Kṛsṇ ̣a and Arjuna, friendship is not the first thing one
thinks of regarding epic treatments of dharma and bhakti. But let us
not forget that the epic uses sakhi to describe Kṛsṇ ̣a’s special friend-
ships with two people, Arjuna and Draupadī. Here Gautama is again
318 chapter eleven
interesting and unique in providing a rule on female sakhīs: “Sex with
a female friend (sakhī) or sister (sayoni), a woman belonging to one’s
lineage (sagotrā), the wife of one’s pupil, one’s daughter-in-law, and
a cow is equal to sex with the wife of an elder” (GDhS 3.5.12/23.12).
Kṛsṇ ̣a could be said to listen to Gautama in the epic, if not, of course,
in later texts where he is a sakhi to the Gopīs. But we also get the
larger idea that Kṛsṇ ̣a is “a friend alike to friend and foe.” Unlike
sakhi, suhṛd seems to be an epic coinage. Meaning “one with a good
heart,” I translate it as “wellwisher.” Rāma is a sakhi of no one in that
term’s sense of intimacy. Rather, as Rāma emerges into view in court
and palace life, what he has are wellwishers, suhṛds—impersonal and
never named. For example, “As for Rāma’s wellwishers, they were all
bewildered: crushed by the weight of their grief, they could not rise
from where they had fallen” (2.36.16). The suhṛds are the last in the
capital to bid Rāma adieu, after which, once he disappears from sight
(37.1–2), they are among those left behind to think how every hill and
grove he visits will treat him as “a beloved guest” (priyātithi) (2.42.10;
cf. 3.4.25d; 3.11.27d). It is not until Sītā is abducted that Rāma needs
to make friends, which he begins to do by widening a strange network
of low status sakhis among animals, beginning with Sugrīva. As with
the low caste tribal (Nisạ̄ da), Guha, his first mentioned sakhi of this
type, these are only “pact friends” based on a relationship of “friend
to master” (sakhi to bhartṛ) (Rām 2.44.14a; 2.78.5ab).
Hospitality and friendship are thus interrelated practices or dis-
courses where dharma and bhakti coincide. And where they do so, I
believe that they take us deeply into these texts. If we simply ask who
hosts Kṛsṇ ̣a and Rāma in these epics? whom do Kṛsṇ ̣a and Rāma host
in turn? how do these scenes play out? what is the tone or mood cre-
ated? we get into revealing and, I would argue, indispensable material
of which we could ask, What would be left of these epics without these
scenes of divine hosting and visitation? They certainly cut down on the
intermittency problem in the Mahābhārata—most obviously in Books
3, 5, and 12–14, and the war books too, if you think about it; and for the
Rāmāyaṇa, one hosting covers the whole poem, since Rāma hosts its
first public recitation. But let me just keep to the moods at Kṛsṇ ̣a and
Rāma’s comings and goings. The epics detail such movements in ways
that are not the case for other “characters.” Rāma’s prolonged depar-
ture from Ayodhyā has already been mentioned. But the Mahābhārata
has similar descriptions of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s departures. I will cite only the last,
which comes after Kṛsṇ ̣a has lingered longer than he wished (see Mbh
mapping bhakti in the sanskrit epics 319
14.15.21) to help Arjuna remember the Gītā by telling him the Anugītā.
Having mounted his chariot amid the cityfolk of Hāstinapura, having
said his difficult goodbyes to his sister Subhadrā, his aunt Kuntī, the
Pāṇḍavas and others, and bid them return to the city; and having told
his charioteer Dāruka to “urge the horses to speed,” While Vārsṇ ̣eya
was proceeding to Dvārakā, O Bharata bull, those foe-scorchers with
their retinue, having embraced, turned back. Again and again Phālguna
embraced Vārsṇ ̣eya and as long as he was in eye’s range, he saw him
again and again. And even so, Pārtha w ithdrew that sight fixed on
Govinda with difficulty, and the unvanquished Kṛsṇ ̣a did the same
(Mbh 14.52.1–3; cf. Mbh 2.2.1–23; 2.42.45–59; 5.81.6–57).
B. Separation
We can now see that with hospitality and friendship as our first two
stepping stones, separation is their inevitable outcome. Kṛsṇ ̣a has just
made his final separation, while alive, from Arjuna, which anticipates
the devastating scenes of Book 16 describing Arjuna’s handling of
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s death: God’s departure from the world. But I would like to
make my case with two scenes of separation that are less obviously
devotional, ones in which the poets may be said to be concealing their
“love of concealment” while speaking through the woman’s voice.
Now there are two planes on which the Sanskrit epics unfold what
dharma holds for their heroines’ spirituality. On the one hand, both
agree with Manu that women find, or should find, their first spiritual-
ity in the home, and above all in the context of marriage. Normatively
put, the ideal woman is a pativratā or “faithful wife”; and her husband
is a god. Draupadī and Sītā, who embody this ideal as queens and
cultural icons, never tire of speaking up for it. But something more
is going on that we would not expect to find in a “Law-book.” Their
spiritual life comes to be intertwined with bhakti, “devotion”—and
devotion not only to one’s husband but to god. As we know from Fred
Hardy (1983, 5–9, 331–429, 527–34;) and Karen Prentiss (1999, 53),
vernacular bhakti traditions are well known for making the woman’s
voice a vehicle for strong devotional sentiments, but this is already
happening in the epics. Draupadī can keep her two types of spiritu-
ality separate: her five husbands are gods of more than one kind, as
husbands; her special friend Kṛsṇ ̣a is something else. Sītā, on the other
hand, would be bringing her two types of spirituality together in her
320 chapter eleven
devotion to one figure: her husband Rāma, whom neither he nor she
can really know to be god, at least on the scale of his being the incar-
nation of Visṇ ̣u.
To explore this, I will concentrate on passages where their voices are
strongest—not only in what their words recall but what they antici-
pate in the fuller narratives. I choose episodes where the heroine’s very
embodiment of the cultural ideal of the faithful wife is first strained
to the limit. Each episode marks the point where the heroine first
speaks out after she has suffered the deepest outrage she experiences
as a devoted wife and queen. And in each case, she address her kingly
husband. The difference is that whereas Draupadī, whom I shall treat
first, can address Yudhisṭḥ ira in Kṛsṇ ̣a’s absence, Sītā can only speak
to a Rāma who is not there.
B.1. Draupadī in Exile
Thirteen months into the Forest Exile (Mbh 3.36.31–32), Draupadī
and the Pāṇḍavas have their first conversation since the dicing. The
sequence introduces her as “dear and beautiful, a scholar (paṇḍitā)”
(Mbh 3.28.2)—that is, as a “lady pandit.” Draupadī berates Yudhisṭḥ ira
for his lack of kingly authority and manly wrath (3.28.19–34; Malinar
2007), and tells him a story to chide him for exalting patience and
forebearance (3.29). After hearing his initial defense of patience, her
exasperation mounting, she introduces a new turn with the exclama-
tion, “Glory be to the Placer and Ordainer (namo dhātre vidhātre ca)
who have befuddled you!” The Mahābhārata mentions these two old
abstract divinities one hundred and forty times, and uses their names,
Dhātṛ and Vidhātṛ, for a variety of gods, including Kṛsṇ ̣a, as when
Yudhisṭḥ ira says Kṛsṇ ̣a is the Placer and Ordainer who should decide
who marshals his army (5.149.33–36). With sixteen such usages in this
dialogue, who would Draupadī and Yudhisṭḥ ira be talking about? As
with Sītā, devotional implications will not be obvious.
Setting out their differences as a matter of two intellects, the lady
pandit and Yudhisṭḥ ira repeatedly use the philosophically potent term
buddhi with nuances that range from “intellect” to “mind” to “mental
or spiritual attitude.” She first remarks on his listless turn:
By my buddhi, you would abandon Bhīma and Arjuna, the twin
sons of Mādrī, and myself before you would forsake dharma. . . . Never
straying, your buddhi always pursues dharma as one’s constant shadow
pursues a man (31.7–8).
mapping bhakti in the sanskrit epics 321
Draupadī is not praising Yudhisṭḥ ira with her simile that he pur-
sues dharma like a shadow. She has been hearing about it up to the
ears, and is saying that his buddhi follows it as something reflex, “on
pilot.” Her last word on the subject is that she wants him to be “reso-
lute on his own with his intellect (buddhi) in front (buddhipūrvaṃ
svayaṃadhīraḥ)” (33.23c), rather than trailing him like a shadow.
Also worth noting is Draupadī’s “so I have heard from the Āryas.”
She will conclude this whole dialogue by explaining that once, while
she was doing errands and sitting on her father’s lap, she overheard a
learned Brahmin who had spoken to her brothers on subjects that had
first been propounded by Bṛhaspati, chaplain of the gods (33.56–58).
Draupadī refers her account to an “ancient tradition” about how the
aforementioned Placer is behind everything: “As wooden puppets are
assembled, so are these creatures, king; he makes the body and limbs
move” (31.20–22). As we shall see, this “puppet speech” offers a pos-
sible clue to Draupadī’s point of view during this exchange.
At the heart of what they are debating is the nature of karma with
regard to what Yudhisṭḥ ira calls the “fruits of dharma”—a topic on
which he appears to share the philosophy of “Reflection’s”—that is, the
Mīmāṃsā’s—view that the spiritual fruits of ritual action are “unseen.”
Since he charges her with heresy (nāstikyam; 3.32.1, 5), characterizing
her view as an excessive doubt in dharma that can lead one to be
reborn as an animal (6), their differences include an airing of con-
tending spiritual attitudes. I limit discussion to what I believe are two
levels to Draupadī’s alleged heresy; and to what deity they might be
talking about.
The first level comes out in Draupadī’s “puppet speech.” It is about
the Placer: She says, “As wooden puppets are assembled, so are these
creatures, king; he makes the body and limbs move” (22). Carrying
this idea along with several “string” similes (“like a pearl strung on a
string” among them), and remarking that creatures can be “pushed
along” by the Lord to heaven or hell (24–25, 27), she builds up
to this:
This body they call the “field” is the Placer’s mere instrument (hetumātram)
by which the Lord causes action that has good or bad fruit . . . . a Lord who
kills beings with beings, having bewildered (mohayitvā) (them) with his
own magic. . . . having made a disguise, Yudhisṭḥ ira, the god Bhagavān, the
Self-Existent Great Grandfather hurts creatures with creatures. Joining
them together and disjoining them, doing as he will, the Lord Bhagavan
plays (krīḍate) with beings like a child with playthings (krīḍanakair).
The Placer does not act toward beings like a father or mother. He seems
322 chapter eleven
to act out of fury (rosạ ). He is like another person (yathā ayam itaro
janaḥ). (3.31.29–37)
Even at the end of this debate, Draupadī hols that the body is an
instrument (kāraṇam) by which the Placer, now as the Great Lord
(Maheśvara), moves beings to this or that task (33.21–22).
Of the two dimensions of heresy, Yudhisṭḥ ira seems least interested
in this one, probably getting to it only toward the end of his response
when he reminds Draupadī of her birth, ostensibly to illustrate the
principle that acts bear fruit. He says,
So it is in you: recall your birth, Krṣ ṇ ̣ā, and how the ardent Dhrṣ ṭạ dyumna
was born. This is a sufficient analogy, sweet smiling woman. . . . Fruition of
both meritorious and wicked acts and their origin and disappearance are
mysteries of the gods, beautiful woman. Nobody knows them, creatures
are bewildered (muhyanti) about them. They are guarded by the gods;
surely the gods’ magic is hidden (32.30–31, 33–34).
Draupadī’s birth from an earthen altar, just after her brother’s birth
from fire, is frequently cited as something known to the principal
epic characters. Yudhisṭḥ ira can remind her of it not only as one of
the “mysteries of the gods” but as a ritual still bearing “unseen fruit.”
Granting that beings are bewildered, but not as puppets of a divine
puppeteer, he rather suggests that they make up a bewildered audience
to a divine plan. If he is bothered by the theology of the puppeteer
heresy, it is not much. Rather, saying “Everything is” (sarvam astīti),
set free your heretical heart (nāstikyam bhāvam utsṛja)! Do not revile
the Placer,” he concludes with a ringing endorsement not only of the
ontology of acts but of dharma and of everything the Placer does as
“the supreme deity” (uttamaṃ daivatam) (32.38c–40). Yudhisṭḥ ira
thus reminds Draupadī of her divine birth not only as one of the “mys-
teries of the gods,” but, implicitly, as part of their divine plan. We can
understand why she might have a sense that she is buffeted around like
a puppet, since one of her birth-given names, Pāñcālī, means not only
a daughter of Pāñcāla but evokes a word for “marionette.”
But if the puppeteer heresy is more Draupadī’s problem and doesn’t
much bother Yudhisṭḥ ira it is the other way around with her second
heresy, which gets to the core of Yudhisṭḥ ira’s self-understanding. Vir-
tually his first response is, “My mind is beholden to dharma by its
own nature (svabhāvāt), Kṛsṇ ̣ā” (3.32.4). What exercises Yudhisṭḥ ira
is what Draupadī says last. Condemning the Placer (39), she asks: Hav-
ing given Prosperity to the wicked Kauravas,
mapping bhakti in the sanskrit epics 323
What fruit does the Placer eat (dhātā kim phalam aśnute)? If karma done
pursues its doer and not another, then surely the Lord is stained (√lip)
by the wicked karma he has done. Or if the wicked karma done does
not pursue its doer, then mere power is the cause here, and I grieve for
weak people (3.31.40–42).
Draupadī is being literal in using the idiom “phalam √aś” as “eats
the fruit”; for even after Yudhisṭḥ ira has mentioned heresy, she
comes back to this image. Using the example of babies suckling their
mother’s breast (33.4) to show that all beings obtain livelihood from
what they do, she says: All beings know exertion, Bhārata, and visibly
(pratyaksạ m), having the world as witness (lokasāksịkam), they eat the
fruit of their actions (phalam aśnanti karmaṇam). I see that creatures
live off their own total effort (svaṃ samutthānam)—even the Placer
and Ordainer, as does this crane in the water (33.6–7).
We can detect a Materialist bent in Draupadī here, for in philo-
sophical terms she is, like a Materialist, stating that “visible evidence”
or “perception” (pratyaksạ ) is her standard (pramāṇam) for knowl-
edge. Nor would she be contradicting herself by mentioning deities,
since Indian materialism does not require atheism (see Bronkhorst
2007, 150–59, 161–62, 172, 309–10, 363–66). She may also be echo-
ing the Jain notion that one is stained by one’s karma, which, unlike
Brahmanical notions, involves a material concept of karma. Not only
does she want effort. She wants to see results! In contrast, Yudhisṭḥ ira
speaks like a good theist Mīmāṃsaka in seeing divinity behind the
spiritual fruits of dharma, defending the Placer and dharma together
(dhātāraṃ dharmam eva ca; 32.14b) for establishing the “Ṛsịs’ stan-
dard” (ārsạ m pramāṇam; 20a), without which “the universe would
sink into foundationless darkness (apratisṭ ḥ e tamasi)” (23cd). Who is
the Placer—at least for now, to these two speakers?
Most agree that Draupadī and Yudhisṭḥ ira seem to be talking about
Brahmā, at least in using some of his epithets. But she also uses the
names Bhagavān, Īśvara, and Maheśvara, which have wider and more
devotional ambience; and Yudhisṭḥ ira thinks of him as “the supreme
deity by whose grace a bhakta mortal attains immortality” (yasya
prasādāt tad bhakto martyo gacchaty amartyatām/ uttamaṃ daivatam)
(32.40ac). It has been suggested that when the Placer and Ordainer are
named in situations of misfortune, it is as if the speakers are reluctant
to blame their personal deity by name (Hill 2001, 176). In such a world
two characters could be talking about different deities. Draupadī’s story
about the Placer comes from Bṛhaspati, who, as chaplain of the Vedic
324 chapter eleven
gods, gets a reputation for having composed a Materialist sūtra (see
Bronkhorst 2007, 150–53)! There are also Jain and Buddhist texts that
mock the idea of a creator god. The Mahābhārata does not openly cite
heterodox texts (real or imaginary), but here it seems to do so covertly,
under a Vedic cover and in a woman’s voice! Draupadī is particularly
out of sorts at this point, and openly fed up with Yudhisṭḥ ira. But she
would also have reasons to be fed up with a divine plan that has put
her through her ordeal at the dicing and now “placed” her in the for-
est (Biardeau 2002, 1: 437). If she would have a complaint about the
Placer, then what about a friend who leaves things to the last moment
to rescue her from afar with unending saris? Indeed, shortly before
this on Kṛsṇ ̣a’s first visit to the exiled Pāṇḍavas, she asked him, “You
are the lord of all beings, both divine and human. Then how was it
that a woman like me, wife to the Pārthas, sister of Dhṛsṭạ dyumna,
your friend (tava . . . sakhī), Kṛsṇ ̣a, came to be dragged into the hall?”
(3.13.52c–53).
It could thus be that Yudhisṭḥ ira is heading Draupadī off, implic-
itly, from speaking ill of her friend Kṛsṇ ̣a, that grand illusionist who
will tell Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gītā, “The Lord of all beings resides
in the region of the heart, Arjuna, making all beings reel, mounted
to a device (yantra) by his power of illusion” (BhG 18.61)—which
reminded Śankara of a puppet play. Yudhisṭḥ ira could have reasons
to hear Draupadī’s words that way. When she was summoned to the
gambling hall, menstruating and in a single garment, he would have
heard her say,
So now the All-Ordainer disposes (vyadadhāt saṃvidhātā), touching both
who are touched, the wise and the fool. He said, “In this world dharma
is alone supreme.” Protecting, he will dispose peace (Mbh 2.60.13).
Her words are the epic’s single mention of the All-Ordainer
(Saṃvidhātṛ), who seems to cover both the Placer and the Ordainer,
and to leave open the possibility that she is talking about Kṛsṇ ̣a.
In fact, there are vivid echoes between Draupadī’s “heresy” and
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s words with his other special friend Arjuna in the Bhagavad
Gītā. Like Draupadī, who protests the point, Arjuna hears that he should
consider himself a “mere instrument” (BhG 11.33) of a god on whom
everything is “strung like heaps of pearls on a string” (7.7). Indeed,
she says things that would rather defy the Gītā. Whereas Draupadī
says, “The Placer does not act toward beings like a father or mother.
He seems to act out of fury. He is like another person,” Kṛsṇ ̣a says, “I
mapping bhakti in the sanskrit epics 325
am the father of this universe, the mother, the Placer, the grandfather”
(9.17). When Draupadī asks, “What fruit does the Placer eat?” that
might either stain him or leave people powerless before mere power,
Kṛsṇ ̣a says, “I eat” (aśnami) whatever is offered to me with bhakti—”a
leaf, a flower, a fruit (phala), or water”—so as to free devotees from the
good or bad fruits (phala) of binding karma (9.26–28), while Arjuna
sees him with crushed heads stuck between his teeth (11.27). Kṛsṇ ̣a
would not confirm Draupadī’s supposition that “the Lord is stained by
the wicked karma he has done,” since he says, “The four-varṇa-system
was created by me with distinctions as to qualities and acts (karmas).
Even though I am its doer, know me as the unchanging non-doer. Acts
do not stain me (√lip). . .” (4.13–14).
Compared to the Gītā, we cannot contrast Draupadī’s spirituality
as emotional with Arjuna’s as intellectual. If anything, it is more the
other way around. Unlike her beloved Arjuna, the exemplary man of
action, the lady paṇḍit is a philosopher with a consistent and respect-
able position. As a materialist, she seems to speak for primal mat-
ter, prakṛti, in its subtlest aspect, the buddhi. This would be in accord
with Yudhisṭḥ ira’s final tribute to her after she has passed away: that
she was “the great dark one endowed with intellectual substance”
(buddhisattvaguṇānivitā).
B.2. Sītā in Captivity
Now to Sītā. Rāvaṇa has given her two month to live, and left her in an
Aśoka grove guarded by Rāksạ sis with the threat that if she does not
come to love him in two months they will prepare her for his break-
fast or eat her themselves. Yet Hanumān has found her. Hiding in a
tree, he has seen her in this anguish, but not yet spoken to her. As he
sees her make three speeches amid exchanges with the Rāksạ sīs, it is
not always clear what he actually hears, since her words seem at times
to become soliloquys, particularly as she more and more addresses
herself to Rāma.
I will look at these three speeches for the points where Sītā addresses
Rāma directly, even though he is not there. Be it noted that while
translators, quite sensibly, have wanted to keep Sītā talking on an
intelligible human and wifely plane, it has meant undertranslating
certain loaded words: most notably the impossible-to-translate ātman,
“self,” but also words that I will translate with reference to gratitude
326 chapter eleven
(kṛtajña: 5.23.16d; 24.12a; 26.12d), pity, compassion, lordship, power,
abandonment, and belovedness so as to bring out her speeches’ bhakti
overtones. I am not saying this is the “right” way to translate these
passages, just that we may trace a devotional thread through them that
is intertwined with the ruptured domestic thread of Sītā and Rāma’s
marriage.
As Sītā’s first speech (23.11–20) opens, she recalls a popular maxim
quoted by paṇḍits. As with Draupadī, this aside offers a glimpse of a
female’s listening-post position; but whereas Draupadī is a paṇḍit, Sītā
only cites them. The maxim she cites concerns how death comes only
at its appointed time (12–13), and she grieves that her death will come
now separated from Rāma, whom she then dwells on until this train
of thought ends. She says,
This pitiable woman, whose merit must be small, like a woman without
a lord (anāthavat) must surely perish, like a laden vessel struck by strong
winds in the midst of the ocean. . . . How fortunate are those who are able
to see my lord (nātha)—his eyes like the inner petals of a lotus—who walks
with the valorous gait of a lion and is yet grateful (kṛtajña), a speaker of
what is beloved (priyavādinam). Separated from Rāma who knows himself
(rāmeṇa vidita-ātmanā), there is no way that I can survive. . . . What kind
of sin did I commit in a former body that I obtain such cruel and terrible
suffering? . . . I will never see Rāma again. A curse on this human state! A
curse on being under another’s power (para-vaśyatām). Although I wish
to, I cannot end my life (23.14–20).
Sītā imagines the good fortune of others who might see Rama, without
yet saying who they might be. She builds up a shaky image of him. She
thinks he “knows himself,” but he cannot really know his divine nature
until he has killed Rāvaṇa. On this point, let me recall Sheldon Pol-
lock’s groundbreaking 1984 article demonstrating that Rāma’s seeming
humanity is threaded into the poem along with a boon obtained by
Rāvaṇa from Brahmā: that of invulnerability to death from all different
classes of beings other than humans, whom Rāvaṇa omitted because
he disdained them (7.10.13–20). To slay Rāvaṇa, Rāma must be a man,
and he must think he is one until he accomplishes this goal. It is worth
quoting from a note that Pollock sent me in May 1992 during a cor-
respondence we were having over my eventual article “Epic Studies:
Classical Hinduism in the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa” (Hiltebei-
tel 1993), since it tells us something about careful and open-minded
scholarship: “This was a reading (that is, on the divinity of Rāma) I
came to adopt only with great reluctance but I did so by force of what I
mapping bhakti in the sanskrit epics 327
felt to be overwhelming evidence, text-critical, narrative, and literary-
historical both prior to and after the formation of the monumental
text (“monumental” in the sense used in Homeric studies). Whether
I’m right or not about an informing problematic of divinity, I read the
Rām. with much more pleasure now, watching how it encourages us to
understand, with a slowly growing wonder, the truly special nature of
the nāyaka. Far more exciting than looking for the droppings of god-
crazed interpolators.” As the Princeton translation of the Rāmāyaṇā has
continued, Robert Goldman and Sally Sutherland Goldman have now
credited Pollock’s approach in their introduction to the Sundarakāṇḍa
(Goldman and Sutherland Goldman 1996; Sutherland Goldman 2001,
335 n. 30), the Book we are here considering.
Obviously, Sītā must think Rāma is a man too, but let us not be too
sure that that is all she might think. She grieves at being under “anoth-
er’s power.” Ostensibly she is held captive by the Rāksạ sīs and Rāvaṇa.
But she intimates that she is under some still higher power: her own
karma? a lord’s who should be grateful, who should know himself? As
her own imaginings continue, Rāma will not be so perfect.
Sītā’s second and longest speech (5.24.3–49) follows a vivid depic-
tion of her: “Grieving like a woman possessed, or a madwoman, or a
woman in a state of utter confusion, she rolled on the ground like a
filly” (5.24.2). She “broods” further on her captivity under the “Rāksạ sa
women’s power” and on her separation from Rāma (3–5), curses her-
self (6), addresses the Rāksạ sīs and Rāksạ sas including Rāvaṇa while
predicting their downfall and Laṅkā’s destruction (11–25), comes
back to herself (35), and ends on the theme of being under “Rāvaṇa’s
power” (49). Here, she first centers her attention on Rāma wondering
why he does not come for her. She says,
Rāghava is renowned, wise, grateful, and compassionate (kṛtajñaś ca
sānukrośaḥ). Therefore I think it must be the exhaustion of my good for-
tune that has made this man of good conduct uncompassionate (sadvṛtto
niranukrośaḥ). . . . Why has Rāma, so firm in his valor, not come to rescue
his cherished wife, who is carried off by a Rāksạ sa? (24.12–18)
Her key verse here is the first one, bringing Rāma’s compassion into
question around the thought that he might become uncompassionate
now that she has been abducted—as he will in fact be in imposing her
two ordeals on her. But then, where was God’s compassion something
one could secure just by loving him? Sītā then multiplies these anxiet-
ies in this second speech’s closing:
328 chapter eleven
How, in my great suffering, shall I do without him—without seeing my
beloved Rāma, the corners of his eyes bloodred? . . . Rāma must not know
that I am alive. [Otherwise] the two of them would . . . scour the earth for
me. Surely [Rāma] has gone—out of grief for me—from here to the world
of the gods, having abandoned his body on earth. Fortunate are the gods,
Gandharvas, Siddhas, and supreme Ṛsịs who can now see Rāma, my
lotus-eyed lord. Or perhaps this wise royal Ṛsị Rāma who loves dharma
and is the Supreme Self (paramātman) has no use for me as his wife.
There would be love for the one that is seen; there is no affection on the
part of one who does not see. Ingrates (kṛtaghnāḥ) destroy; Rāma will
not destroy. Is it that I am completely devoid of qualities, or is it just the
exhaustion of my good fortune, that I, Sītā, should be without Rāma, who
is deserving of the best? It would be better for me to die. . . . Or perhaps
the two brothers . . . have laid down their weapons and are wandering in
the forest as forest dwellers, subsisting on roots and fruits. Or perhaps
Rāvaṇa . . . has slain the[m] . . . by some trick. I can wish only to die. . . . For-
tunate, indeed, are those great-souled, great-fortuned Munis who are
revered for their truth, their selves conquered, for whom there is neither
beloved nor unbeloved. Homage to those great-souled ones who detach
themselves from both! Abandoned here by my beloved Rāma whose self
is known (rāmeṇa viditātmanā), and fallen under the power of the wicked
Rāvaṇa, I shall end my life (24.35–49).
The passage is a spiritual treasure trove. While imagining that Rāma
may have gone to heaven out of grief for her, or that he and Laksṃ aṇa
have relinquished their weapons and become forest wanderers, she
broods twice on the “fortunate” celestial Ṛsịs or Munis in tellingly
contrastive terms. First she imagines them greeting Rāma in heaven:
“Fortunate are the gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas, and supreme Ṛsịs who
can now see Rāma, my lotus-eyed lord” (39). But then she brings them
down to the circumstances of her own despair: “Fortunate, indeed,
are those great-souled, great-fortuned Munis who are revered for their
truth (satyasammatāḥ), their selves conquered, for whom there is nei-
ther beloved nor unbeloved. Homage to those great-souled ones who
detach themselves from both!” (47–48). According to commentators,
the passage “suggests the sages’ capacity to transcend saṃsāra” (Gold-
man and Sutherland Goldman 1996, 422). Sītā cannot aspire to this
kind of detachment. Moreover, in the midst of all this, she has had
the disturbing yet also penetrating thought that “perhaps this wise
royal Ṛsị Rāma who loves dharma and is the Supreme Self has no
use for me as his wife” (40). One commentarial view is “that Rāma,
as the paramātmā and as one whose mind consists of dharma, does
not require a wife [to assist him in practicing dharma]” (Goldman
and Sutherland Goldman 1996, 421). Sītā brings her thoughts on this
mapping bhakti in the sanskrit epics 329
anxiety to some complex and subtle questions. If, as we have noted,
the fruits of dharma can often be unseen, what of Rāma and Sītā’s
love when she is unseen? Raising the image of Rāma as a potential
ingrate, who, to the extent that he does “know himself,” would “love
dharma” more than her, she reassures herself, perhaps wishfully, that
Rāma “will not destroy,” yet asks whether her own “qualities” (guṇas)
are such as to have left her now without him. Indeed, Rāma will not
involve Sītā in his ritual duties after the war: at his Aśvamedha, even
before she enters the earth, he will replace her with a golden replica
(Rām 7.82.19ab; cf. then 89.4)! Her wifely dharma will be cast aside
because he feels he must acknowledge the public’s doubts about her
time with Rāvaṇa.
Sītā’s third speech carries on her lonely soliloquy with mixed apos-
trophe to Rāma (5.26.3–16), ending at the point where even she senses
the favorable omens that presage the presence of Hanumān. As in the
first speech, she begins with a popular saying: “Alas, the good speak
this truth in the world: that there is no such thing as untimely death.
Alas it must be true if I, who lack all merit, have managed to survive
even for a moment under such abuse” (3). Surely suicide would not
be a fault when “I am about to be killed by this one unbeloved in my
sight, to whom I could not give my affection any more than a twice-
born could teach mantra to a non-twiceborn” (5). For the rest (6–16),
it is her concluding apostrophe to Rāma:
Surely [, she says,] if Rāma, the lord of the world (lokanātha), does not
come, the king of Rāksạ sas will soon dismember me. . . . Then it will be for
me, just as it would be for a thief, imprisoned and condemned to death
for a crime against the crown, on the morning of his execution. Oh Rāma!
Oh Laksṃ aṇa! Oh Sumitra! O mother of Rāma and my own mother as
well! I, this luckless woman, will perish like a ship foundering in a storm at
sea. [Rāma and Laksṃ aṇa] must have been killed on my account through
the strength of that creature in the form of a deer. . . when, fool that I am,
I sent away my husband [and his] younger brother. . . . Alas, Rāma of the
long arms, true to your vows! Alas, you whose face rivals the full moon!
Alas, you benefactor and beloved of the living world (hā jīvalokasya
hitaḥ priyaś ca)! You do not realize that I am to be slain by Rāksạ sas.
My taking you for my sole divinity (ananyadevatvam), my long suffering,
my sleeping on the ground, and my rigorous adherence to dharma—this
fidelity to my husband has been fruitless (pativratātvaṃ viphalam), like
the favors men do for ingrates. Surely this dharma adventure of mine
(dharmaś carito mama) has been vain. . . . For, pale and emaciated, I can-
not see you; I am cut off from you without hope for our reunion. Once
you have carried out your father’s orders to the letter and have returned
330 chapter eleven
from the forest with your vow accomplished, you will, I think, make
love with wide-eyed women, carefree, your purpose accomplished. But
as for hapless me, Rāma, after having loved you so long, given you all
my heart—to my own undoing—and practiced my vows and penances
in vain, I shall abandon my accursed life (26.6–15).
Those who see Rāma, always potentially a bhakti idiom, are no longer
the celestial denizens but wide-eyed lovers. We see how Sītā keeps
dharma and bhakti at play along with all the strands of her predic-
ament before finally letting them unravel in her version of a wife’s
worst-case imaginings, well in tune with Rāma’s overriding concern
for his father’s truth, if not when imagining his infidelities. Sītā also
deepens the implications of her first invocation of Rāma, Laksṃ aṇa,
and their mothers, this time mentioning all four again but adding “and
my own mother.” For this, she uses an appropriately different term for
“mother,” jananī, “begetter” or “genetrix,” hinting that she is speaking
of the Earth, to whom she will finally appeal at her last ordeal when
she will really end her life. But for now, as she determines to hang her-
self from her ponytail (see Hiltebeitel 1980–81, 198–99), her thoughts
turn more fondly to Rāma as she becomes aware of the good omens
that presage the presence of Hanumān, and takes hold of the branch
of a great flowering tree (18–20).
C. Conclusions
On, then, to some conclusions. Both Draupadī and Sītā register that
their husbands’ allegiance to dharma can leave them unprotected. In
this Yudhisṭḥ ira is different from Rāma, whom Sītā must worry about
more for his strictness to dharma than his rather feebly shadowing it.
But as we have seen, Draupadī’s argument with Yudhisṭḥ ira is also one
about God. Bhakti allows for numerous arguments with God. Sītā’s
and Draupadī’s are certainly different, but there are also similarities.
Intellectually, both put a twist on the visible evidence that, if God is
as supreme as he is reputed to be, he would appear to have put each
heroine’s dharma on trial with a certain transcendent aloofness. In
approaching God in his absence, each woman finds suggestive ways
to speak of him as theologically puzzling. But Sītā in captivity, more
than Draupadī in exile, anticipates the convention of having a wom-
an’s voice express the emotional side of bhakti.
We thus come back to the intermittency problem, and to the neces-
sities and niceties of textual discretion in portraying the hiddenness of
mapping bhakti in the sanskrit epics 331
gods among men, which constrains Kṛsṇ ̣a to operate within human
limits, and in Rāma’s case is tacitly structured into the Rāmāyaṇa not
only around Rāvaṇa’s boon but in the poet’s and Sītā’s apostrophes
to the perfect man. Bhakti is in the bones and sinews of these texts as
we have them. Positing political ideologies or class interests as prior
to their bhakti can only dim this intertwinement. I believe that these
epics’ bhakti politics reflected a sly and confident sense of taking over
the game.
Finally, as this presentation would suggest, if one were to look
closely at the ways dialogue is used in the two epics, it might be worth
exploring the possibility that Vālmīki innovates in the enhanced
transposition of dialogue into apostrophe. Our eavesdropping on Sītā
would suggest that, where apostrophe is used, it is used to lift dia-
logue “out of context” not only to address an absent husband and God,
but to address the reader: i.e., to engage the epics’ target audiences.
This of course means using apostrophe to create new dialogical com-
munities of those engaged in the text. The reason to investigate this
with regard especially to the Rāmāyaṇa, and to ask whether Vālmīki
enhances apostrophe as a new “move,” is the fact that the Rāmāyaṇā
is addressed first of all to its hero, Rāma. In a bhakti context (which
is where I have argued this move is made), this would mean that the
Rāmāyaṇa as apostrophe is a dialogue with God: one that draws in
Rāma himself, the “perfect man,” as the poet’s first conversation part-
ner, with readers following the poet in knowing all along that, like the
poet, they are approaching God.

CHAPTER TWELVE
ON READING FITZGERALD’S VYĀSA
After an extraordinary twenty-six years’ wait, the J.A.B. van Buitenen
translation of the Mahābhārata has been resumed by James L. Fitzger-
ald and it has been well worth the wait. Fitzgerald is to be congratu-
lated for a vigorous, nuanced, and often deeply moving translation,
one for which he had to draw on varied skills and impulses to animate
not only the text’s epical and edifying strains as he moves from the
Strīparvan to the Śāntiparvan, but, in the latter, the multigeneric char-
acter of the instructions of Yudhisṭḥ ira. Although Fitzgerald makes it
clear “that many of van Buitenen’s translational conventions are not
reproduced here” (p. xvii), one senses many debts and continuities,
and, more than that, a similar commitment, even if it takes different
forms and uses different idioms, to be daring and often enough amus-
ing, as the text deserves. As van Buitenen did, Fitzgerald also pro-
vides well thought-out introductions to the major parvans that include
valuable state-of-the-field position pieces on their components. Only
in the far more extensive and scholarly apparatus does the work feel
resolutely different. Along with seven appendices, the endnotes are far
more numerous and detailed, and many are signaled within the trans-
lation by the degree symbol ⁰ “to indicate the presence of a relevant
annotation in the endnotes” (p. vii, n. 5). Scholars may find some of
these changes more felicitous than the “serious general readers of con-
temporary American English” (p. xviii) whom Fitzgerald mentions as
his primary target, but in my view they offer a balance that is good
for both.
To resume this translation has not, however, meant picking up where
it was left off. From the Udyogaparvan (Book 5), where van Buitenen
exited, to the Strīparvan (Book 11), where Fitzgerald picks up, the
five books that recount the Mahābhārata war still remain in limbo.
Fitzgerald tides readers over this gap under the heading “What Hap-
pened in the War” (pp. xxiv–xxxi), and outlines the plan whereby the
University of Chicago Press will bring out the epic’s remaining books
under his editorship (pp. xv–xvi). More interesting than this temporary
jump over the war, however, is the exciting opportunity this volume
334 chapter twelve
offers for a new centering of Mahābhārata interpretation. For, though
the translation resumes with the Strīparvan, Fitzgerald’s interpretive
center of gravity lies in his introduction to the Śāntiparvan (Book 12).
Fitzgerald brings special and rare expertise to the Śāntiparvan, for
with this volume he has now not only translated and introduced the
first two of its three main instructional components—the Rājadharma
and Āpaddharma sub-parvans, but has written his dissertation on the
third—the Moksạ dharma sub-parvan,1 his translation of which will be
a further contribution to this overall resumption.
Thus, by an accident of publishing history, this resumption will
focus interpretative attention on the Śāntiparvan. I shall argue in this
review that this accident may have the fortunate result of encouraging
“suspended” readers and reviewers to raise interesting new questions,
and hopefully shake up some long-standing assumptions, about the
relation of parts to the whole. With that in mind, let me mention a few
of Fitzgerald’s most broad-stroke interpretative strategies, situate them
in relation to some other recent approaches, and turn to a couple of
points where I think his approach is not as fruitful as it could be.
Mahābhārata Reading Strategies
On the broadest scale, Fitzgerald uses the hyphenated term “praśamana-
anuśāsana” to describe the double “cooling” and “instructional” char-
acter of the book’s title term, śānti (“peace”). Fitzgerald suggests a
sacrificial dimension to this word, as an apotropaic bringing-to-rest or
neutralizing of effects—in this case, the effects of war—that reorients
Yudhisṭḥ ira, beset after the war by grief (śoka, from its root śuc, related
by Fitzgerald to things “burning too hot” in Vedic ritual), toward being
“fit to rule” (pp. 94–100). Though he is cautious about the ritual dimen-
sions of this interpretation (pp. 97–98, 99 n. 97), I believe it makes a
sound contribution to our appreciation of the depth of Vedic resonance
that the epic poets repeatedly call upon. More immediately, Fitzger-
ald speaks of this praśamana-anuśāsana’s four main components—the
three of the Śāntiparvan plus the Dānadharmaparvan, the main sub-
parvan of the following Anuśāsanaparvan (Book 13)—as “four large
1 James L. Fitzgerald, “The Moksạ Anthology of the Great Bhārata: An Initial Sur-
vey of Structural Issues, Themes, and Rhetorical Strategies” (Ph.D. diss., University of
Chicago, 1980).
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 335
anthologies” that “make up the first canonical library of ‘Hinduism’ ”
(pp. 79–80). At this point, let me note only that in laying out these
overarching terms Fitzgerald writes as if Bhīsṃ a and Yudhisṭḥ ira were
the only interlocutors in this vast span, leaving him grounds to impute
lateness to features that do not fit the pattern. Finally, at the most
local level affecting the many individual units within these anthologies,
Fitzgerald sees a “tension” (pp. 103, 105) between an older sense of
dharma (Law-based, often translated as “meritorious Lawful action,”
that “connects one to an important good, or goods, that do not lie
completely within the reach of normal human effort”) and a newer
(yogic and virtue-based) one (p. 104). For Fitzgerald this tension has a
great deal to do not only with the dharma teachings of the four rāja-,
āpad-, moksạ -, and dāna-dharma anthologies but with the historical
situation that “drove some brahmins to create the Mahābhārata as we
have it” (p. 105)2 in its first written redaction (p. 103) and to construct
the figure of Yudhisṭḥ ira as the son of the god Dharma (pp. 136–37). It
is not always easy to guess the reasoning behind Fitzgerald’s “ parsing”
(pp. 138, 140) of dharma in particular instances of translation or to
follow him from his discussion of a basic tension to his analysis of
dharma as having three senses (pp. 641–43) and “primary forms and
secondary forms” (p. 154), but it is clear that his analysis makes an
important contribution to understanding the complexity of usages
in the “didactic” anthologies, if possibly less of one in translating the
“narrative.”
I would characterize Fitzgerald’s interpretative work, along with
my own3 and Madeleine Biardeau’s,4 as one of three attempts in the
last three years at “strong readings.”5 By this I mean readings that
acknowledge their hypothetical character, situate the text in history,
and are proposed as “revisionist” advances for offering a plausible
degree of coherence to the whole text in relation to its parts (philo-
logical readings of segments and of segments in relation to larger units
do not provide strong readings in this sense). These three readings are
2 Fitzgerald often invokes “some brahmins” as part of his diachronic view of the
text’s production.
3 In Alf Hiltebeitel, The Education of Yudhisṭḥ ira: A Reader’s Guide to the Education.
of the Dharma King (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 2001).
4 Madeleine Biardeau, Le Mahābhārata: Un récit fondateur du brahmanisme et son
interpretation. 2 vols. (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 2002).
5 See Harold Bloom, A Map of Misreading (New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1975).
336 chapter twelve
quite close in their historical contextualization6 and agree on many
things in their interpretation. There are, however, important differ-
ences in the ways they conceive of the parts-whole relationship. On the
hypothesis of a coherent subsurface authorial design and the messages
conveyed through it across the text,7 Biardeau excludes two units of
the Mahābhārata from discussion—the Nārāyaṇīya and the Anugītā—
mainly because she finds them off-message.8 On the hypothesis that
the text was composed by a committee over a shorter time than is
usually conceived, I hold off on excising anything, on the premise that
the whole remains elusive so long as we have yet to discern the con-
ventions by which its parts are interrelated. And on the hypothesis of
an historical link between Aśoka Maurya and the situation that “drove
some brahmins to create the Mahābhārata as we have it,” Fitzgerald
would excise many passages either because they do not reflect these
politics or because they adumbrate it in supposedly later formulations.
In other words, although all three share common historical reflections,
one is a semiological hypothesis, one a literary hypothesis, and one a
political hypothesis. These are of course not mutually exclusive cat-
egories. Biardeau and Fitzgerald speak quite similarly of their readings
as “apocalyptic,” though with opposed views on how the apocalypse
would relate to bhakti. And all three readings are in one or another
sense political. There is thus the possibility that each is strong enough
to strengthen the others, but each would also have its weaknesses.9
Two Problematic Hypotheses
There are two points where I think Fitzgerald’s approach is not as fruit-
ful as it could be: his “hypothesis that the Bhagavad Gītā is a later ame-
lioration of the ksạ triyas’ ethical horizons over those set for them by
6 Fitzgerald would now have to soften his statement that he is “much more concerned
with matters of history” (pp. 127–28, n. 198) than Biardeau.
7 Biardeau, Le Mahābhārata, 1: 26.
8 Ibid., 2: 566, mentioning “leur étrangeté et leur difficulté intrinsèque.”
9 There is some justice in the criticism that my approach has been rather too case-
by-case, and that it dooes not deliver a total statement, for instance, on the educa-
tion of Yudhisṭḥ ira. See James L. Fitzgerald, “The Many Voices of the Mahābhārata:
Review article of Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education of
the Dharma King by Alf Hiltebeitel,” JAOS 123 (2003): 803–18; John Brockington,
review of Rethinking the Mahābhārata, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African
Studies 65 (2002): 600–602.
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 337
The Laws for Kings” (p. 141) or Rājadharma, and his idea that the four
anthologies of Books 12 and 13 would have been composed sequen-
tially over a considerable time through what he has recently called
“growth-rings.”10 Let me begin with a few of the arguments by which
Fitzgerald supports these hypotheses, and then turn to the opening
of the Śāntiparvan, up to Yudhisṭḥ ira’s first exchanges with Bhīsṃ a,
where I believe these topics deserve to be put in a different light.
As regards the Gītā hypothesis, Fitzgerald repeatedly advances the
following view of bhakti passages, elements, and themes: rather than
being part of what he posits as the epic’s quite capacious “original
post-Mauryan written redaction” (p. 113, n. 139), which he also calls
“the putative Śuṅga or post-Śuṅga text that likely knew nothing of
the Bhagavad Gītā” (p. 141, n. 242). Fitzgerald considers such bhakti
features to be uniformly “later”11 than the “original,” having become
piecemeal parts of an alleged “Gupta text” (p. 114) that he posits to be
the proximate archetype recovered by the Pune Critical Edition (see
xvi n. 2). Since I address his view on bhakti elsewhere,12 I leave it aside
here other than to make one observation that applies equally to the
growth-rings hypothesis: whereas Fitzgerald presents external evidence
for the post-Mauryan/post-Śuṅga background of his “original redac-
tion” (lately called the “main Mahābhārata”),13 he presents no such
evidence for the “Gupta text.” Rather, all evidence for the lateness of
bhakti is based on internal evidence, for which the “Gupta text” seems
to provide a suitably distant date on which to hang arguments for a
10 James L. Fitzgerald, “The Rāma Jāmadagnya ‘Thread’ of the Mahābhārata: A
New survey of Rāma Jāmadagnya in the Pune Text.” in Stages and Transitions: Tem-
poral and Historical Frameworks in Epic and Purāṇic Literature. Proceedings of the
Second Dubruvnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas, ed.
Mary Brockington (Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts, 2002). 111; “The
Position of Brahmins in the Mahābhārata: New Perspectives on the Development
and Growth of the Epic Between the Empires” (paper presented for the “Between the
Empires” Conference, University of Texas, April 2003), 2. The term does not appear
in the book under review.
11 See p. 104 (Fitzgerald says little about his exemplary figure Tanu’s residence at
Badarī with Nara and Nārāyaṇa); p. 112 (the older Mbh reflects a “Brahmanic vision”
of a “universal plenum” that is only “later” envisioned “within the body of God”);
p. 124, n. 183 (the lateness of pralaya themes and seemingly anything to do with Śiva,
for whom Fitzgerald leaves a kind of blind spot: e.g., at 103, where Visṇ ̣u-Nārāyaṇa,
Indra, and Śrī, but not Śiva, are mentioned among deities supporting the older Mbh’s
pre-bhakti apocalyptic events); and p. 132 (nothing is said about the massive treatise
first “abridged by Śiva”).
12 See now chapters 3 and 18 of this book.
13 Fitzgerald, “The Many Voices of the Mahābhārata,” 811.
338 chapter twelve
lengthy process. In fact, to hang the Gītā midway on this timeline,
Fitzgerald overrides “the great deal of [external] evidence” from the
second century B.C.E. that the Gītā’s composition would coincide with
“the rise of the Bhāgavata cult focused on Kṛsṇ ̣a Vāsudeva” (p. 141).
Stating rather implausibly that such “evidence only establishes a ‘date
after which’ the BhG developed,” Fitzgerald claims that his later dating
is “not hampered by the fact that Vaisṇ ̣avism rose to eminence in the
second century B.C.” (p. 141). Clearly, however, it is not helped.
Second, Fitzgerald attributes a certain agency to “the armed stratum
of society, the ksạ tra” (p. 102) in negotiating the Gītā’s “improved
solution to the same basic problem of reconciling the older and the
newer senses of dharma” (p. 140). Having apparently felt “a sense
of insufficiency in the praśamana-anuśāsana” offered up in the early
portions of Book 12 that Fitzgerald considers to have been part of
the “original redaction” (p. 139), “the warriors and kings who were
directed by The Book of Peace to embrace violence and bloodshed duti-
fully, even enthusiastically, may have found the blend of old and new
dharmas an un-inspiring compromise” (p. 140); and having apparently
“shared” with a “somewhat later” group of Brahmans a feeling that “a
pall hangs over the epic narrative from the conclusion of Bhīsṃ a’s
instructions all the way to the end of the tale,” this later group of
Brahman authors14 would have produced the Gītā’s “more powerful
solution” to better inspire them (p. 139). This new ksạ tra constituency
is arrived at by a kind of gerrymandering of the text.15 Fitzgerald is
right to call attention to some similar issues addressed in the prewar
instructions of Arjuna and the postwar instructions of Yudhisṭḥ ira,
but his evidence for this increasingly disaffected “armed stratum” is
left to our imagination. I believe, on the contrary, that while the epic
poets recalled the old Vedic Ksạ triya with what Robert P. Goldman
has called “janapāda nostalgia,”16 they constructed the new one dur-
14 Other later such groups having apparently also intervened by now to have carried
the tale to the end.
15 See Fitzgerald, p. 15, on “society’s need for warriors,” who are taken to be the text’s
primary “imagined audience”—with one of Vyāsa’s primary purposes, at least in Book
11, being to produce a narrative “gratifying to warriors.” In positing a “triple-layered
Mahābhārata,” Fitzgerald hypothesizes that prior to the written post-Aśokan and
Gupta “redactions,” there would have been an archaic bardic precursor that glorified
Ksạ triya clients (p. 82, n. 15). But even if that widely held view were true (which I see
no reason to assume), it could not offer that same warrior population as audience for
the written text(s).
16 Orally, at a conference in Pondicherry, January 1997.
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 339
ing times when the Ksạ triya population was in major disarray, that
they composed this epic in one swoop that entailed the bold move of
depicting both Arjuna and Yudhisṭḥ ira as contending yet also comple-
mentary images of their new ideal, and that they had their reasons
for going over “the same basic problem” twice: once with the ideal
warrior before the war where inspiring the yet-to-be-materialized new
Ksạ triya to an “enthusiasm” for battle is fitting, and again after the war
when the “pall” of victory would be faced by the more discerning ideal
once and future king.
As regards the “growth-rings” hypothesis, Fitzgerald reserves its
presentation for the end of his second Introduction. There, even
though it follows directly upon his Gītā hypotheses, it still comes as
something of a surprise, since he had earlier committed himself to a
mainly “synchronic” reading. After suggesting that Kṛsṇ ̣a’s gift of the
divine eye to Bhīsṃ a “reflects a relatively later stratum of editing or
rewriting” because Bhīsṃ a claims “his own authority for some of the
items he subsequently teaches Yudhisṭḥ ira” (p. 95, n. 80),17 he writes,
“In a work like this, however, the diachronic question must be super-
seded by an attempt to read the whole received text in as thoroughly
synchronic a way as possible. I occasionally remark upon issues of the
text’s history, but for now my main interest is to offer the text we have
as sympathetic a reading as possible” (p. 95, no. 80, my italics). It is
not yet clear how Fitzgerald defines the possibility of offering “as sym-
pathetic a reading as possible.” That is left for the close of the second
introduction, where the “main interest” entirely subsides. There he
allows the “diachronic question” to drive the main questions he asks
of the text and thereby constrains any sustained sympathetic reading
by favoring these diachronic questions.
Fitzgerald organizes these parameters under the headings of “read-
ing maps” and “bird’s eye views” of the Śāntiparvan’s three anthologies
(with an initial mapping of Dānadharmaparvan of Book 13 as well)
(pp. 142–64). His most programmatic statement is the following: “each
of these collections clearly is an anthology constituted from various
textual items that preexisted its insertion into the anthology. But it is
not the case that each of the three anthologies of the Śāntiparvan were
[sic] assembled at the same time or in the same fashion. In fact, each of
17 Fitzgerald similarly tries to explain away Vyāsa’s gift of the divine eye to Gāndhārī
in Book 11 (p. 18).
340 chapter twelve
the three anthologies exhibits distinct traits of assembly and construc-
tion” (p. 144). Fitzgerald never indicates his criteria for determining
preexistence,18 but to support the claim of separate construction he
seeks to demonstrate discontinuity and layering by proceeding from
“the basic surface facts of each collection” to the “careful determina-
tion of their structure and history” (p. 144). One of his strategies is to
contrast the relative “tautness” of the series of instructions that begin
the first two anthologies, exemplified by a pre-dominance of topically
focused one-adhyāya units, with the “more relaxed” character of the
subsequent instructions, which have “looser aggregations” and “mul-
tichapter recitals” (pp. 147–49, 158)—with, moreover, each of the four
anthologies being more relaxed than its predecessor as the result of “a
progressive loosening of editorial integration” (p. 148). Another crite-
rion is to identify thematic sets topically in the looser second parts of
these two anthologies, and take such topical shifts as indications that
segments were “prepended” and “appended” over time to the “first
edition” and its “core” (pp. 152–53). Here Fitzgerald suggests, as a
kind of leapfrog effect over time, that relatively inchoate segments
on āpad and moksạ in later parts of the first two parvans anticipated
more articulate treatment of those topics as the main ones of the
next parvans. Thus he detects a “proto-Āpaddharmaparvan” (p. 156)
in the Rājadharma, I think unconvincingly,19 and likewise a disaggre-
gate “moksạ group of texts” (p. 160) in the Āpaddharma.20 A third
18 No doubt there were preexisting texts, but which ones, and what are the grounds
for determining that status? Although not found in the four anthologies, one might
on good grounds regard the “Sixteen Kings Story” (see below) as based on preexisting
texts. But note how the Mbh’s two tellings are different in ways that are at least partly
contextual (see n. 51 below).
19 The term āpad is never used in this “proto-Āpaddharma” (12.110–15); its stories
are little developed from the king’s point of view, the view that Fitzgerald recognizes as
prominent in the Āpaddharma (p. 159); there is barely a nod to the key āpaddharma
theme of the king’s survival (see Fitzgerald, p. 156); and little about nīti (“policy”).
Indeed, the one exception regarding a nīti-wise (12.112.61b) jackal minister illustrates
these differences: the jackal stops working for an untrustworthy tiger-king yet survives
only to commit suicide. There is also nothing about Āpaddharma being a secret and
somewhat disagreeable teaching (see Bowles 2004, 149, 155–58) and nothing about
dasyus, “robbers,” who present a singular problematic in the Āpaddharma (see n. 25
below).
20 E.g., Fitzgerald says of the last verse of the penultimate Āpaddharma unit,
“12.161.48 relates (falsely as the text stands now) that Yudhisṭḥ ira began questioning
Bhīsṃ a about moksạ ” (p. 143, n. 248). He gets “the Law beyond these” from tataḥ
paraṃ dharmam, which, he says, implies moksạ by taking “‘these’ to refer either to
the Laws” of the first two anthologies or to the trivarga mentioned some verses back.
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 341
criterion is to note alternations in the immediacy of the Yudhisṭḥ ira-
Bhīsṃ a dialogic frame, assuming that “larger framed items in the col-
lection tend to diminish the sense of the Bhīsṃ a-Yudhisṭḥ ira setting”
(p. 158), which “often fades from sight” and is “once . . . even discarded”
(p, 149)—in this latter claim mischaracterizing a shift of which he first
says, more plausibly, that “the Bhīsṃ a-Yudhisṭḥ ira protocol is tempo-
rarily suspended” (p. 144)21—and going on to say that even where it is
strongest, at 12.56–90, “the Bhīsṃ a-Yudhisṭḥ ira frame . . . is definitely
an artificial frame” (p. 149).
I do not find any of these modes of analysis really convincing.
On the second, for instance, Fitzgerald is not altogether persuasive
in assigning successive “labels,” “rubrics,” or “topics” (pp. 149, 162)
based on the “proper”-ness (p. 158), “fit” (p. 162), or “point” (p. 163)
of units and sets (e.g., “two optimistic texts” [p. 162]). And with regard
to the third, I think it unwise to posit that Indian audiences would
ever forget who is listening in from any of the Mahābhārata’s multiple
frames. (I would wager that one thing this text would have taught
Indian audiences better than it has taught Western scholars is to keep
these multiple speaker-audience relations always in the back of the
mind.) Moreover, I can think of other reasons why the text might
have been designed to produce the described effects, not the least of
which being that its authors could have sought simply to approximate
features of a plausible dialogue—with stretches of high-intensity focus
followed by more relaxed unfoldings—between the two increasingly
relaxed principals, Bhīsṃ a and Yudhisṭḥ ira.
A Question of Sympathetic Reading
Here, then, I would like to suggest five assumptions, working prem-
ises, or strategies that might point a way to further “sympathetic read-
ing,” and then turn to the early going of the Śāntiparvan to illustrate
how this approach can offer some reverse light on the questions raised
On this basis, “Obviously, [the next unit] now intervenes, but it would seem that it
was added . . . later” (778). But “these” is gratuitous: tataḥ paraṃ more easily means
“beyond that, further.” Cf. van Buitenen, The Mahābhārata, 2: 770, translating “and
friendship . . . higher still” (i.e., “higher than that”) for tataḥ paraṃ mitram (3.281.29).
Yudhisṭḥ ira probably just wants to hear more about dharma.
21 “Suspended” describes what one reads in the text, whereas “discarded” implies an
authorial rejection. On the pertinent passages, see chapter 7 above.
342 chapter twelve
so far about the Gītā and growth-rings. The first two assumptions are
already by now implicit and can be mentioned quickly: the text trains
its readers to watch for understatement and suspension in the comings
and goings of Kṛsṇ ̣a and the unfolding of bhakti, and one should not
underestimate the staying power of its multiple frames.
Third, one should not overdo the didactic/narrative opposition.
While I heartily agree with the conclusion of Fitzgerald’s opening
statement on the “four large anthologies”: “What is surely lacking is
an orientation to The Book of Peace as a deliberate literary and intel-
lectual construction, as a functioning part of the Mahābhārata, serving
some of the agendas of those people responsible for the epic” (p. 80),
I would suggest caution on the point that this praśamana-anuśāsana
“poses an effective counterweight to the reading narrative of the great
Bhārata war, and it created another ancient Indian library of sacred
texts” (p. 99). While the terms anthology, collection, compendia, and
library are all analogically useful, one must be careful about where one
heads with them, and with “library” I believe Fitzgerald takes too free
a hand in emphasizing originally “independent components” (p. 199,
n. 200).22 But more important, the notion of “counterweight” relies on
a didactic/narrative opposition that is perhaps due for questioning: the
four anthologies’ multiple texts and teachings would certainly have
presented different problems from other parts of the Mahābhārata,
but it may handle these problems in recognizably similar ways.23
Fourth, one should not miss that the four anthologies become a
centerpiece in the life-long education of Yudhisṭḥ ira by attending
closely to his ups and downs and repeatedly reinforcing the foun-
22 E.g., that “The first part of the RDh instructions was definitely assembled from
preexisting texts,” with a significant effort made to “weave” them “into a (relatively)
seamless text that appears as a genuine dialogue” (p. 148). I doubt that this significant
effort, this weave, is secondary.
23 Consider here what one might call a theory of the originary vastness of texts that
would apply equally to the Mbh “as a whole.” Presented twice in the Śāntiparvan, first
at the beginning of Bhīsṃ a’s instructions (12.59.13–92) and again in the Nārāyaṇiya
(12.322.26–52), one hears of two ancient śāstras, one of a hundred thousand adhyāyas
(12.59.29) and the other of a hundred thousand verses (332.36), that, like the hundred-
thousand-verse Mbh, offer dharmic instruction for kings. Indeed, the first of five
abridgments of the first of these śāstras was made by Śiva (59.85–87). Fitzgerald,
however, starts using “hieratic capitals” (see xxi) in translating śāstra only at the onset
of Bhīsṃ a’s instructions (12.50.34), and then quite consistently thereafter (usually as
“Teachings,” “Learned Teachings,” or “Learned Traditions,” but in the case of Śiva’s
abridgement also as “Guidebook” [p. 309]). Fitzgerald thereby reinforces a division
between narrative and didactic that is not discernible in the text itself.
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 343
dational trope of his guilelessness.24 This overarching theme finds a
good illustration in Book 3 where, after narrating the Rāmopākhyāna
to the five Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī, Mārkaṇḍeya says to Yudhisṭḥ ira,
“Do not grieve, tiger among men, you are a baron, enemy-burner; you
are walking the road of blazing resolve that relies on the prowess of
your arms; for not the slightest bit of guile is found in you (na hi te
vṛjinaṃ kiṃcid dṛśyate param aṇv api). On that road (asmin mārge)
even Indra with the gods and Asuras might well despair” (3.276.2–3
as translated by van Buitenen, The Mahābhārata, 2: 759). To trace this
road or path through Books 12 and 13 one must be attentive to the
Bhīsṃ a-Yudhisṭḥ ira frame, including the build-up to it and moments
where Vaiśampāyana breaks into it to offer cues to subtleties we would
otherwise have to miss. Within the compass of this translation, one
may consider Yudhisṭḥ ira’s quite developed and beautifully rendered
evocation of the wanderer’s path in response to Arjuna’s insulting
first speech, especially 12.9.2 and 12–19, ending, “ridiculing no one,
frowning at nothing, my face always cheery, all my faculties thor-
oughly restrained, questioning no one about the road, traveling by any
way whatsoever, not seeking to go in any particular direction, nor to
any particular place, paying no heed to my going, not looking back,
straight and steady as I go, but careful to avoid creatures moving and
still—so will I be” (p. 185). Or consider Yudhisṭḥ ira’s reflections on
the dashed “hopes” that he had for Duryodhana (p. 485; 12.125.1–7);
his horrified and stunned reaction to the “robber morality”25 that
24 Though to be sure, Yudhisṭḥ ira also has his dark side and conniving moments as
part of what Fitzgerald calls his interesting “complexity” (pp. 87, 125).
25 My translation of dasyumaryādā at 140.1c; cf. Fitzgerald, 541: “barbarian law.”
This once I must disagree with Fitzgerald’s translation choice of “barbarian” for dasyu,
mleccha, anāryajano (p. 50; 11.14.13), Nisạ̄ da (p. 132), and Caṇḍāla (p. 153 n. 263;
498). Fitzgerald unsuccessfully tries to distinguish mlecchas from dasyus as “foreign
barbarians” and “jungle barbarians” (pp. 495, 594 [even in translation], 823). A better
distinction emerges in the Āpaddharma’s last unit (12.162–67), a story set among mlec-
chas of the north (162.28; the only usage of that term in the Āpaddharma) in which the
characters and their village are designated by dasyu fourteen times. A Brahman settles
into the village, meets a “good” dasyu, and starts living the dasyu life. Meeting a “good
dasyu” would be different from meeting a “good mleccha,” which I have never done in
a classical Sanskrit text. The major trait of dasyus that interests the Āpaddharma is that,
although they can be wild and unruly, especially in their forests, they can be managed
once a king recognizes that their wildness and unruliness can be of service if they run
what are essentially protection rackets. In the Āpaddharma such unruly but regulable
dasyu morality is mirrored in kings’ being given free reign to rob others—in both cases
exempting Brahmans (12.128.20; 133.14–18)—to restore their treasuries (12.128; 129.9;
131.1–6; 134). It is just after Yudhisṭḥ ira hears how the Brahman Viśvāmitra robs dog
344 chapter twelve
Bhīsṃ a has unveiled as law for times of distress (140.1); and his claim
not to “understand vicious men or their deeds” (p. 576; 158. 1cd).
Finally, let me add that I would also prefer “goodness” rather than
“courage” for sattva in “Then he whose courage (sattva) had never
been diminished26 questioned the son of the river . . .” (p. 590; 161.48).
For Fitzgerald, however, “the Bhīsṃ a-Yudhisṭḥ ira frame . . . is definitely
an artificial frame” (p. 149), as noted, and serves mainly to provide
a kind of shelf space for the “independent components” of the four
anthologies. When it comes to tracing it, although he attends to it
nicely in adhyāya summaries, he is quite minimalist in his interpreta-
tion: “occasionally, in The Laws for Kings, there is a little movement
in the overarching narrative” (p. 143). His emphasis is consistently on
what could be deemed late.27
Fifth, and tying all the preceding together, are the overarching nar-
rative and didactic devices of pacing, threads, repetitions (after the war,
more particularly, the text’s plangency or mournful reverberation),
and juxtaposition. Fitzgerald is certainly appreciative of “themes” and
“threads” and their reverberation,28 though I think somewhat suspi-
cious of juxtaposition. But when he gets to his growth-rings hypothesis
he tends to treat such matters as of secondary interest: “For the most
part these lessons are a succession of discrete textual units of varying
length and internal complexity that sometimes do and sometimes do
not exhibit thematic connections to the other textual units of Bhīsṃ a’s
instruction” (p. 144). Yet one of the ways that Bhīsṃ a, and before him
others, finds of engaging the attention of Yudhisṭḥ ira and guiding him
through his ups and downs is to take advantage of the Mahābhārata’s
character as a multi-genre work. Here again, as Fitzgerald recognizes,
meat from a caṇḍāla that he says he shuns this “robber morality,” since it leaves his
sense of dharma “completely undone” (p. 541; 140.1–2).
26 Cf. Bowles, 297: “Again that man who had never lost his goodness. . . .”
27 Right after mentioning the passage just cited as indicative of how “the text stands
now” (pp. 143–33 and n. 247), Fitzgerald mentions four passages to support his point,
among them two toward the end of the Āpaddharma: where Nakula questions Bhīsṃ a
rather than Yudhisṭḥ ira, and where, with Bhīsṃ a taking a breather, Yudhisṭḥ ira con-
verses with his brothers and Vidura. See above at n. 21 on Fitzgerald’s imputation of
lateness to passages interrupting the Bhīsṃ a-Yudhisṭḥ ira exchange.
28 E.g., p. 88, “the dominant theme of Vyāsa’s narrative becomes burning grief
(śoka)”; cf. pp. 149, 162–63 on labeling different sets and units by “theme,” especially
the “proto-Āpaddharma.” These terms too are anchored to an historicizing purpose:
“a thread of interconnection” between the anthologies “as a literary artifact and the
historical events that . . . stimulated the precipitation of this grand work” (p. 101).
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 345
“the contents of these books are instructional lectures, sermons, his-
tories, and parables” (p. 143): the Viśvāmitra story “smacks of satire”
(p. 157); and there are “animal fables and parables” (p. 158). Ought
we not to ask whether there is an attempt to use artful juxtaposition
in developing this curriculum for the troubled king?
Let me then turn to the Śāntiparvan’s opening with these issues,
premises, and questions in mind.
Opening the Śāntiparvan
The Śāntiparvan opens with the conclusion of the funerary rites
after the Kuruksẹ tra war. “There on the bank of the holy Bhāgīrathī
brahmins by the hundreds of thousands comforted and encour-
aged (āśvāsayantaḥ) the king, who was out of his mind with burn-
ing grief” (p. 168; 12.1.8). Fitzgerald takes two words, “comforted
and encouraged,” for one, āśvāsayantaḥ, here, no doubt recognizing
that it is an important term: indeed, the long praśamana-anuśāsana
of Yudhisṭḥ ira is equally his āśvāsana: the revival of his spirits, his
breathing anew, his cheering up. Now amid this conclave of ṛsịs is
Nārada, the proverbial “troublemaker for the welfare of the world,”
whose words of “comfort and encouragement”—”I hope yon feel like
celebrating now” (api kaccin modasi) (p. 169; 1.11d)—rather confront
Yudhisṭḥ ira with the terrible irony of his situation. Beset with grief
over the killing of Karṇa, whom Yudhisṭḥ ira did not know was his
elder brother until their mother Kuntī just revealed it over Karṇa’s
corpse (11.27.6–24), Yudhisṭḥ ira asks Nārada to tell all that brought
on Karṇa’s doom. Upon further hearing his mother confirm Nārada’s
ultimately elegaic account, Yudhisṭḥ ira says, “Damn the ksạ tra way”
(dhig astu ksạ tram ācāram) (7.5a), insists that “no one could make us
rejoice at being a king” (rājyena nāsmān kaścit praharsạ yet) (7.8ab),
remarks that “We are not dogs, but like dogs we greedily went after a
piece of meat! Now our piece of meat is gone; and so are those who
would have eaten it” (7.10), and soon announces to Arjuna that he
will depart for the forest, concluding, “You rule this wide earth. . . . The
kingdom and the enjoyment of it are no affair (artha) of mine” (7.40).
Vaiśampāyana then frames the continuation, ending this adhyāya:
“With this the King of Law, Yudhisṭḥ ira, stopped . . . ,” and beginning
the next with, “Now Arjuna, like a man who is not going to let an
insult pass (adhiksịpta ivāksạ mī), attacked him with harsh words and
346 chapter twelve
delivered a very a pposite speech” (8.1). This is the first of six speeches
by Arjuna, which open retrospective vistas on the Bhagavad Gītā. The
point, however, emerges only gradually. First, the two brothers are
differentiated with respect to two concepts that are basic to the Gītā:
their “purpose” (artha) and their “intellect” (buddhi). (Since Fitzgerald
translates buddhi variously, I will insert the word “intellect” to signal
that it is what the conversation is still about.)
Has Arjuna really been insulted? When a Mahābhārata narrator
describes someone with the particle iva in the sense of “like” or “as if,”
he signals what would appear to be so but also suggests that there is an
ambiguity to ponder. Clearly Yudhisṭḥ ira is throwing his troubles into
Arjuna’s lap along with some coded barbs, but it is not so clear he has
insulted him. My sense is that Arjuna needs to feel insulted, and g enerates
his initial outrage mainly over the dog reference. As the war’s most tena-
cious fighter, he could find this insulting, but Yudhisṭḥ ira may not have
intended it to be so.29 But appearing to take it as an insult, “licking the
corners of his mouth over and over again (srḳ kiṇī saṃlihan muhuḥ)”
(p. 182; 12.8.2d)—indeed, Vaiśampāyana would seem to be telling us
that Arjuna is looking rather like a dog—Arjuna insults Yudhisṭḥ ira’s
manhood in no uncertain terms: c onnecting Yudhisṭḥ ira’s “heights of
sissy feebleness” (vaiklavyam uttamam) (p. 182; 8.3b) with his decision
to renounce the kingship. Arjuna asks, how could you do this “unless
you are daft (buddhilāghavāt)” (p. 183; 8.4d), for which Fitzgerald sup-
plies a more literal gloss in the notes: “(except) from lightness of mind?”
(p. 682). Arjuna is calling Yudhisṭḥ ira a “mental lightweight,” whereas,
by comparison, that is what he himself is, although Yudhisṭḥ ira is too
polite to say so, for now.30
Further, as if to underscore not only Yudhisṭḥ ira’s addled “intellect”
but his complicity in the slaughter, Arjuna now asserts that Yudhisṭḥ ira
was “insensate with rage” (krodhamūrchitaḥ; p. 183; 12.8.5d) in killing
all the kings in the war. There are good grounds to read this not only
29 Yudhisṭḥ ira had said much the same before the war, but to Kṛsṇ ̣a: “With the
prevention of conciliation it becomes terrible like a trifle among dogs, as marked by
the wise: tail-wagging, a bark, a bark back, backing off, baring the teeth, howling, and
then the fight begins. The one who is stronger, having won, eats the meat, Kṛsṇ ̣a. So
it is too among humans; there is no distinction at all” (evam eva manusỵ esụ viśesọ
nāsti kaścana) (5.70.70–72).
30 Later he twice overcomes this reluctance in the closing words of his speeches: first,
in response to Arjuna’s third speech (p. 201; 12.17.19–20, 23d), and then in response
to his fourth (19.26); see below.
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 347
as an exaggeration but a deliberate distortion. The descriptor here,
krodhamūrchitaḥ, is never used for Yudhisṭḥ ira in the war or any-
where else, and it is also never used for Arjuna. Rather, it is used for
ill-tempered heroes and outraged Brahmans, cows, and mountains. In
other words, to be “insensate with rage” is behavior that is beneath the
most refined heroes, and it is never used to describe the chief antago-
nists of any war book. Moreover, in all of its other usages a speaker is
describing someone or something in a story. Only Arjuna uses it, this
once, to describe another character being spoken to directly as (having
been) “insensate with rage.” In this sense, in challenging the rest of the
text, Arjuna’s words are out of line: both formally, in being atypical,
and in what they claim to be true.
Arjuna then grounds his argument in what Yudhisṭḥ ira has declared
to be no “affair” of his, artha. He mentions that Yudhisṭḥ ira is now
“rejecting altogether both Law and Profit” (dharmārthāv akhilau hitvā)
(p. 183; 12.8.9c), and quotes the adharmic Nahusạ , of all people, in sup-
port of doing “cruel things” (nṛśaṃsā) while fighting for “wealth” (artha)
(8.11). For Arjuna, “he who has wealth has allies (mitrāṇi), he who has
wealth has relatives (bāndhavāḥ)” (8.19). His view soon becomes an
argument for dasyumaryādā, “robber morality” (8.25–31), as epito-
mized by his saying, “all that is better when they take it from someone
else” (kṛtsnaṃ tad eva ca śreyo yad apy ādadate ‘nyataḥ) (8.29cd),31
on which Fitzgerald notes, “These swashbuckling words are consis-
tent with the rest of Arjuna’s fierce assertion of self-interest” (p. 682).
More than this, Fitzgerald notes that when Arjuna introduces the idea
that Yudhisṭḥ ira should offer a horse sacrifice, he does so with words
clarified by the Bhagavad Gītā: Yudhisṭḥ ira should perform “a sacrifi-
cial rite, one made of substance (dravyamayo yajnāḥ)” (8.34a) rather
than “one done mentally,” citing BhG 4.33 (p. 682), where Kṛsṇ ̣a, with
the reverse emphasis, tells Arjuna, “better than the sacrifice made of
substance (śreyān dravyamayād yajnāt) is the sacrifice of knowledge
(jnānayajna).”32 The compound dravyamaya occurs nowhere else in
the Mahābhārata. On the face of it, either Arjuna is quoting s omething
31 Cf. Bowles, 109–10, making a more general connection with āpad, and n. 25
above on dasyumaryādā.
32 Here and below, for the BhG’s translation I quote from Franklin Edgerton, The
Bhagavad Gītā Translated and Interpreted, part I: Text and Translation (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1952). For the BhG text I cite the Pune Critical Edition
(6.23–40).
348 chapter twelve
he has remembered from the Gītā,33 which makes rather good sense
at this point in the Mahābhārata, or Kṛsṇ ̣a is made to quote Arjuna,
which makes no sense at all.
The Bhagavad Gītā and the Cheering Up of Yudhisṭ ḥ ira
This brings us then to the first matter on which I believe Fitzgerald points
us in an unfruitful direction: his idea that the Gītā is a c enturies-later
improvement on the arguments made now to Yudhisṭḥ ira. I propose
a different reading. What Yudhisṭḥ ira hears, among other advice, is a
cumulative argument introduced by Arjuna and carried forward by
Kṛsṇ ̣a and Vyāsa—these three, in fact, being the only ones present
who could know the Gītā’s contents—that recalls and evokes the Gītā.
But there is also one noteworthy but cogent omission: whereas Arjuna,
a prince and not a king, can be told before the war to act without the
desire for the fruits of his actions (which might be important in what
Fitzgerald considers to be the Gītā’s “improved” bhakti-yoga “solu-
tion” [pp. 140–41], although he does not mention it), Yudhisṭḥ ira, as
a king who has just won the fruits of a victory he has certainly desired,
must be spared that teaching.34 Indeed, were he told now to act with-
out desire for the fruits of his actions, he might just take it as an invita-
tion to head for the forest. Let us see how this works.
Arjuna’s second speech is not pertinent to this point. But his third,
beginning with an exaltation of the daṇḍa or rod of punishment that
would pertain primarily to a king, returns to matters that he would
seem to have learned from the Gītā, building up to a strong defense
of “rightful infliction of injury” (sādhuhiṃsā) (p. 198; 12.15.49c) or
“‘good’ violence” (Bowles, 110) in the name of world rectification,
divine precedent, and scaring people into behaving (15.1–55), and
then getting philosophical with, “The inner self of all creatures cannot
be slain, there is no doubt of that. When the Self is unslayable, how
33 Biardeau also remarks on a point in Arjuna’s early speeches where “L’enseignment
de la BhG a pris racine dans sa pensée” (2002, 2: 536; cf. 543–44).
34 See Vyāsa’s words to Yudhisṭḥ ira at 12.36.45: “You will get free of the evil you
incurred, king, because of the motive you had prior to acting (pūrveṇa hetunā)—either
you acted to effect a rescue by killing these men, or you did it because it was the duty
of kings” (p. 249). But I think better for option two would be the more straightforward
“. . . or because it was the act of a king (atha vā nṛpakarmaṇā).”
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 349
can anyone be slain by anyone?35 For, just as a man might move into
a new house, so does the soul arrive at various new bodies. Discarding
old bodies, it takes on new ones” (15.56–58b).36 Note that Arjuna does
not bring up the “warriors go to heaven anyway” argument (Kṛsṇ ̣a will
do this). Here he is giving Yudhisṭḥ ira a rather half-baked digest of
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s teachings on the sinlessness of the killer.
Between Arjuna’s second and third speeches, the twins and Draupadī
have chimed in, making it clear that along with Bhīma they are leaving
Arjuna to carry a joint message: Yudhisṭḥ ira should get his act together.
But Arjuna’s third speech brings Bhīma to intervene—it seems, to try
to soften Arjuna’s harshness: “You know Law, king. There is nothing
on this earth yon do not know. We are always trying to understand
what you do, but we never can” (p. 198; 16.2). He actually elevates
the discussion, pointing ahead: “Now a terrible battle with your mind
awaits you. A battle in which there is no need for arrows, nor allies
nor kinsmen: a battle you must fight by yourself” (p. 199; 16.20cd–21).
And he ends on an auspicious note while for the first time calling atten-
tion to Kṛsṇ ̣a: “Fortunately the wicked Duryodhana and his followers
have been killed in the war. Fortunately you have followed the lead
of Draupadī’s tresses. Worship as prescribed with a Horse Sacrifice
that offers good presents to priests. We are your servants (kiṃkarāḥ),
Pārtha, and so is the heroic Vāsudeva” (p. 200; 16.25.26).
Yudhisṭḥ ira responds to this with what Fitzgerald takes as “a kind
of soliloquy” (p. 694) in which “[t]he inner battle that Bhīma predicted
now takes place within Yudhisṭḥ ira” (p. 179). But this is unlikely. I
believe the portended inner battle is to last through the rest of the
Mahābhārata, but that it will be waged especially in Yudhisṭḥ ira’s
lengthy exchanges in the four anthologies—and that it thus should
not be identified with this following speech.37 Moreover, it is easier
to read the first half of Yudhisṭḥ ira’s response as addressed implicitly
to Bhīma and the second half to Arjuna. First Yudhisṭḥ ira speaks of
35 Mbh 12.15.56: avadhyaḥ sarvabhūtānām antarātmā na saṃśayaḥ/avadhye cātmani
kathaṃ vadhyo bhavati kenacit, Cf. BhG 2.30: dehā nityam avadhyo ‘yaṃ dehe sarvasya
bhārata/tasmāt sarvāṇi bhūtāni na tvaṃ śocitum arhasi.
36 Mbh 12.15.57–58b: yathā hi purusạ ḥ śālām punaḥ sampraviśed navām/evaṃ jīvaḥ
śarirāṇi tāni tāni prapadyate//dehān purāṇān utsṛjiya navān sampratipadyate; cf. BhG
2.22: vāsāṃsi jirṇāni yathā vihāya navāni gṛhṇāti naro ‘parāṇi/tathā śarirāṇi vihāya
jīrṇāni anyāni saṃyāti navāni dehī.
37 Note that Arjuna, in his fifth speech, can briefly refer to this process as still lying
ahead: “Now conquer yourself (vijitātmā . . . bhava)” (p. 213; 12.22.10cd).
350 chapter twelve
kingship in relation to matters of desire and appetite, concerns typi-
cal of Bhīma. Then he contrasts those who have buddhi with those
who are mandabuddhi or “dull-witted” (p. 201; 12.17.19–20), and
concludes, “Everything is based in understanding” (sarvam buddhau
pratisṭ ḥ itam) (17.23d). I believe these are indirect barbs at Arjuna’s
“intellect,” and that they show Yudhisṭḥ ira beginning to overcome
the politeness he has shown so far to Arjuna (see n. 30), which he
will do more emphatically after hearing Arjuna’s fourth speech.
Vaiśampāyana’s framing of Arjuna’s reply makes this the most likely
reading: “When the king lapsed into silence, Arjuna spoke to him
again. He was deeply pained by the king’s verbal darts, and he burned
with grief and sorrow” (p. 201; 18.1).
So stung, Arjuna’s fourth speech is rather a Lulu. This time he cites
a story about Janaka and his wife, but he quotes the wife rather than
Janaka, a famous Upanisạ dic royal sage whom the epic presents as an
authority on buddhi.38 After Janaka became a wandering bald beggar,
his wife found him in a deserted place and berated him about his tak-
ing up the mendicant life. Arjuna says she made “reasoned arguments”
(hetumad vacaḥ) (12.18.6d), the least persuasive of which, certainly, is,
“Having given up brilliant Royal Splendor, you look like a dog” (śriyaṃ
hitvā pradīptāṃ tvaṃ śvavat samprati vīksỵ ase) (18.12ab)—perhaps a
payback on the dog theme, since Arjuna is implying that Yudhisṭḥ ira
would soon look like Janaka were he to set forth as announced. The
queen dislikes beggars: a king should give, not take, and he should
support the different types of mendicants, including those “lacking
understanding (abuddhayaḥ)” who abandon not only the three Vedas
but their children (18.32).39 Arjuna says that Janaka was sung of as
a great sacrificer in this world, but then got confused (18.35–36). As
noted, Yudhisṭḥ ira now no longer holds back. No doubt it is Arjuna’s
imputation that Yudhisṭḥ ira is like those “lacking understanding” that
finally pushes him over the edge, for that is the ground on which he
defends himself. Whereas Arjuna knows “only the teachings on fight-
ing” (yuddhaśāstravid eva) (p. 204; 12.19.8a), Yudhisṭḥ ira claims to
know a great variety of śāstras down to their deepest subtleties (19.1–4,
38 As in his instructions bearing on liberation to Vyāsa’s eldest son Śuka (12.313.40–
41, 47).
39 No doubt implying Buddhists, Jains, and other heretic (nāstika) mendicant orders.
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 351
16–17, 22, 25).40 Moreover, he closes with the claim that he has the
“intellect” to pursue this course: “O son of Kuntī, one who knows Law
always attains the universal principle (mahat) through asceticism; he
finds it (mahat) through the higher mind (buddhyā); he gains hap-
piness through renunciation” (p. 205; 19.26). Clearly, one can derive
from this that Yudhisṭḥ ira is prepared to implement some of the
basic “proto-Sāṃkhya” teachings of the Gītā without Kṛsṇ ̣a having to
impart them.
At this impasse, the Ṛsị Devasthāna “interrupts the family colloquy”
(p. 205) for two adhyāyas (12.20–21) to explain some of Arjuna’s more
general points in new ways, and to do some initial tablesetting for the
contents of the Śānti and Anuśāsana Parvans—advising Yudhisṭḥ ira to
be “resolved upon Rājadharma” (21.16b); telling him “it is extremely
difficult to get to Extinction (nirvāṇam); there are many obstacles to
it” (p. 212; 21.16ef); and that one of the ways royal sages reach heaven
is by their dedication to making gifts (21.17b). No doubt encouraged
by this saintly backing, Arjuna now makes his fifth speech, which
Vaiśampāyana prefaces by describing Yudhisṭḥ ira as Arjuna’s “lord
(īśvaram), whose mind was sunk in depression (visạ ṇṇamanasam)”
(p. 213; 22.1).41 As Bhīma did, Arjuna admonishes Yudhisṭḥ ira, “now
conquer yourself” (22.10cd), but for Arjuna this means exalting
“ksạ tra Law” (ksạ tradharma) with all its brutal horrors and insisting
that Indra “who killed ninety-nine nineties of his own wicked kins-
men” (p. 213; 22.11cd) should be Yudhisṭḥ ira’s model. Upon Arjuna’s
finishing, Vaiśampāyana tells Janemejaya that Yudhisṭḥ ira “said noth-
ing. . . . so Dvaipāyana spoke” (p. 212; 12.23.1). Vaiśampāyana thus
frames Arjuna’s fifth speech as if it may have gone over the edge: cer-
tainly his “lord” Yudhisṭḥ ira’s depression was not going to be reduced
by hearing a near rant on ksạ tradharma. Yudhisṭḥ ira’s silence thus
makes Arjuna’s last words a segue for Vyāsa. Says Arjuna: “You should
not grieve one bit for anyone who departed in this way. . . . They all
went the furthest course, doing the ksạ tra Law, purified on the sharp
blades of weapons. What has happened had to be so (bhavitavyaṃ
tathā tac ca yad vṛttam) . . . for it was ordained (disṭ ạ m). . . . It could
not have been averted” (p. 213; 12.22.14–15). Here again, Arjuna is
40 Arjuna will soon cite only “tradition” (smṛtaḥ) (p. 213; 12.22.5b) rather than
śāstra or śruti.
41 The same verb vi-sạ d (√sad) also describes Arjuna’s “despondency” three times
at the beginning of the Gītā (1.28b, 2.1c, and 2.10c).
352 chapter twelve
restating ideas he could recall from the Bhagavad Gītā, notably BhG
11.33c: “they have already been slain long ago.” Vyāsa, the author by
whom all this was “ordained” just as it was by Kṛsṇ ̣a, will now find a
better way to put these ideas into words suitable for Yudhisṭḥ ira.42
Beginning, “This statement of Bībhatsu’s is completely true,
Yudhisṭḥ ira” (pp. 213–14; 12.23.2ab),43 Vyāsa opens a foray that leads
to three exchanges with Yudhisṭḥ ira in six adhyāyas (12.23–28), rein-
forcing Arjuna’s topics, but with a different kind of voice. For one
thing, he hooks Yudhisṭḥ ira into asking his first leading question (24.1)
since he asked Nārada about Karṇa. Second, as already suggested,
Vyāsa speaks with an implied authorial voice: “Rejecting household-
ing and going to the forest is not what is prescribed [or “ordained”:
vidhīyate] for you” (p. 214; 12.23.3cd). And when Yudhisṭḥ ira despairs
to the point of saying he will fast to death, and asks that all bid him
adieu, “Vyāsa stopped him (vyāso nigṛhya),” saying, “I will declare to
you once again what has already been said: This was fated (disṭ ạ m
etad), lord. . . . As the Creator has made you [or “as you are issued/
created by the Disposer”: yathā sṛsṭ o ‘si . . . dhātrā] for deeds, O son
of Kuntī, do them. Your perfection will come from that. You are not
your own master all by yourself, king” (p. 224; 12.27.26d, 27cd, 32).
Note how author/creator resonances emerge here: Yudhisṭḥ ira can
only be a perfect character by overcoming his resistance to doing
what the author/creator disposes. It is in this vein that Vyāsa carries
forward Arjuna’s presentiments of ideas from the Gītā. In fact, it is
while quoting another gītā of King Senajit (12.26.13), on how Time
(cf. BhG 11.33) with its “inevitable turning” (paryāyaḥ . . . dustaraḥ)
(p. 220; 12.26.14) is the fundamental cause, that he says, “But men kill
other men, king, and then other men kill those first men as well. This
is the conventional wisdom, king. In fact, no one kills, no one is killed
(saṃjñaisạ̄ laukikī rājan na hinasti na hanyate). Some think ‘He kills,’
while others think ‘No one kills.’ The coming into being and passing
away of beings is fixed according to their basic natures (svabhāvatas tu
niyatau bhūtām prabhavāpyayau)” (26.15–16). First, Vyāsa reiterates
and presumably must think he improves upon Arjuna’s formulations
42 Cf. Hiltebeitel 2001a, 66–72, where I trace the “education of Yudhisṭḥ ira”
through Books 12 and 13 in relation to the author, but not in relation to the four
anthologies.
43 Vyāsa concurs with Arjuna also at 24.30.
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 353
on the unslayableness of the soul.44 Then he breaks into cosmologi-
cal ground that all but references the deity. Although the Gītā does
not use the Upanisạ dic yogic phrase prabhavāpyaya,45 it uses the more
straight-forward prabhavaḥ pralayaḥ twice: “Of the whole world I am
the origin and the dissolution, too (ahaṃ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ prabhavaḥ
pralayas tathā)” (7.6cd; cf. BhG 9.18c). The more yogic phrase could
be more suitable for Yudhisṭḥ ira (cf. Nārāyaṇīya 12.328.14).
It may also be that these words cue Arjuna to be reminded of
Kṛsṇ ̣a. Up to the middle of Vyāsa’s exchange with Yudhisṭḥ ira, Arjuna
“remained angry (kupite ca dhanaṃjaye)” (12.26.1b), but in his last
short sixth speech, his anger seems to be gone. Having heard Vyāsa
speak of the great, deep ocean of time with its monsters of old age
and death on which beings meet like floating sticks and into which the
world sinks (12.28.36, 43), Arjuna, at last, has words of sympathy for
his “drowning” elder brother. “He is drowning in an ocean of grief.
Revive his spirits (tam āśvāsaya), Mādhava. Everyone has been thrown
into doubt once again, Janārdana. O strong-armed hero, please make
his grief go away” (pp. 227–28; 12.29.2c–3). In asking Kṛsṇ ̣a to “revive
Yudhisṭḥ ira’s spirits,” Arjuna uses the same verb that describes the
moment when Kṛsṇ ̣a brings Arjuna back to his senses after showing
him his cosmic form in the Bhagavad Gītā: “Having thus spoken to
Arjuna, Vāsudeva again revealed his own (natural) form, and com-
forted (āśvāsayām āsa) him in his fright by once more assuming his
gracious aspect” (BhG 11.50). Of course this verb is found widely 46
and the dramas differ, but scenes of Kṛsṇ ̣a offering comfort surely cre-
ate echoes. In any case, it is Kṛsṇ ̣a who is now called on to “revive the
spirits” of Yudhisṭḥ ira, this being the first time the verb ā-śvas has
been used since those hundreds and thousands of Brahmans failed to
“comfort and encourage” Yudhisṭḥ ira when Nārada threw things off
course with his intolerable irony.
44 See n. 35 above. Again, pertinent BhG lines include 2.19cd: ubhau tau na vijāniyo
nāyaṃ hanti na hanyate; 2.20cd: ajo nityaḥ śāśvato ‘yam purāṇo/na hanyate hanaymāne
śarire; 13.28cd: na hinasty ātmanātmānaṃ tato yāti parāṃ gatim; and 18.17cd: hatvāpi
sa imāṃl lokān na hanti na nibadhyate.
45 Katḥ a Up. 6.11; see Patrick Olivelle, tr., The Early Upanisạ ds: Annotated Text and
Translation (New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1998), 401: “When the senses are firmly
reined in, that is Yoga, so people think. From distractions a man is then free, for Yoga
is the coming-into-being as well as the ceasing-to-be (yogo hi prabhavāpyayau).”
46 Vyāsa will soon tell Yudhisṭḥ ira, “Cheer (āśvāsaya) your brothers and your
friends” (12.34.22c).
354 chapter twelve
Now against this background of reverberations between these pre-
war and postwar scenes, nothing is more revealing than the ways that
Kṛsṇ ̣a “comforts” Arjuna in the one and Yudhisṭḥ ira in the other. For
Arjuna, just after Kṛsṇ ̣a’s terrifying theophany, Kṛsṇ ̣a brings com-
fort after terrifying the Terrifier (Bībhatsu, a name for Arjuna), his
dear and intimate friend (sakhi), into becoming his friend and devo-
tee (see BhG 11.41). With Yudhisṭḥ ira, who is never called Kṛsṇ ̣a’s
sakhi, Vaiśampāyana cues us to ponder something strangely different
that seems to combine a longstanding mutual affection, a respect for
each other’s “intellects,” and a knowing mutual deference between the
incarnate deity and the king:47 “The king could never disobey Keśava—
from the time he was a little boy, Govinda (bālyāt prabhṛti govindaḥ)
had been more dear to him than even Arjuna. The strong-armed
Śauri took hold of Yudhisṭḥ ira’s sandal-streaked arm that looked like
a pillar of stone and he spoke to him disarmingly (abhivinodayan)”
(p. 228; 12.29.4–6).48 Fitzgerald’s “disarmingly” is most felicitous,49
even (indeed especially) with Kṛsṇ ̣a taking hold of Yudhisṭḥ ira’s
pillar-like arm. But how is Kṛsṇ ̣a “disarming”? We may say with the
varied meanings of the verb vi-nud: disarm, divert, amuse, entertain.50
First he “disarms”: “Your face is beautiful, with your fine teeth and
sweet eyes. It is sincere, like a fully opened lotus awakened by the sun”
(p. 228; 12.29.7). Having begun in this extraordinary fashion, he tells
Yudhisṭḥ ira not to grieve, and quickly affirms the point noted earlier
that Arjuna left open: all the slain warriors have gone to heaven and
should not be mourned (8c–11), recalling Bhagavad Gītā 2.32 and 37.
Then, leaving Gītā references behind, he is suddenly diverting, launch-
ing new versions of two “old accounts” that were earlier told to Arjuna
by Vyāsa, in Yudhisṭḥ ira’s hearing, upon the death of Abhimanyu.51
Quoting Nārada, who is of course present, Kṛsṇ ̣a begins a significantly
47 Recall that Bhīma has told Yudhisṭḥ ira that Kṛsṇ ̣a, too, is his “servant” (12.16.
25–26).
48 It is not certain whether the little boy in question is Kṛsṇ ̣a, Yudhisṭḥ ira, or both
of them (one could read it as “from the time of their youth”).
49 Given that Monier-Williams suggests the implausible “gladdeningly” or “causing
to rejoice” for this very singular usage.
50 Indeed, Mahāvinodin, “The Great Entertainer,” is a name for Śiva.
51 About a resurrected boy-prince, in that context emphasizing that he could be
resurrected, unlike Abhimanyu, because he left the world without having fulfilled all
his virtues—a point pertinently made to Arjuna but not to Yudhisṭḥ ira, for whom it
could not be more irrelevant; see Alf Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle: Krishna in the
Mahābhārata (Albany: State Univ. of New York Press, 1990), 347–48.
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 355
different retelling of sixteen vignettes about great kings of old (in its
first telling called the Ṣoḍaśarājakīya or “Story of the Sixteen Kings”),
emphasizing that Nārada first told it to a king named Sṛñjaya to divert
him (12.29.14.cd, 15d) from mourning a young son when great kings
of old, far greater than his son, had met their ends (29.16–136). Then,
quite incredibly in these circumstances, Kṛsṇ ̣a turns from diverting
Yudhisṭḥ ira to amusing and entertaining him. Recalling how Sṛñjaya
had to convince Nārada that he had indeed been paying attention dur-
ing these rather tedious vignettes (29.137–39), Kṛsṇ ̣a saves his first
mention of the boy’s name for Nārada’s closing words: “I will give
you once again the dear departed boy Suvarṇasṭḥ īvin [“Excretor of
Gold”] . . .; he will have a golden navel and will live a thousand years”
(p. 236; 29.141).
As the next adhyāya begins, this has been enough to hook Yudhisṭḥ ira
into asking his next lead-in question,52 and moreover his first set of
questions (five of them) of which the last is: “And I want to know if
‘Excretor of Gold’ was merely Suvarṇasṭḥ īvin’s (sic) name, or was he
really an ‘excretor of gold (kañcanasṭḥ īvī)’?” (p. 237; 12.30.3). I propose
that this is an early experiment in alternating what the Rāmāyaṇa calls
rasas (1.4.8), with this first brief flicker of humor (hāsya)53 being an
alternance on Yudhisṭḥ ira’s underlying “stable aesthetic emotion” of
grief (śoka).54 In short, Krṣ ṇ ̣a has comforted Yudhisṭḥ ira by lifting his
spirits for the first time since the war, if only momentarily, into a bit
of shared humor. Moreover, once Krṣ ṇ ̣a has said the line about slain
warriors going to heaven, it is as if he has turned to humor to divert
Yudhisṭḥ ira from Gītā matters such as they have been covered so far
by Arjuna. Krṣ ṇ ̣a now continues with some amusing background to the
“Excretor of Gold” story as it bears on Nārada, and then suggests that
52 Omitting the rhetorical and unanswered questions he asks of Vyāsa about his
involvements in the killings of Droṇa, Karṇa, and Abhimanyu (12.27.17ef-19ab).
53 Granted that humor is proverbially difficult to recognize in another language and
culture, and even more so to translate in a two-thousand-year-old text, it would seem
that if we consider the span covered in this translation it would resurface toward the
end of the Rājadharma where Yudhisṭḥ ira hears explicitly of moments of smiling and
laughing in the Tanu story (12.125.18, 126.1 and 126.46), then again when he listens
to the gallows humor of “The Conversation Between a Vulture and a Jackal” (12.149)
in the middle of the Āpaddharma, and that such passages prepare us for his own first
spontaneous smile (161.40d) in the convivial side-conversation he has with his brothers
and Vidura in the Āpaddharma’s next to last unit—leaving aside a few formal smiles
in brief exchanges.
54 See n. 28 above.
356 chapter twelve
Yudhisṭḥ ira ask Nārada for the rest of the story since Nārada witnessed
all that happened (30.42). When Yudhisṭḥ ira obliges rather unex-
pansively (31.1cd), it seems that he is once again getting morose. As
Vaiśampāyana reports, once Nārada has finished, “The grieving King
Yudhisṭḥ ira kept silent, and the ascetic Krṣ ṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana, who knew
the fundamental truth of Law, spoke to him” (p. 241; 12.32.1), again.
Kṛsṇ ̣a thus leaves it to his co-ordainer Vyāsa to deliver the final
authoritative statement on the pertinence of the Gītā’s teachings to
Yudhisṭḥ ira. Vyāsa speaks sternly of Law, assuring Yudhisṭḥ ira that
what he has done through war falls within it, and when Yudhisṭḥ ira
protests his guilt for so many deaths, Vyāsa offers four (Fitzgerald,
however, says five [209]) perspectives on what accounts for action:
the Lord,”55 man, chance, and karma (32.11). Focusing on the king’s
use of the rod of punishment, Vyāsa says Yudhisṭḥ ira is blameless
from each perspective, but gives the greatest attention to the first and,
his own, the fourth. On the first, he begins, “When men who have
been commanded by the Lord (īśvareṇa niyuktāḥ) do a good or bad
deed, the consequences of that deed go to the Lord. For obviously if
a man were to chop down a tree in the forest with an axe, the evil
would belong to the man doing the chopping and not at all to the axe”
(pp. 241–42; 32.12–13). As in Bhagavad Gītā 11.33d, a king using the
daṇḍa, like Arjuna taking up his weapons, would, like the axe, be the
“mere instrument” (nimittamātram) of the Lord. Vyāsa concludes that
from this standpoint, “It would not be right, son of Kuntī, that one
should acquire consequences effected by another. Therefore assign it
to the Lord (tasmāc ca īśvare tan niveśaya)” (p. 242; 12.32.15). Here,
as applied to a king’s use of the daṇḍa, one may detect echoes of the
Gītā’s bhakti yoga such as Kṛsṇ ̣a details it soon after telling Arjuna to
“be a mere instrument”: “But those who, all actions (karmāṇi) casting
on Me, intent on Me, with utterly unswerving discipline meditating
on Me, revere Me, for them I am the Savior from the sea of the round
of deaths become right soon, son of Pṛthā, when they have made their
thoughts enter into Me. Fix thy thought-organ on Me alone. Make
thy consciousness enter into Me (mayi buddhiṃ niveśaya); and thou
shalt come to dwell even in Me hereafter; there is no doubt of this”
(BhG 12.6–8). In each case there is the imperative niveśaya plus a loca-
55 Fitzgerald points out that the Lord “might be interpreted to signify a person’s
‘master’ or ‘boss;’ but admits that this does not match other epic usages (p. 709).
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 357
tive construction applied to casting one’s karma on God. But whereas
Kṛsṇ ̣a recommends this to Arjuna as a bhakti yoga technique, Vyāsa
leaves it as a theoretical option for Yudhisṭḥ ira’s “intellect” to ponder,
and, with Kṛsṇ ̣a standing by, soon gets to his own recommendation.
What he believes, he says, is that since karma always has good or bad
consequences, Yudhisṭḥ ira should do his own dharma (svadharma)
and take advantage of “expiatory measures” (prāyaścittāni), “or you
will roast when you die” (pretya taptāsi) (p. 242; 12.32.20–24)!
Yudhisṭḥ ira envisions falling “headfirst into hell” (33. 11cd) much
as Vyāsa has just warned him, but rather than expiatory measures, he
says he wants to free himself by fierce tapas, closing with a curious
line, “Grandfather, tell me about some especially good hermitages”
(āśramāṃś ca viśesạ̄ ṃs tvam mamācaksṿ a pitāmaha)” (p. 243; 33.12cd)!
Is this desperation or is he keeping his sense of humor? Yudhisṭḥ ira
can hardly expect Vyāsa to tell him about lovely forest retreats. The
author and this seemingly incurable protagonist are at loggerheads. But
it is not exactly a throwaway line either, since upon hearing it Vyāsa
marks something significant, perhaps seeing an opening, since tapas
and prāyaścittas are not irreconcilable. Says Vaiśampāyana, beginning
the next adhyāya, “After listening to what Yudhisṭḥ ira said, the seer
Dvaipāyana, who had made a shrewd assessment (samīksỵ a nipuṇam
buddhyā)”56 of him, responds with what Fitzgerald rightly flags as “an
intricate and important sermon” (p. 209), which he summarizes nicely
though mentioning only this much as regards what I now discuss:
“invoking the ksạ triya Law and Time (Time in its lordly form uses
beings to slay beings), he tells Yudhisṭḥ ira that those killed were villains
with wicked intentions, while Yudhisṭḥ ira is still virtuous since he was
compelled to do what he did” (p. 209). Examined more closely, we see
that Vyāsa makes these connections by building upon pertinent mat-
ters from the Bhagavad Gītā that reconcile the first and fourth options,
while also mentioning the third, chance,57 that he just presented in his
previous speech: “You were not their killer (na tvaṃ hantā), nor was
56 Fitzgerald, p. 243; 12.34.1c. At 13.57.6c Vaiśampāyana uses the similar parīkśya
nipuṇam buddhyā to describe Bhīsṃ a’s scrutiny of Yudhisṭḥ ira and frame a key familial
turning point in Book 13 (see 13.57.42–44).
57 “Once you understand that the origination of a man has no special cause, and
that his annihilation occurs at random (yadṛcchayā), then grief and joy are pointless”
(pp. 243–44; 12.34.11). Kṛsṇ ̣a mentions “chance” in the Gītā twice: “Presented as mere
luck (yadrc̣ chayā), an open door to heaven—happy the warriors . . . that get such a fight”
(2.32); “Content with getting what comes by chance (yadrc̣ chālabhasaṃtusṭaḥ), passed
358 chapter twelve
Bhīma, nor Arjuna, nor the twins. Time, in its characteristic revolu-
tion (kālaḥ paryāyadharmeṇa), took the life of those men (dehinām).58
They were destroyed by Time, Time who has no father or mother, who
treats no one kindly (na yasya mātāpitarau nānugrāhyo ‘sti kaścana),
who is the witness of creatures’ deeds (karmasāksị prajānām). This
[war] has merely been the instrument of Time (hetumātram idam
tasya kālasya);59 when it slays beings by means of other beings, that
is its form as Lord (tad asmai rūpam aiśvaram).60 Realize that Time
has deeds for its bodily form (karmamūrtyātmakaṃ viddhi)61—it is
witness62 to deeds good and bad, and it yields its fruit later in Time,
giving rise to pleasant and unpleasant things” (p. 243; 12.34.4–7). In
effect, rather than being a revelation by Kṛsṇ ̣a, Vyāsa offers a revela-
tion of and about this Kṛsṇ ̣a who is standing by.63 Continuing to offer
this depersonalized Gītā theology in the deity’s presence,64 Vyāsa turns
to what Yudhisṭḥ ira should derive from it: “Consider your own good
character, your vows and your special observances; yet you were made
to act and approach such deeds as those by fate (vidhinā). Just as an
beyond the pairs (of opposites), free from jealousy, indifferent to success and failure,
even acting he is not bound” (4.22).
58 Uses of dehin, “embodied one,” for the soul are prominent in BhG 2.11–30 at
2.13, 22, and 30, where, along with one usage of the equivalent śaririn (2.18), they
occur without usage of ātman—a feature Mislav Ježić has taken as evidence that
BhG 2.11–30 forms the Gītā’s “first sāṃkhya layer,” and one prior to the Gītā’s later
philosophical unfoldings; see Przemyslaw Szczurek, “Some Remarks on the So-Called
Epic Layer of the Bhagavadgītā,” in Stages and Transitions: Temporal and Historical
Frameworks in Epic and Purāṇic Literature (above n. 10), 60 and 70 (for discussion).
My point, however, would be only that dehin is one of the Gītā’s signature terms;
cf. also BhG 2.59;3.40; 14.5–8, 17.2.
59 Cf. BhG 11.32a, 33d.
60 Cf. BhG 11.3cd: “I desire to see Thy form as God, O Supreme Spirit (drasṭụ m
icchāmi te rūpam aiśvaram purusọ ttama)”; 11.8–9: “ ‘But thou canst net see Me with the
same eye of thine own; I give thee a supernatural eye; behold My mystic power as God
(yogam aiśvaram)!’ Saṃjaya said: ‘Thus speaking then, O king, Hari (Visṇ ̣u), the great
Lord of Mystic Power (mahāyogeśvaraḥ), showed unto the son of Pṛthā his supernal
form as God (paramaṃ rūpam aiśvaram).’ ” Cf. yogam aiśvaram at 9.5, and of course
BhG 11.31–33 (kālo ‘smi lokaksạ yakṛt pravṛddho lokān samāhartum iha pravṛttaḥ . . .)
on this rūpam/yogam aiśvaram as Time ripened to destroy worlds and beings.
61 Cf. BhG 9.4–10, where Kṛsṇ ̣a says (I paraphrase) that with respect to creation
and destruction (and thus Time), all beings (and thus their karma) are caught up in
his material nature (prakṛti).
62 See BhG 9.18a on Kṛsṇ ̣a as “witness (sāksị).”
63 On this effect, cf. Mārkaṇḍeya’s words to Yudhisṭḥ ira on Kṛsṇ ̣a’s having just sat
and listened to a cosmic narrative about him at 3.187.49–55.
64 Yudhisṭḥ ira later asks Bhīsṃ a to talk about this attendant Krṣ ṇ ̣a, for whom he and
his brothers have affection, at 13.126.1–6 (cited in the closing discussion below).
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 359
apparatus (yantra) fashioned by a carpenter is in the control of the
one who holds it, so the universe is driven by action that is yoked
to Time.65 . . . But now since falsehood snares your mind on this, king,
you are therefore commanded: ‘Perform expiation (prāyaścittam)
now’” (pp. 243–44; 34.9–10, 12). As Fitzgerald nicely observes, “As
they have all failed to persuade Yudhisṭḥ ira that he is not guilty of
wrongdoing, Vyāsa reluctantly tells him he must perform the expia-
tion” (p. 709). But note what Vyāsa does not and cannot tell him: to
act (or better, the impossible to have acted) without desire for the
fruits of his action. It is precisely because that course is closed off to
Yudhisṭḥ ira that prāyaścitta is required. Moreover, Vyāsa has once
again made his authorial “command” coincide with what is divinely
“ordained,” on which he offers a story as divine precedent. Demon-
strating from this tale that “the wise man must realize that there is
Right with the appearance of Wrong,” and urging that as “an educated
man (śrutavān)” Yudhisṭḥ ira should realize he is not going to hell, he
says, “Cheer (āśvāsaya) your brothers and your friends” (34.13–22).
Now making his point that Yudhisṭḥ ira is one whose karma was done
“unwillingly (anicchamānaḥ)” and with regret, he says the Aśvamedha
is the right expiation (34.23–26), offering advice that previews distinc-
tive events yet to occur in Book 1466 where the Aśvamedha will be
performed. And he concludes on the note of Yudhisṭḥ ira’s current
worries about hell: “perform your Law, son of Kuntī, and what you
experience after death will be better” (p. 245; 34.36).
Thus ends Vyāsa’s turning-point speech. Borrowing a trope from
Karṇa’s prewar depiction to Kṛsṇ ̣a of the forthcoming “sacrifice of bat-
tle,” let me take the gamble that if I review matters so far as a postwar
“sacrifice of baseball,” terrible as it sounds at first, it will be illuminat-
ing and to the point.67 Arjuna has been the starting pitcher. He pitched
well enough, delivering fastballs he learned from Kṛsṇ ̣a in the Gītā
(he hadn’t mastered the curves). But he fell behind, and Devasthāna
(technically, a set-up man), Kṛsṇ ̣a, and Nārada took over the middle
innings, the latter two tossing a few bloopers. And when the home
65 Cf BhG 18.61: “Of all beings, the Lord in the heart abides, Arjuna, causing all
beings to turn around (as if) fixed in a machine (yantra), by his magic power.”
66 Yudhisṭḥ ira should do “soothing things even for babies still in the womb,” fore-
shadowing, or even announcing, the birth of Pariksịt, now still in the womb, and he
should replace the defeated kings, even by princesses (p. 245; 12.34.32–33).
67 My apologies to readers beyond the baseball world, for some of whom cricket
might be still a bit pertinent.
360 chapter twelve
(gṛhastha) team finally took a precious lead, Vyāsa brought himself in
as a would-be closer. But now a (double) question from Yudhisṭḥ ira
(only his third) does not allow the victory so quickly: “What are the
deeds that require expiation? What does a man do to get free? Tell
me, grandfather (kiṃ kṛtvā caiva mucyeta tan me brūhi pitāmaha)”
(p. 245; 12.35.1). Vyāsa has hooked Yudhisṭḥ ira on the help to be
offered by expiation, over which Vyāsa reigns as the acknowledged
expert. But expiation will never be enough for Yudhisṭḥ ira, and with
this “mucyeta” in the second of these two questions—which could just
mean “freed of sin by expiation,” but which in standing alone suggests
far more68—he ties the score, hinting that it may be necessary to satisfy
this restless king with a Moksạ dharma Parvan. Vyāsa will now make
a few more pitches and then bring in the long reliever Bhīsṃ a for the
anthologized extra innings.
The Four Anthologies
This brings us then to the matter of growth-rings through Books 12
and 13, on which I believe Fitzgerald points us again in an unfruitful
direction. Not only is it a matter of the shaky evidence for this within
the “four anthologies,” but the fact that the head topics of all four
sections are anticipated in the exchange Yudhisṭḥ ira continues with
Vyāsa just before the latter brings in the long reliever. I have begun
with the teaser just noted: Yudhisṭḥ ira’s ambiguous mucyeta. But mat-
ters soon get more precise. First, and let us note that from this point
Yudhisṭḥ ira’s questions flow freely and can no longer be profitably
counted, “Yudhisṭḥ ira thought for a moment” and asked four ques-
tions, two about eating and two about giving (p. 249; 12.37.1–2). For
the rest of adhyāya 37, Vyāsa offers preliminary detail on these mat-
ters, but concludes concessively, “this is a large matter that had to be
learned in brief form (samāsena mahad hy etad śrotavyam)” (p. 252;
37.43cd). This leaves giving to be taken up—cumulatively, I would
suggest—in numerous other contexts, and especially as what will be
the major agenda of the Dānadharmaparvan in Book 13.1–152, where
giving will repeatedly intersect with food, particularly in connection
68 Literally translated, the question would read, “And having done what may one
be freed?”
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 361
with giving food to Brahmans.69 But now, having focused matters
on expiations and food, offering this foretaste on gifts, and leaving
the subject of “release” at the ambiguous placeholder we have noted,
Vyāsa has now successfully revived Yudhisṭḥ ira’s appetite for things
of this world. And so it is that in the next adhyāya Yudhisṭḥ ira opens
by asking Vyāsa the agenda-setting question for the next two sub-
parvans of the Śāntiparvan: “Great sage, blessed one, most excellent
of brahmins, I wish to hear at length (vistareṇa) all the Laws for kings
(rājadharmān) and all the Laws of the system of the four Orders of
society, and how a king determines policy during times of distress
(āpatsu)” (p. 252; 12.38.1–2). Appreciating that Vyāsa’s discussion of
expiations and food “answers my interests exactly and cheers me a
little,” he nonetheless comments that “Doing what is Lawful and rul-
ing as a king are constantly in opposition—I think about this all the
time, and yet this opposition baffles me” (pp. 252–53; 38.3c-4). As
Vaiśampāyana immediately suggests, it would be just such a response
that Vyāsa has been awaiting, for at this very moment, “having glanced
at Nārada (nāradaṃ samabhipreksỵ a),”70 he tells Yudhisṭḥ ira, “If you
wish to hear the Laws in their entirety, approach Bhīsṃ a (śrotum
icchasi ced dharmān akhilena . . . praihi bhīsṃ am)” (p. 253; 38.5c, 6c).
It would seem to me that these anticipations of all four antholo-
gies, which Vyāsa has probably just referred to as “the Laws in their
entirety,” would be significant at this pivotal moment in the text. Let
us note that in three of the four cases, there is specific attention to the
volume needed to treat the topics: giving and food are “a large mat-
ter” that cannot be addressed now; and rājadharma and āpad are what
Bhīsṃ a will shortly speak to “at length” and in sequence. I take this
as evidence that the plan for Books 12 and 13 is condensed here, and
note that this segment is not one that Fitzgerald includes among those
he considers to be late. Nor does he highlight or consider any of these
69 Intermittently at first (e.g., 13.9.12, 23.39, 24.49, 35.1–2, where the preeminent
subjects are cows and women, including the gift of a bride [44]), and then at full bore
after Vaiśampāyana describes a happy exchange between all the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī
at 57.42–44 and Yudhisṭḥ ira makes giving his next primary question at 58.1–2 (see
especially 13.62, 65.53–63, 66, 93.1–2, 94–95, 113.7–28 [Brḥ aspati is the speaker during
a surprise visit from heaven (112.4–114)], 116, and 122.10–16).
70 Note that at 12.38.27, when Yudhisṭḥ ira gets up to enter the city, Arjuna, Kṛsṇ ̣a,
Devasthāna, and Vyāsa are the four who are said to have persuaded him “along with
the others.” Nārada would seem to be only among the others, his cogent contributions
having been to set things in motion, to follow Kṛsṇ ̣a’s cues on the story of “Gold-
Excretor,” and to receive this glance from Vyāsa.
362 chapter twelve
apparent references to what is to come, at least the last two of which
seem to me to be beyond question.
I thus believe there is a stronger case to be made for reading Books
12 and 13 whole, as part of the Mahābhābrata’s total design and earliest
inspiration, than an adhyāya-by-adhyāya and anthology-by-a nthology
approach envisions or allows. In this regard, recent approaches by John
Brockington and Adam Bowles, each generated by the study of one
anthology, suggest principles that may have some generalizable merit.
Brockington, in an article that seeks “to assess how far” the
Moksạ dharma “is just a random collection and how far its growth con-
forms to a definite purpose or reveals a clear structure,”71 mentions
Robert C. Zaehner’s view that “[t]he scheme of the twelfth book of the
Mahābhārata resembles” the Gītā in that the Moksạ dharma becomes
“increasingly theistic.”72 But Brockington cautions: “In so far as [Zaeh-
ner] regards the Nārāyaṇīya as its climax, such a view might possibly
be justified, but in reality the final passage of the Moksạ dharma is
the Uñcha-vṛtty-upākhyāna” (p. 72)—a unit, named after the ascetic
practice of “gleaning” food from the remains of the harvest, that tells
a puzzling story (or better, puzzle story) about the travels of a Brah-
man who has learned about the many doors to heaven. Brockington
then restates his opening caution as a conclusion (p. 81) after thrice
asserting the lateness of the Nārāyaṇīya (pp. 74, 78, 80).73 Considering
the parvan’s history as the only setting in which the Nārāyaṇīya’s the-
ism could be climactic, and weighing supposed evidence for both the
earliness and lateness of the tale of gleaning, he decides that the latter
“cannot easily be explained as a mere afterthought or appendix” and
that it “constitutes perhaps the strongest argument against a definite
structure to the Moksạ -dharma” (p. 82). But what if the Moksạ dharma
has a “common structure” with one of the other anthologies? The
Āpaddharma likewise ends with a puzzle story about a journey to the
north, the “Story of the Ungrateful Brahman” (12.162–67). Indeed,
71 John Brockington, “The Structure of the Moksạ -dharma-parvan of the Mahābhārata,”
in On the Understanding of Other Cultures: Proceedings of the International Conference
on Sanskrit and Related Studies to Commemorate the Centenary of the Birth of Stanis-
law Schayer (1899–1941), ed. Piotr Balcerowicz and Marek Mejor (Warsaw: Oriental
Institute, Warsaw Univ., 2000), 72.
72 R. C. Zaehner, “Utopia and Beyond: Some Indian Views,” Eranos-Jahrbuch 32
(1963): 281–309, citing p.302.
73 But see Hiltebeitel, “The Nārāyaṇīya and the Early Reading Communities of the
Mahābhārata” (above, n. 21).
on reading fitzgerald’s vyāsa 363
each of these two puzzle narratives features a mysterious guest who
has the word dharma (Rājadharman, Dharmāraṇya) in his name.74
Let me suggest that the puzzle story is one of the anthologies’ multi-
genre options, and that it is used in these two transitional instances to
mark significant movement in the Bhīsṃ a-Yudhisṭḥ ira dialogue. For
whereas Bhīsṃ a is postponing not only his death but his heavenly
ascent until the completion of the fourth anthology, and has cosmo-
logical puzzles to ponder on his own, Yudhisṭḥ ira is especially good
at such puzzles. Indeed, the ends of these two sub-parvans recall the
end of Book 3 where Yudhisṭḥ ira answers the Yaksạ ’s questions.75 This
said, I believe there is some merit to Zaehner’s attempt to trace a cur-
rent of theism. But it would not be one measured through any of the
text’s sub-units or its historical development, and for that matter it
would be not so much an increasing current (it barely trickles through
the Āpaddharma) as one that runs through Bhīsṃ a’s entire discourse,
with the deity always present and listening. This current reaches its
full strength in the Dānadharmaparvan when Yudhisṭḥ ira finally asks
Bhīsṃ a to describe this long-silent “Nārāyaṇa” (13.126.5–6), and,
after Bhīsṃ a obliges with a run of lauds and mostly theistic narra-
tives, Yudhisṭḥ ira finally addresses Kṛsṇ ̣a himself (13.144–46) before
Bhīsṃ a finishes.
Bowles, in his very strong recent dissertation on the Āpaddharma
(see n. 19), notes that “We have no way of knowing how much time
elapsed between the various chronological ‘layers,’” and that, as a
temporal marker, the term “later” is “indeterminate.”76 While offering
careful and cautionary arguments that some passages are inserted, he
develops his main argumentation and advance through the sub-parvan
74 Indeed, another puzzle story ends the main narrative in the Āśvamedhikaparvan
(14.92–93): apparently overheard by Yudhisṭḥ ira, it features two incarnations of
Dharma—one, again, a mysterious guest and the other a mysterious mongoose—and
addresses the question of whether a king’s giving in sacrifice is comparable to the
“pure gift (śuddhena tava dānena)” (14,.93.57a) elicited by Dharma. See Hiltebeitel
2001a, 20, 78, 156 n. 93.
75 Cf. Bowles, 304 on the episode of “The Yaksạ ’s Questions”: just as in the Yaksạ
story the questioning Yaksạ , who is ultimately Dharma, first appears in the form of
a crane (baka), in the story ending the Āpaddharma Yudhisṭḥ ira hears about a crane
named Rājadharman, evoking the name Dharmarāja for Yudhisṭḥ ira, and “drawing
(him) within the ambit of the very tale being narrated to him” (ibid.). The name
Dharmāraṇya (12,349.50), “Forest of Dharma,” coming second, could then deepen
this “draw.”
76 Idem, 5, 306.
364 chapter twelve
by readings that are attentive to design and interlinkages with the sur-
rounding “didactic corpora” and the Mahābhārata as a whole. On the
point in question, concerning the Āpaddharmaparvan and its two sur-
rounding anthologies, the Rājadharma and the Moksạ dharma, Bowles
writes, “A logic of action informs this structure, a logic that models
the proper duties of the royal life. A king’s desire for salvation must
follow the proper completion of his royal duty, or, rather, it follows
from the proper completion of his royal duty. The syntactic order of
the Śāntiparvan text . . . mirrors, therefore, the proper syntactic order
of the royal life and the proper order of the king’s concerns” (p. 297).
I believe Bowles has found the right terms here for us to deepen our
investigation of the fourth anthology: Would not dānadharma follow
moksạ dharma in “the proper syntactic order of the royal life”?77 I have
in mind, to begin with, that the Mahābhārata would be developing
this “further instruction” for kings as a Brahmanical counterpart to
the Buddhist (and not just Mahāyāna) dānapāramitā.
But it must be acknowledged that there could be such a thing as
oversympathetic reading. The Anuśāsanaparvan lies before us as a
virtual terra incognita. In resuming with the Śāntiparvan we have
the good fortune of renewing our acquaintance with the Chicago
Mahābhārata fresh with Fitzgerald’s stimulating hypotheses, and with
the excitement that it has returned as an old friend to stimulate us
with new questions that can continue to be explored under Fitzgerald’s
thoughtful and judicious editorship.
77 Notes 69 and 74 (and following) above are preliminary ones toward raising this
question.
iii. recent/early companion pieces

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
BHĪSṂ A’S SOURCES
Nearing the end of the Mahābhārata’s Śāntiparvan and its closing
Moksạ dharma sub-parvan, Bhīsṃ a is lying on his bed of arrows.
Immersed in instructing Yudhisṭḥ ira about virtually anything that
might make this grieving king a reluctantly willing one after the terri-
ble war, he comes to the story of Vyāsa and his son Śuka, and how the
latter fulfilled his penchant for moksạ , liberation. Toward the begin-
ning of this tale, relating how Vyāsa looked when he performed his
arduous tapas to beget Śuka, Bhīsṃ a pulls in a surprise witness:
And by the splendor of his matted locks like the crest of a fire, he
[Vyāsa] was seen to be blazing, possessed of immeasurable splendor.
Lord Mārkaṇḍeya said this to me. He always told me the deeds of the
gods here (Mbh 12.310.23–24).
Again, toward the end of the story, with Vyāsa understanding that his
son has set forth on the ‘supreme way’ (uttamām gatim), “filled with
affection, the father followed along behind” (320.18). Vyāsa himself,
“having risen to that supreme way of great yoga” (320.20ab), now trails
by only the ‘bare moment’ (nimesạ̄ ntaramātreṇa; 320.20c) that Śuka’s
mokșa has taken. But when he comes to the mountain his son has sun-
dered, Śuka has “gone to the other side.”1 At this point, Bhīsṃ a once
again clarifies his sources and the position of Vyāsa as author relative to
them: “The Ṛsịs then repeated to [Vyāsa] that act of his son” (320.21cd).
Bhīsṃ a thereby indicates who (beside Śuka) witnessed the wonder of
Śuka’s liberation, which Vyāsa had just missed, and thus how Bhīsṃ a
could have gotten this missing moment of the tale. Vyāsa heard it
from the witnessing Ṛsịs, who could have again included Mārkaṇḍeya,
who, in turn, could have been among those who could have told this
to Vyāsa, as well as the whole story to Bhīsṃ a. Finally, when Bhīsṃ a
concludes the story, he reassures Yudhisṭḥ ira with a double citation:
“The Ṛsị Nārada formerly told it to me, O king, and so did the great
1 I leave the metaphor to speak for itself here. For more extended discussion, see
Hiltebeitel 2001a, chapter 8 § D.
368 chapter thirteen
yogin Vyāsa, line by line amid conversations” (saṃjalpesụ pade pade;
320.40). Thus Nārada too could have been among the witnessing Ṛsịs
who told Vyāsa about his son’s departure. Unlike Mārkaṇḍeya and the
generic Ṛsịs, however, Nārada and Vyāsa are both actors within the
Śuka story. Bhīsṃ a is thus careful to show that his sources include not
only such insider testimony as theirs, but, where necessary, that of out-
side observers like Mārkaṇḍeya and the Ṛsịs—celestial Ṛsịs, that is: a
category that would, however, also include not only Nārada but, from
time to time, Vyāsa. We thus get the impression that while Vyāsa is
one of Bhīsṃ a’s sources,2 Bhīsṃ a pulls the story together from varied
sources particularly where it is necessary to “supplement” the author.
Bhīsṃ a’s citation apparatus is certainly not typical of a Parry-L ordian
oral epic, for which Albert Lord posits authorly anonymity and “the
Tradition” itself as author (1960). Indeed, neither does the phrase “line
by line” suggest improvisational oral formulaic verse. But of course we
are not in the “main story,” to which certain scholars, drawing on oral
theory, have looked for their evidence of the Mahābhārata’s earliest
oral strata. We are in the Moksạ dharma section of the Śāntiparvan,
which is among those “didactic” tracts that such scholars deem to be
literary and late.3 There, as James L. Fitzgerald has argued, Bhīsṃ a
seems to draw on some kind of library—whether oral or written4—
that a “redactor” has “edited” into Bhīsṃ a’s mouth as the bulk of a
“Moksạ dharma anthology”5—leaving room also for eighteen segments
“here and there” that Bhīsṃ a
2 Bhīsṃ a repeats Vyāsa’s teachings to Śuka (12.224–247; Bedekar 1966: ccxiii–ccxv),
narrates their father-son story (12.3 10–320), and cites him at several other points:
12.200.3: as an authoritative source on Visṇ ̣u-Kṛsṇ ̣a, along with Nārada, Asita
Devala, Vālmīki, and Mārkaṇḍeya; 247.1; 327–338 (Nārāyaṇīya citings); 13.18.1–3
(he recited Śiva’s thousand and eight names on Mount Meru to obtain a son: i.e.,
Śuka); 13.25.5–12 (on Brahmanicide); 13.118–120 (story of the worm who became
a Ksạ triya); 13.121–123 (conversation with Maitreya); 13.146.23 (composed the
Śatarudrīya).
3 For an overview, see Brockington 1998: 3, 18–28, 120–127.
4 Fitzgerald admits that it is “necessary to bear in mind the uncertainty that
exists about the nature of these ‘texts’ prior to their existence in a fixed text of the
Mahābhārata. If the texts anthologized in the MDh come from an improvisational oral
tradition, then the whole concept of the ‘history’ of these ‘texts’ is highly problematic,
if not completely inappropriate” (Fitzgerald 1980: 331, n. 1). As I have indicated,
however, oral theorists are not interested in Bhīsṃ a’s orations.
5 See Fitzgerald 1980: 279–280, positing “that there existed in the Brahman tradition
a number of texts concerned with aspects of the mokșa perspective that were neither
Veda nor sūtra,” “unquestionably by different authors,” and that someone “collated
[them] into an anthology.”
bhīṣma’s sources 369
asserts on his own authority, that is without attributing the substance
of the text to some sage or other like Bhṛgu or Manu, either by for-
mulaic introduction or by some statement within the text (Fitzgerald
1980: 320).
Fitzgerald (1980: 320–321) suggests that these eighteen units may be
“original contributions of the redactorial agent.” Although I believe
Fitzgerald exaggerates the likelihood of a high percentage of preexist-
ing texts, and underestimates the creativity of the “redactorial agent,”
which was probably a group or committee, the line of inquiry remains
promising for the Śāntiparvan6 and other portions of the Mahabharata.
Here, however, I am interested not so much in Bhīsṃ a’s anthology as
his methods of citation; not so much in his bibliography as his foot-
notes. It must suffice for this essay to note that, as elsewhere in the
Mahābhārata, the two together describe an intertextual situation that
probably evokes the composition of written texts that would have been
known and used orally (see Narayana Rao 1993: 95).
Until recently (see now Brockington 2000), Fitzgerald and Annette
Mangels seem to be the only scholars to have given attention to
Bhīsṃ a’s sources: Fitzgerald while focusing on the above-mentioned
anthology thesis; Mangels on the Mahābhārata’s narrative technique.
In his dissertation on the Moksạ dharma, Fitzgerald notes that Bhīsṃ a
often cites “old accounts” through an oft-repeated formulaic line:
atrāpy udāharantīmam itihāsaṃ purātanam; ‘On this they recite/cite/
quote this old account.’7 One can learn a good deal from these passages.
Counting slight variants,8 in his Śānti- and Anuśāsanaparvan oration,
Bhīsṃ a uses (or quotes others using) the full-line formula eighty-eight
of the one hundred and six times it is used in the entire epic.9 He also
sometimes precedes his references to itihāsaṃ purātanam with other
6 As Fitzgerald (1980: 76) observes, the Rājadharma subparvan of the Śāntiparvan is
more “strongly motivated” than the Moksạ dharma in terms of narrative momentum.
7 The translators (Ganguli 1884–96; van Buitenen 1973; Fitzgerald 1980, etc.) have
taken udāharanti variously as “they cite,” “they quote,” “they narrate,” “they recite,”
and itihāsaṃ purātanam as “old or ancient history, story, tale, legend, or account.” It
appears to be best to keep a sense of ambiguity to the verb, which may deliberately
write orality into the text. For itihāsaṃ, “account” seems the best single term for its
neutrality.
8 Replacing api eleven times with eva.
9 There are eleven usages prior to the Śāntiparvan, seven in the Śāntiparvan
before Bhīsṃ a gets going, and none after he has finished in the Anuśāsanaparvan.
These and other such figures come from using Muneo Tokunaga’s machine-readable
Mahābhārata text (1994).
370 chapter thirteen
tag phrases, most typically atra te vartayisỵ e’ham itihāsaṃ purātanam,
‘On this I will tell you an old account.’10 Looking only so far as through
the Śāntiparvan, sometimes the “old account” goes unattributed, as
if it were something Bhīsṃ a knows first hand (e.g., 12.189.6; 263.2).
But most often (sixty-three times), it is a “dialogue” (saṃvāda). Yet it
can also be a story (kathā, 202.6; ākhyānam, 248.11), speech (vacaḥ;
168.8), discourse (vādam; 194.2), or “words” (vākyāni; 253.1).11 And
it can be something that was first “proclaimed” (proktam)12 or more
often “sung” (gītam).13 Without calling it an “old account,” Bhīsṃ a
also quotes gāthā verses that were “sung” (gītāḥ) by Brahmā about
royal treasuries (12.134.1), and an upanisạ d that was uttered by king
Yayāti (12.94.38). Most interesting are cases where the account is fur-
ther sourced. Bhīsṃ a quotes Dhṛtarāsṭṛa quoting Nārada (12.124.18).
He recalls an “old account” sung by Maṇkin, who quotes Śuka and
in turn cites another “old account” sung by king Janaka of Videha,14
leading to the recollection of a quatrain-collection (padasaṃcayam)
of a certain Bodhya (12.171.4–57). He also tells the “old account” of
what Vyāsa told Śuka when asked about creation and the divisions of
time (12.224.6). The chronology of the citations is obscure but plau-
sible in these cases,15 but it is baffling how Bhīsṃ a could have heard
an “old account” that the Brahman Indrota, a descendent of Śaunaka,
told to the Pāṇḍavas’ descendant Janamejaya, which includes verses
sung by Yayāti (12.148.9) and Satyavat (148.14–15) and a quotation
of Manu (148.26).16 Places can also be surprising. Bhīsṃ a heard the
“old account” of the Muni and the dog whose heart had gone human17
in Rāma Jāmadagnya’s ascetic grove (tapovane), where it was told by
10 Mbh 12.168.28; 224.6; 288.2; 291.7; 298.3; and with variants: 146.2; 277.2;
13.40.2.
11 Covering such ground in discussing the Mahābhārata’s terms for stories and their
antiquating appeal to Vedic authority, see Gombach 2000: 109–122.
12 Mbh 12.124.18, by Nārada; 227.2, by Arisṭạ nemi to Sagara. See Minkowski 1989:
402, 411–412 on pra + vac/proktah, with its Vedic overtones, in “the sense of an
original utterance.”
13 Mbh 12.78.6 (the only case I can see with a refrain); 12.93.2; 170.2; 171.4; 171.55;
251.1; 268.3; 270.13.
14 His aphoristic saying, “Unlimited is my wealth, of which nothing is mine. If Mithilā
burns, nothing of mine burns” (12.171.56)—also quoted at 12.17.18 and 268.4.
15 I take up the case of Śuka in Hiltebeitel 2001a.
16 See Belvalkar 1954: 939: there must be two Janamejayas.
17 Mbh 12.117.10: manusỵ avad gato bhāvah. On this wicked tale, see Hiltebeitel
2001a, Chapter 5.
bhīṣma’s sources 371
some of the most excellent Ṛsịs (yad uktaṃ ṛsịsattamaiḥ; 12.117.1–2).
And he heard the story (kathā) of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s power, and why he
took animal forms, from Kaśyapa in the hermitage of Mārkaṇḍeya
(reached by Bhīsṃ a during a hunt), amid “hosts of Munis seated by
thousands” (12.202.4–6). The epic does not tell us when Bhīsṃ a vis-
ited Rāma Jāmadagnya’s ascetic grove18 or Mārkaṇḍeya’s hermitage.
Most expansively, when Yudhisthira asks to hear about the infallible
Puṇḍarīkāksạ ,19 Bhīsṃ a replies that he heard about this topic (artha)
when Rāma Jāmadagnya was speaking,20 and from Nārada, Vyāsa,
Asita Devala, Vālmīki, and Mārkaṇḍeya (12.200.3–5)! Let us make
four observations: 1) as referenced, time and space are expansive;
2) Bhīsṃ a’s citations, sources, and authorities have a certain Vedic
ring to them;21 3) his sources tend to proliferate when he is expatiat-
ing on themes of bhakti, notably to include not only Mārkaṇḍeya and
Nārada but Vālmīki; and 4) one need not accept the commonly held
view that bhakti passages are “late.”22
Fitzgerald also suggests that whenever Bhīsṃ a answers Yudhisṭḥ ira’s
questions by citing his “old accounts” and numerous authorities, the
combination “stand[s] out . . . as an overall frame” (Fitzgerald 1980:
281–282). Yet he limits his notion of a “frame” here to the “garland
of Yudhisthira’s questions” and Bhīsṃ a’s often-oblique responses.
Fitzgerald finds this frame too uncoordinated (p. 295), pattern-
less (p. 322), and “thin and weak to be a text of any importance in
its own right” (p. 293). But he does not explore its relation to the
epic’s encompassing frames:23 Vaiśampāyana’s first public narration
of the Mahābhārata at Janamejeya’s snake sacrifice (the inner frame);
Ugraśravas’s retelling of the epic to the Ṛsịs of the Naimisạ Forest
(the outer frame); and Vyāsa’s original teaching of the Mahābhārata
to Śuka and his four other “disciples” (the outermost, or authorial,
18 Bhīsṃ a did not visit Rāma Jāmadagnya’s hermitage when he fought him over
Ambā; they met at Kuruksẹ tra (5.177–178), and in any case did not pause over
stories.
19 “The one with the eyes of the Puṇḍarīka Lotus,” a name of Visṇ ̣u-Kṛsṇ ̣a.
20 Or muttering, jalpataḥ (12.200.3).
21 See notes 11 and 12 above, and note 26 below.
22 Cf. note 2 above. Vālmīki is also mentioned among the coming-and-going celestial
and sometimes Visṇ ̣u-attending Ṛsịs at 2.7.14, 3.83.102, 5.81.27, 99.11, and 13.18.7.
23 Though he seems to be aware of the possibility: “A few of the framing passages
do express an awareness of the rest of the collection . . .” and “coordination among the
introductory frames” (Fitzgerald 1980: 294).
372 chapter thirteen
frame)—this third frame being indispensable to understanding all of
the epic’s other frames.24
Mangels, however, takes interest in Bhīsṃ a’s citations against just
this background. She diagrams these encompassing frames as a “box-
structure” (Schachtelstruktur; Mangels 1994: 42–44) that has been
affected, as will be noted, by late purāṇic “corrections” (p. 144). What
interests her is these frames’ relation to two long interior frame seg-
ments that she places within the same “box”: the bard (sūta) Saṃjaya’s
war narrative, and Bhīsṃ a’s post-war oration. As Mangels notes, in
both cases the interior frame narration or oration is made possible by
imparting the “divine eye” or divya caksụ s to the speaker: to Saṃjaya,
by Vyāsa himself;25 to Bhīsṃ a, by Kṛsṇ ̣a with Vyāsa authoritatively
present.26 Noting that it is possible to obtain the divine eye on one’s
own by means of yoga, as Yudhisthira claims to have done,27 Man-
gels takes Saṃjaya’s and Bhīsṃ a’s cases to show, contrastively, that, in
not letting either of them get the divine eye on his own, the redactor
(Epiker) indicates that he is not ready to risk leaving these characters
answerable for vast stretches of text to the odium of fiction.28 Indeed,
when Bhīsṃ a obtains the divine eye, Nārada attests to all the ancient
and celestial authorities Bhīsṃ a knows and can cite: he has seen the
gods, gratified the divine Ṛsịs led by Bṛhaspati, learned variously
from the Asuras’ preceptor Uśanas, from such other Ṛsịs as Vasisṭḥ a,
24 A point I make in Hiltebeitel 2001a. On the Mahābhārata frame stories, see also
Witzel 1986; Minkowski 1989; Mangels 1994 (as cited below); Oberlies 1998; Reich
1998: 56–75; Hiltebeitel 1998b.
25 See Mbh 6.2.9–13; 16.5–10.
26 Mbh 12.52.15–22; see Mangels 1994: 99–100, 126, 148, Before Vyāsa’s presence
is mentioned, Kṛsṇ ̣a has already told Yudhisthira that Bhīsṃ a knows past, present,
and future (12.46.19); then, once we know that Vyāsa is there, Kṛsṇ ̣a adds that he
has bestowed on Bhīsṃ a from afar the “divine knowledge of seeing the triple-time”
(traikālyadarśanaṃ jnānaṃ divyam) by means of their mutual meditation on each
other (47.65). Moreover, Vyāsa hears from Kṛsṇ ̣a that whatever Bhīsṃ a says “will
stand on earth as if it were a declaration of the Veda” (vedapravāda), and that it will
have “validity” (pramāṇa; 54.29–30).
27 Mangels 1994: 137: by “the yoga of knowledge” (jñānayogena; 11.26,20). Actually,
the point could be challenged: it is presumably still Vyāsa who tells us that Yudhisthira
obtained the divine eye by yoga.
28 Mangels 1994: 148. Cf. pp. 99–101 and 111 on Vyāsa’s function as “Ordner,”
“einen ordnenden Geist” imparting his duties as author to authorize others’ (Bhīsṃ a’s,
Saṃjaya’s, Kṛsṇ ̣a’s. . .) fictions.
bhīṣma’s sources 373
Cyavana, Sanatkumāra, Rama Jāmadagnya, and Mārkaṇḍeya, and
from Indra.29
Mangels’s main interest, however, is in further contrasting Saṃjaya
and Bhīsṃ a. There are places where Saṃjaya seems to have the “divine
eye” before Vyāsa gives it to him for the war narration.30 He samples it
briefly when Kṛsṇ ̣a lets him see his theophany in the Kuru court.31 He
previews at least one of its powers when he discloses, with Vyāsa’s bless-
ing, Vāsudeva and Arjuna’s “thought entire.”32 And most importantly
for Mangels, he enters a trance to gauge for Dhṛtarāsṭṛa the strength
of the Pāṇḍava army.33 For Mangels, the first two passages result from
a bhakti overlay that subsumes Saṃjaya’s older self- sufficient bardic
powers under themes of the later purāṇic bardic tradition exemplified
by Vyāsa and Vaiśampāyana. In these two instances the “little Sūta
Saṃjaya” is pushed into the background34 and subordinated through
the “divine eye” itself—a “literary sediment of practical yoga tech-
nique” (Mangels 1994: 130), “a Buddhist pendant” (p. 137, n. 324), and
a belated addition to make Saṃjaya’s narration credible (pp. 117, 125,
131). But the third passage leads Mangels to “speculate”—in the name
of a recovery of the original bard—on a thoroughgoing “correction”
of the war books (p. 144). Meanwhile, in contrast to this recuperable
bard overlain by bhakti stands Bhīsṃ a.35 His provision with the divine
eye, says Mangels, is doubtless done to achieve a connection with the
dharma-texts (p. 99–100), and as a sign of the presence of “abstract
authors” appearing in the narrated figures (p. 45)—a notion she relates
29 Mbh 12.38.7–13. The case of Indra’s instruction is interesting. Whether it is at
the same point in Bhīsṃ a’s life or another, Bhīsṃ a not only learned from Indra but
“formerly,” when the gods were fighting the Asuras (6.21.9–11), he advised him, say-
ing, “Those who seek victory conquer not so much by strength and heroism as by
truth and non-cruelty (satyānṛśaṃsyābhyām), as also by dharma and enterprise.” See
similarly 6.15.38.
30 See Belvalkar 1947: 329–331; Mangels 1994: 97–98, 107, 113, 142–144.
31 Mbh 5.129.13; see Mangels 1994: 137.
32 Mbh 5.65.7d. Mangels (1994: 142–143) takes Saṃjaya as adapting to a hierar-
chy here, generally viewing bhakti passages as overlay (pp. 36–38, 44–48, 52, 83–88,
99–100, 144, 148).
33 Mbh 5.49.9–14: Saṃjaya heaves long sighs, faints, falls, and loses consciousness
before replying. See Mangels 1994: 143.
34 Mangels (1994: 143–144), for whom the “little Sūta” (pp. 107, 143) is Vyāsa’s
“protege” (Schützling; pp. 110, 123, 126); see further Mangels 1994: 26, 69–71, 97–129,
140–145.
35 Saṃjaya’s being a messenger (dūta) gives him a “home advantage” over Bhīsṃ a
and other narrators (Mangels 1994: 117).
374 chapter thirteen
to a Brahmanical overlay concerned with dharma (pp. 44–45, 52).
Mangels thus regards the divine eye to be a late literary effect in both
cases, but only in Saṃjaya’s does she argue that it is superfluous. Yet
Bhīsṃ a also anticipates one of his uses of the divine eye before he gets
it from Kṛsṇ ̣a. Noting how Mahābhārata narrators cite other narrators
(pp. 61–62, 65), Mangels recalls that midway through the war, Karṇa
learns that Bhīsṃ a knows from Vyāsa, Nārada, and Keśava (6.117.9)
that Karṇa is the son of Kuntī. Let us note that the two interior frames
intersect here: it is Saṃjaya reporting.
While the contrast between Saṃjaya and Bhīsṃ a is certainly valu-
able, I do not think that either takes us back to a pre-Mahābhārata tex-
tual situation: a prior oral bardic war-narrative in the case of Saṃjaya,
or a prior library in the case of Bhīsṃ a. But leaving these oral and
literary excavations aside, it is possible to find in the Mahābhārata
itself the source of Bhīsṃ a’s main sources. They come from his time
with his mother. Let us look at some key moments in the birth and
early life of Bhīsṃ a, paying attention especially to the ways his story
configures space and time and fashions the “chronotope” (Bakhtin
1981; Hiltebeitel & Kloetzli 2004) through which cosmological time
descends into dynastic time (see Chart). A methodological point here:
A. K. Ramanujan has a good impulse when he criticizes me for over-
emphasizing divine-human connections at the expense of “the archi-
tectonic complexity of the human action of the epic” (Ramanujan
1991a: 434, n. 4)—so long as we are willing to explore where that com-
plexity takes us in its own terms. The human action has cosmological
complexity.
There was once a king born of the Iksṿ āku lineage, a lord of the earth
known as Mahābhisạ , true-spoken and of true prowess. With a thousand
Aśvamedhas and a hundred Vājapeyas, he satisfied D evendra; and then
that lord obtained heaven, Then at some time the gods did homage to
Brahmā. The royal Ṛsịs were there and king Mahābhisạ (among them).
Then Gaṅgā, best of rivers, approached the G randfather. Her garment,
radiant as the moon, was raised by the wind. (Mbh 1.91.1–4.)
That is the setting. An Iksṿ āku or Solar dynasty king, Mahābhisạ , has
left earth for heaven to join the royal Ṛsịs there. He has done this in
the typically vast time of that place, measurable for now only by one
of the epic’s cunning narrative conventions:
bhīṣma’s sources 375
trahC
)*(
ratS
/
trahC
wolF
:secruoS
s’aṃsīhB
*
aḥṭsisaV
susaV
***
āġnaG
eniL
ranuL
eniL
raloS
ot
ạsihbāhaM * nevaeh
laitselec
seeS
deftil
* s’āġnaG ***
triks
ạsihbāhaM
tuoba
sesuM
:esruc
s’āmharB
,htrib
latrom
ạsihbāhaM
erofeb nruter
nac
eb
ot
susaV
sesruC
rof
)*(
aḥṭsisaV
yb
desruC
>
susaV
)*(
demmideb
eht
seeS
apītarP
ạsihbāhaM
nrob-bmow
ta
mih
ot
esolc
oot
gnimoc
nos
eb
ot sesoohc
bmow
a
ni
nrob
eb
ot ,nwad
>
fo
na
meht
edivorp
ot
āġnaG
ksA
bmow
suoicipsua
unatṃ
aŚ nos
s’apītarP
esoohC
meht
eris
ot
)nrob
tey
ton(
ni
snos
reh
worht
āġnaG
tsisnI
sa
efiw
s’unatṃ
aŚ
eb
ot
seergA
t’now
noitarotser
rieht
os retaw
”dnim
reh
no“
saw
ti
”gnol
os“
eb
susaV
eht
mohw
rof
,aṃsīhB
niater
lliw
unatṃ
aŚ
setalupitS
rieht
fo
8/1
ylppus
lliw
hcae
>
,nos
eno
eb
ot mih
gnisruc
tey ,ayrīv sselnos
376 chapter thirteen
).tnoc(
elbaT
*
aḥṭsisaV
susaV
***
āġnaG
eniL
ranuL
eniL
raloS
sih
no
stis
,apītarP
ot
sraeppA
ot
mih
gnitmorp
,hgiht
thgir
wal-ni-rethguad
sih
reh
ekam
nos
nrobnu-tey-sa
sih
rof
sih htiw
unatṃ
aŚ
seris
apītarP efiw dega
tcepxe
ot
unatṃ
aŚ
sllet
apītarP
eh mohw
namow
lufituaeb
a
noitseuq
ton tsum
rof
unatṃ
aŚ
htiw
syats
āġnaG
sih htiw
āġnaG
sknird
unatṃ
aŚ
ayāyrap
a
reh
seirram
dna
,)***( seye
ot
derotser
susaV
neves
tsriF
,snos
neves
tsrfi
reh
snworD
tsrfi s’unatṃ
aŚ snword
āġnaG
nevaeh
snos
ybab neves
aṃsīhB
ton
tub
dna āġnaG
snoitseuq
unatnaŚ
sevil
aṃsīhB
ybab
āġnaG
morf
sraeh
unatṃ
aŚ
sksa dna
,tnecsed
’susaV
tuoba
:aṃsīhB
tuoba
sralucitrap
rof
gnoma
llewd
tsum
eh yhw snamuh
a
sah
aṃsīhB
yhw
sllet
āġnaG
htrae
no
ynitsed
laiceps
bhīṣma’s sources 377
).tnoc(
elbaT
*
aḥṭsisaV
susaV
***
āġnaG
eniL
ranuL
eniL
raloS
s’aḥṭsisaV
elots
suayD
usaV
eTh
sih
rof
woc
gnidnetxe-htuoy
namuh
a
ot
evig
ot
efiw
ssecnirp
ni
suayD
desruC
a
ot
ralucitrap
gnoma
emit
gnol
on
htiw
snamuh
-aelp
ro
gnirpsffo
nemow
htiw
erus
dna
aṃsīhB
sekat
āġnaG
sraeppasid
fo
sretaw
eht
skcehc
aṃsīhB
>
.
.
.
aṃsīhB
steem
unatṃ
aŚ
sworra
sih
htiw
āġnaG
eht
sah
aṃsīhB
taht
slaever
āġnaG
htiw
,.cte
,sadeV
eht
deiduts
,sariġnA
,sanaśU
,)*(
aḥṭsisaV
ayngadamāJ
amāR
dna
aṃsīhB
,noob
s’unatṃ
aŚ
htiW
snruter
dna
,htaed
fo
emit
skcip
ecitslos
retniw
ta ykS/nevaeH
ot
emit
ralos
no
.
.
.
378 chapter thirteen
“at some time” (tataḥ kadācit), while Brahmā was receiving homage
from the gods with Gaṅgā among them, her garment, as radiant as the
moon, was raised by the wind (or by the wind god Vāyu) (tasyā vāsaḥ
samudbhūtam māruteṇa śaśiprabham). The poets have introduced us
to the luminous celestial Gaṅgā, her robe the Milky Way, and their
metaphoric range is the night sky where there are not only rivers of
stars but mighty winds,36 and where Ṛsịs, royal and otherwise, are stars
as well.37 Now, as Gaṅgā’s garment lifts,
The host of gods then lowered their faces. But the royal Ṛsị Mahābhisạ
looked at the river fearlessly. Mahābhisạ was disdained (apadhyāta) by
lord Brahmā,38 who said, “Born among mortals, you shall again gain the
worlds.” (Mbh 1.9 1.5–6.)
In a fairly widespread interpolation (1.111*), Brahmā also curses Gaṅgā
to join Mahābhisạ in this double destiny. But the Poona Critical Edi-
tion does well to show that this is superfluous: as we shall see, Gaṅgā’s
descent will be voluntary and amorous, and is not to be accounted for
by the insecurities of Brahmā. Mahābhisạ is able to choose the king,
Pratīpa of the Lunar dynasty, who will be his father, and it is curious
that his karmic crossing from the Solar to the Lunar line comes not
only after seeing Gaṅgā’s lunar radiance, but with a curse that follows
his unabashed glance up her skirt. Coming from the Solar line, with its
more regularly luminous courses, Mahābhisạ chooses his second royal
destiny in the line that will be marked henceforth, through his descent,
by its different kind of rhythmic waxing and waning time, and by the
outcomes of his own desire.39 Meanwhile,
The river, best of streams, having seen the king fallen from his firmness,
went away musing about him in her heart. Going on her path (pathi),
she then saw the celestial Vasu gods, their energy (ojas) smitten with
dejection, their figures bedimmed (vidhvastavapusạ ḥ). Having seen
36 As Vyāsa instructs Śuka, the celestial Gaṅgā is associated with the Parivaha wind,
the sixth of seven winds. When it is “agitated,” heavenly waters carry through the sky; it
abides, having diffused the propitious water of the celestial Gaṅgā (315.46). This would
seem to imply the diffusion of the celestial Gaṅgā or Milky Way by this wind, which
has also to do with the obscuring of the sun and the rising of the moon (315.47–48).
37 Mitchiner 1982; Hiltebeitel 1977a; 1998n.
38 If we look back from a purāṇic perspective, there is an emerging irony here, since
in purāṇic myth, Brahmā is often the prurient one disdained or punished for his gaze
(see e.g., Dimmitt & van Buitenen 1978: 34–35, 171; Hiltebeitel 1999c: 68–76).
39 Perhaps he even senses that a lunar line prince would have a better chance with
Gaṅgā than a solar line one. On the solar and lunar dynasties, see Thapar 1991.
bhīṣma’s sources 379
those forms (rūpān), then, the best of streams asked, “Why are your
forms lost (nasṭạ rūpātaḥ)? Is there tranquility among celestials?” The
Vasu gods said to her, “O great river, we were vehemently cursed by the
great-souled Vasisṭḥ a for a small fault. Foolishly indeed, we all formerly
came too close (atyabhisṛtāḥ purā) to Vasisṭḥ a, that best of Ṛsịs, when
he was seated concealed (prachannam) at twilight (saṃdhyām vasistham
āsīnaṃ) . . .” (Mbh 1.91.8–12.)
Saṃdhyām (accusative) with the root ās- implies “seated at twilight
prayers,” but refers also just to “twilight” itself: maybe Vasisṭḥ a was
praying, but this can also be translated, “. . . when Vasisṭḥ a was seated
concealed at twilight.” Since it has up to now been night, of the two
“twilights,” we must be talking about the dawn. Having started this
story “at some time,” we have moved on a little bit. The poets have
made vapus (‘figure’) and rūpa (‘form’) interchangeable. Both could be
translated ‘(beautiful) appearance’. What is happening at dawn, while
Gaṅgā goes along on her celestial path, is that the Vasus not only lose
energy due to a curse of Vasisṭḥ a, but that their appearance has been
“bedimmed”: an astronomical meaning that Monier-Williams (1899:
969) gives for vidhvasta. This could be suggestive as applied to the
“darkened” form/appearance of the chief Vasu of the story, Dyaus, the
old Vedic “Father Sky,” who will supply the primary divine substance
of Bhīsṃ a in the story’s resumption, which, as others have noted, is
on some points rather different.40 But first, why has Vasisṭḥ a cursed
the Vasus? The resumption will give us another answer, but this first
one is most intriguing. Vasisṭḥ a is interrupted while perhaps praying
or at least doing something at dawn, of course; but more than this,
he is “concealed,” “hidden” (prachannam). This would mean that the
Vasisṭḥ a star, one of the seven in the constellation of the Seven Ṛsịs
or Ursa Major, has become invisible at twilight.41 Moreover, the Vasus
“all formerly came too close”42 to him at this twilight. It sounds like
they nearly bumped into him. The resumption will tell us that when
these things happen, Vasisṭḥ a is at his hermitage on a side of Mt. Meru
40 Smith 1955: 91–96; Dumézil 1968: 178–180; van Buitenen 1973: 455, n. to
1.91.10.
41 See Witzel 1999: 13–14 and 17, n. 14, clarifying that “when we actually look at
the Big Dipper when it appears in the early evening even today; it moves towards the
north pole, surpasses it and sets in the west” (Witzel 1999: 14). Cf. Parpola 1994: 222,
241–243.
42 Atyabhisṛta: “having approached too much; having come too close” (Monier-
Williams 1899: 17, citing Mbh 1.3854, the present verse). See van Buitenen 1973: 216:
“we . . . passed by”; but “passed by” does not explain why Vasisṭḥ a would get angry.
380 chapter thirteen
(1.93.6). Meru is the cosmic mountain by which celestial movements
of the night sky are measured against alternately emerging earthly ori-
entations (Kloetzli 1983; Hiltebeitel 1999a: 293; 2001a, Chapter 8).
The Vasus now add that Vasisṭḥ a cursed them to be born in a womb,
and that his curse cannot be thwarted. Unwilling to “enter an inauspi-
cious human-female womb” (mānusị̄ṇāṃ jatḥ aram . . . aśubham), they
ask Gaṅgā to become a human woman (mānusị̄) whose womb, we must
assume, will for obvious reasons not be inauspicious. Gaṅgā agrees,
and asks them who among mortals they choose as their b egetter. The
Vasus pick Pratīpa’s son Śaṃtanu. Gaṅgā says, “Such is even my mind,
sinless gods, as you say. I will do his pleasure; that is your desire”
(1.91.17)—as Dumézil puts it, “La providence, on le voit, a bien fait les
choses, puisqu’elle aura pour partenaire sur terre celui qui a quelque
peu troublé son coeur” (Dumézil 1968: 179). The Vasus insist that
Gaṅgā “must throw his [Śaṃtanu’s (new)born sons into the water so
that our restoration will not take so long a time, O triple-world-goer”
(yathā nacirakālaṃ no nisḳ ṛtiḥ syāt trilokage; 91.18). What is not so
long a time for the Vasus will now begin to be measurable in human
years, with Gaṅgā linking the three worlds through which divine time
is now channelled into human time. Again she agrees, but with the
proviso that Śaṃtanu will retain one son. Each of the Vasus then
imparts an eighth of his vīrya (energy/manliness/sperm), and Bhīsṃ a
will thus be born from this collective energy 43 as “the son you and
he desire” (91.20d). But, add the Vasus, Bhīsṃ a “shall not reproduce
his lineage among mortals. Thus your son will be sonless, despite his
possessing vīrya.” With Gaṅgā’s agreement on this further point, the
“delighted” Vasus “went straight on as they intended” (9 1.21–22).
Gaṅgā then appears to Pratīpa out of the waters of the Ganges. Sit-
ting on his right thigh, she invites him to make love to her. He has
some scruples, but she has his attention. And because she chose his
right thigh, suitable for children and daughters-in-law, rather than his
left, where a wife would sit, he invites her to become his daughter-in-
law instead. Agreeing, and thereby virtually assuring this apparently
shrewd old king a son they both desire, Gaṅgā says,
43 The Vasus have put it “en cagnotte,” “in a kitty,” according to Dumézil 1968: 179.
bhīṣma’s sources 381
So by devotion to you will I love (bhajisỵ āmi)44 the famous Bhārata lin-
eage (kulam). Whoever are the kings of the earth, you45 are their refuge.
I am unable to speak the qualities that are renowned of your lineage in
even a hundred years; its straightness is peerless (guṇā na hi mayā śakyā
vaktum varsạ śatair api/kulasya ye vaḥ prathitās tat sādhutvam anutta-
mam). (Mbh l.92.12c–13.)
Fusing her descent with the destiny of the Lunar dynasty, she declares
that her love for its kings and their lineage will extend over measur-
able human years.
Telling Pratīpa the conditions he must impart to his son—who
must never question anything Gaṅgā does (92.14)—Gaṅgā d isappears
(92.16). Even though Pratīpa and his wife are old, he “burns tapas”
and “at a certain time” (etasminn eva kāle)46 Mahābhisạ is born as
their son, coming to be called Śaṃtanu (92.17–18). Although his prior
Solar dynasty identity is not specifically mentioned, his karmic car-
ryover is now made explicit: “And remembering the imperishable
worlds he had conquered by his own karma, Śaṃtanu was indeed
a doer of meritorious karma” (saṃsmaraṃś cāksạ yāṃl lokān vijitān
svena karmaṇā/puṇyakarmakṛd evāsīt śaṃtanuḥ kurusattama; 92.19).
We do not know, however, whether he remembers his moment of
audacity in gazing up Gaṅgā’s skirt.
Śaṃtanu becomes a young man, and Pratīpa, before parting for
the forest, describes the beautiful woman who may approach his son
and heir to the throne, and the conditions under which she will stay
with him:
“She is not to be questioned by you as to who she is or whose she is.
And whatever she does, she is not for you to question, sinless one. At my
command, she is to be loved as she loves you.” (Mbh 1.92.22–23b.)
And so once while he was hunting “along the Siddha- and Caraṇa-
frequented Gaṅgā” (92.25cd),47 young king Śaṃtanu
44 Share in/enjoy . . .
45 Plural: your dynasty.
46 This line-opener is used 48 times in the Mahābhārata, and by both Saṃjaya and
Bhīsṃ a.
47 Soon she will say similarly, “I am Gaṅgā, the daughter of Jahnu, frequented by
the hosts of great Ṛsịs” (1.92.49ab). Together, the two passages would thus describe
both her earthly and heavenly courses.
382 chapter thirteen
saw a superb woman whose figure had an intensive glowing (jājvalyamānāṃ
vapusạ̄ ) that was like the splendor of a lotus, faultless everywhere, with
nice teeth, adorned with divine ornaments, wearing a subtle cloth
(sūksṃ āmbaradharām), alone, and radiant as the calyx of a lotus . . . As
if drinking her with his eyes, the king was not satisfied (pibann iva ca
netrābhyāṃ nātṛpyata narādhipaḥ). (Mbh 1.92.25d–28.)
Śaṃtanu is still fixed by the gaze that got him into trouble as Mahābhisạ .
But more than this, what is it to drink this woman with one’s eyes and
not be satisfied if not a reminder that she is a river of the stars? Their
words of courtship include her Melusine-like requirements; and, as
their joys unfold,
by attachment to pleasure (ratisaktatvād), the king, seized by the qualities
of this foremost woman (uttamastrīguṇair hṛtaḥ), was not aware of the
many years, seasons, and months that passed (saṃvatsarān ṛtūn māsān
na bubodha bahūn gatān) (Mbh 1.92.41).
Meanwhile, in what is “not so long a time” for the eight Vasus,
Śaṃtanu sires them in Gaṅgā’s womb, and she throws the first seven
into the water, saying “I fulfill your wish” (92.43–44). Finally, with the
eighth, Śaṃtanu protests and Gaṅgā lets the boy live. This child will
come to be known as Bhīsṃ a. But, she says, “This stay (vāsa) of mine
is now exhausted in accord with the agreement we made” (92.48cd)—a
“stay of a round (paryāya-vāsa) [that] was done in the presence of
the Vasus” (92,55ab). She has thus been with Śaṃtanu for a paryāya:
a going or turning around; a revolving, revolution; a course, lapse,
or expiration of time (Monier-Williams 1899: 605). She tells Śaṃtanu
who she is, and briefly about Vasisṭḥ a’s curse of the Vasus, but Śaṃtanu
wants to know more about all this, including a new question: what did
Gaṇgadatta-Bhīsṃ a do to have to “dwell among humans” (93.2)? To
answer this, Gaṅgā resumes the story of the Vasus’ curse by Vasisṭḥ a.
Of these two narratives, I believe it is best to begin with the simple
recognition that the two versions are meant to be read together, from
which it will unfold that the second amplifies the first, but does not
erase its meanings or allusions.
As already noted, we now learn that Vasisṭḥ a’s hermitage is on a
side of Mount Meru (93.6). Gaṅgā also fills out what it might mean
that the Vasus “all formerly came too close” to Vasisṭḥ a: they stole
his cow, a “choice milch-cow of every desire” (sarvakāmadughāṃ
varām) who was born of Daksạ ’s daughter Surabhī and the celestial
Ṛsị Kaśyapa, and who roved freely through that forest of ascetics,
Munis, gods, and divine Ṛsịs. “At a certain time” (kadācit), the Vasus
bhīṣma’s sources 383
and their wives came to that forest and “roamed everywhere,” tak-
ing their delights. The wife of the Vasu Dyaus saw the beautiful cow
and showed her to Dyaus, who knew that she belonged to Vasisṭḥ a,
and that a mortal who drank her milk would have firm youth for ten
thousand years (93.18–19), Dyaus’ wife48 knew a deserving princess on
earth4948 for whom this cow and her calf would be just the right gift,
and asked Dyaus to bring them quickly (93.21–25). So together with
his brothers, Dyaus seized the cow. Gaṅgā also fills out what it might
mean that Vasisṭḥ a “was seated concealed at twilight.” Charged by his
wife to steal the cow, Dyaus “was unable to see the intense tapas of the
Ṛsị” (ṛsẹ s tasya tapas tīvraṃ na śaśaka nirīksịtum; 93.27cd). Perhaps
that relates to Vasisṭḥ a’s invisibility. But he was not seated, at least
when the cow was stolen. He was out gathering fruits (93.28b). It is
possible that Gaṅgā’s resumption unpacks and narrativizes Vedic allu-
sions in the first account: Twilight-Dawn (Usạ s) is a cow and has cows
that are identified with her rays. With Agni, and with the Sun,50 “the
Vasisṭḥ as claim to have first awakened her with their hymns” (Macdo-
nell 1898: 47); perhaps Dyaus, the Day-Sky,51 makes off with Vasisṭḥ a’s
ruddy-rayed bovine. In any case, back at the hermitage and missing
the cow, Vasisṭḥ a soon knew what had happened by his divine sight,
and cursed the Vasus to take on human births (93.30c–35). But when
the Vasus, knowing they were cursed, sought mitigation, he stipulated
that the seven Vasu accomplices would “obtain release after a year,”
but that the chief perpetrator Dyaus would “dwell in the human world
for a long time by his own karma” (. . . vatsyati/dyaus tadā mānusẹ
loke dīrghakālaṃ svakarmaṇā; 93.37cd) and have no human off-
spring, . . . [and] forsake the enjoyment of women” (93.36–39d). Gaṅgā
then recounts her promise to the Vasus, and concludes that only
Dyaus “will dwell a long time in the human world” (dyau . . . mānusẹ
loke ciraṃ vatsyati; 93.42cd). While Vasisṭḥ a sets the terms of time in
the story from above, Gaṅgā repeats them as they now bear on earthly
matters. Bhīsṃ a, the son of a king who switched from the solar to
the lunar dynasty, will live childless in the latter, and use the boon of
48 She does not seem to have any trait that would identify her as the Prthivī—Earth,
Dyaus’ Vedic wife.
49 This is Jinavatī, daughter of king Uśīnara.
50 See O’Flaherty 1981: 112–115, 179, 211 (ṚV 4.5.8–10; 1.92.4; 5.85.2).
51 Vedic Dyaus means both ‘heaven/sky’ and ‘day’. Usạ s is frequently identified as
his daughter (Macdonell 1898: 21). I do not find persuasive Dumézil’s attempt to link
Bhīsṃ a with the Scandinavian god Haimdallr (Dumézil 1968: 182–190).
384 chapter thirteen
being able to choose the time of his own death (svacchandamaraṇam;
1.94.94c), given to him by his father, to postpone his death to the
winter solstice, thereby getting back on solar time.
Meanwhile, however, Gaṅgā has one more surprise for Śaṃtanu.
This king who had finally spoken out to keep his eighth son even
though he knew it would mean losing his wife, is suddenly without
them both:
Having told this, the goddess disappeared right there (tatraivāntaradhīyata),
and, having taken that boy, she thereupon went as she wished (jagāmātha
yathepsitam). . . And Śaṃtanu, afflicted with grief, went then to his own
city. (Mbh 1.93.43, 45ab)
For Gaṅgā to disappear (antar-adhīyata)—literally, “to turn her mind
to what is inner,” “to vanish into herself”—in this manner conven-
tional to the epic’s gods and Ṛsịs, including the author, is of course to
return to her own element, the waters of the Ganges. In going with her,
Bhīsṃ a’s disappearance is almost like the drowning of his brothers.
But of course it is different too: he is alive, she has brought him with
her, and he will return to Śaṃtanu to begin his long life on earth.
Vaiśampāyana lauds Śaṃtanu’s pious rule, and resumes the story
with the conventional re-start mechanism, which brings the flow of time
back to the river: “At a certain time” (kadācit), hunting while “follow-
ing the river Ganġ ā,52 Śaṃtanu saw that the Bhāgīrathī had little water”
(94.21). Let us note how this name Bhāgīrathī evokes a connection
between Śaṃtanu and the Solar-line king Bhagīratha, who brings the
heavenly Ganġ ā down to earth: Śaṃtanu will meet Bhīsṃ a in a context
that implies the Ganġ ā’s descent. Wondering why “this best of streams
does not flow swiftly as before, he saw the occasion” (nimittam; 94.23):
. . . a shapely large good-looking boy employing a divine weapon like
the god Sacker of Cities was engaged with sharp arrows, having fully
stopped the entire Gaṅgā (kṛtsnāṃ gaṇgāṃ samāvṛtya śarais tīksṇ ̣air
avasthitam)! Having seen the river Gaṅgā obstructed with arrows in that
one’s vicinity, the king became amazed, having seen this superhuman
feat (karma dṛsṭṿ ātimānusạ m). Śaṃtanu . . . did not recognize that son
whom he had formerly seen only at birth. But he, having seen his father,
bewildered him by illusion (mohayāmāsa māyayā), and then quickly, hav-
ing totally confused him, disappeared right there (tatraivāntaradhīyata),
52 To follow the river probably means, as van Buitenen (1973: 223) has it, “down-
stream,” along its course.
bhīṣma’s sources 385
Having seen that wonder, king Śaṃtanu, suspecting it was his son, said
to Gaṅgā, “Show (him)!” Gaṅgā then, assuming a beautiful form, tak-
ing that well-adorned boy by the right hand, caused him to appear.
(Mbh 1 .94.21–29b)
The wonder of stopping the river with arrows is indeed amazing. One
finds the recurrent epic image of “showers of arrows,” with its implica-
tion of an equivalence between raindrops and arrows. But a river is not
separate drops. Bhīsṃ a is, of course, shooting arrows into his mother,
but it seems unlikely that we should connect this with the many ten-
sions with women that run throughout his and his father’s story.
Rather, I think Randy Kloetzli has a keen insight; “The arrows of course
are time (conceived as moments destroying motion/fluidity) and the
Ganges is eternity . . . or motion which brings eternity down into time”;
Ganġ ā descends as “the unifying fluid motion of time as motion which
dynastically results in progeny, lineages, etc.” (Kloetzli 2000). Bhīsṃ a’s
strange intervention marks the boundary over which celestial time and
human time can cross in different ways, but in which dynastic time will
henceforth play itself along with Ganġ ā’s loving devotion, but without
her or her son’s lineal descent. For she will not rejoin her husband,
and he will bear no offspring. Indeed, like mother like son; Bhīsṃ a has
learned to “disappear then and there” exactly as Ganġ ā did a few verses
earlier, and as other gods and sages do. And like her, he can be brought
forth, presumably from her waters, holding her hand.
Where then has Gaṅgā taken Bhīsṃ a for his upbringing? We may
now return to our opening question of Bhīsṃ a’s sources. Gaṅgā said
to Śaṃtanu,
“This is the eighth son, O king, whom you formerly sired in me. He
is yours, tiger among men; take him to your home. The energetic
one studied the Vedas and their limbs from Vasisṭḥ a (vedān adhijage
sāṇgān vasisṭ ḥ ād eva vīryavān) . . . And whatever scripture (śāstram)
Uśanas knows, that he knows entirely. And so too the son of Aṅgiras
[= Bṛhaspati], revered by gods and demons—whatever scripture he
knows, that too is wholly established in this one . . . together with its limbs
and appendages. That Ṛsị, unassailable by others, the scorching son of
Jamadagni—whatever weapon Rāma [Jāmadagnya] knows, that too is
established in him. This great archer, O king, skilled in artha and royal
dharma (rājadharmārthakovidam), is your own53 son, a hero given by
me—take him home.” (Mbh 1.94.31–36.)
53 Nijam could also be ‘my own’.
386 chapter thirteen
The poets do not overstate the matter. But clearly, Bhīsṃ a has been
brought up by the celestial Gaṅgā. She has taken him up to the stars,
near Mount Meru where he would have learned his Veda from
Vasisṭḥ a.54 Similarly, it would be through the same access given by his
mother that Bhīsṃ a would have been able to learn the śāstras, their
limbs and appendages, divine weapons, and artha and rājadharma
from Uśanas, Bṛhaspati, and Rāma Jāmadagnya. It will be recalled
that Nārada attests to a similar list of Bhīsṃ a’s sources—Bṛhaspati,
Uśanas, Vasisṭḥ a, Cyavana, Sanatkumāra, Rāma Jāmadagnya, and
Mārkaṇḍeya—at 12.38.7–13, when Bhīsṃ a gets the divine eye.
Bhīsṃ a’s time with his mother need not account for all the sources he
cites in the Śānti- and Anuśāsanaparvans. When he cites Dhṛtarāsṭṛa,
for instance, it would be an earthly recollection from later in his life.
But this youthful education accounts for the time and place of many
of Bhīsṃ a’s sources. And it shows a certain consistency between the
didactic frame of the Śānti- and Anuśāsanaparvans and an important
foundational narrative of the Ādiparvan.
54 Perhaps Vasisṭḥ a’s involvement in Bhīsṃ a’s Vedic instruction implies a follow-
up from his having cursed Dyaus to become incarnate in Bhīsṃ a, who has in effect
recycled himself from heaven to earth to heaven, and now back to earth, courtesy of
his triple-world-going mother Gaṅgā.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
NAHUSẠ IN THE SKIES: A HUMAN KING OF HEAVEN
As Mircea Eliade has observed, the ritual systems connected with the
seasonal renovation of the New Year and the coronation of a king
“pursue the same end—cosmic renewal. ‘But the renovation accom-
plished at the coronation of a king had important consequences in the
later history of humanity. On the one hand, the ceremonies become
movable, break away from the rigid framework of the calendar; on the
other, the king becomes in a manner responsible for the stability, the
fecundity, and the prosperity of the entire Cosmos. This is as much as
to say that universal renewal is no longer bound to the cosmic rhythm
and is connected instead with historical persons and events.’ ”1 There
are also myths and legends, particularly about primal kings, which the-
matize this transition from “ontology” to “history.”2
In India, as far as I can see, there is no counterpart to the wide-
spread Indo-European pattern in which the primal kings represent,
in sequence, the emergence of the three functions.3 But there are two
kings who come at least in the Mahābhārata to be associated with
especially significant foundational events in the Kṛta Yuga. These are
Nahusạ and Yayāti, who from the Vedas through the Purāṇas were
regarded as a stable father-son pair among the primal kings.4 By the
time of the Mahābhārata, they are placed with Nahusạ ’s father Āyus
near the beginnings of the Kuru dynasty, but with two main variants
1 Mircea Eliade, Myth and Reality (New York: Harper & Row, 1963), pp. 40–41,
quoting from Eliade, “Dimensions religieuses du renouvellement cosmique,” Eranos-
Jahrbuch (Zurich, 1960), 28: 269 ff.
2 See Eliade, Myth and Reality, pp. 108, 110.
3 Most recently, William T. Magrath, “The Athenian King List and Indo-European
Trifunctionality,” Journal of Indo-European Studies 3 (1975): 173–74; Georges Dumézil,
From Myth to Fiction: The Saga of Hadingus (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1973), pp. vi–xi.
4 Georges Dumézil, The Destiny of a King (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1973), p. 18, sums up the Vedic data; cf. A. A. Macdonell, ed., Kātyāyana’s
Sarvānukramaṇī of the Rig Veda (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1886), p. 35, explaining
the tradition that Manu Sāṃvarana, Nahusạ , and Yayāti were seers of successive por-
tions of ṚV 9.101 by linking them genetically. Inconsistencies in the names prior to
Nahusạ do not justify two Nahusạ -Yayāti pairs; see V. G. Rahurkur, The Seers of the
Ṛg Veda (Poona: University of Poona, 1964), pp. 226–29.
388 chapter fourteen
about their more distant forbears. In one tradition the list includes
Atri, Soma (Moon), Budha (Mercury), and Purūravas (son of Budha
and Manu’s daughter Ilā)—thus drawing to their line the title “Lunar
dynasty,” which becomes standardized in the Harivaṃśa and Purāṇas5
but is also well attested in the epic.6 In the other, given twice in the epic’s
Ādiparvan (1.70.13–30; 90.7–9), Atri, Budha, and Soma are unmen-
tioned, and Ilā, Manu’s son, is both father and mother to Purūravas
(1.70.16). It is therefore curious that the well-developed independent
legends which the Mahābhārata and Purāṇas tell about Nahusạ and
Yayāti involve so little direct narrative continuity or cross-referential
comment. As Michel Defourny has observed, their relationship plays
no part in any version of the Yayāti story other than the one in the
Padma Purāṇa,7 and that is an account which freely alters the legend
in ways which other versions totally ignore.8 But Nahusạ and Yayāti
are not indifferent to each other. Thanks to the two recent studies
of the Yayāti legend by Dumézil and Defourny,9 we have a clear and
complex picture of Yayāti that can enlighten us at several points about
the story of his father.
The Nahusạ Legend in Context
There are numerous references to Nahusạ in the epic, and his name is
known in the Ṛg Veda, though with no clear lore attached.10 In addi-
tion to a brief résumé of his reign in the Ādiparvan (1.70.24–28), the
5 See Walter Ruben, Krishna: Konkordanz und Kommentar der Motive seines
Heldenlebens (Istanbul, 1944), pp. 16–24.
6 See 3.177.6 and 12.329.31 (on Nahusạ ); 5.147.3 ff. (on Yayāti); 3.147.3 (on Bhīma);
7.119.4–6 (on Sātyaki). All Mahābhārata citations are from the Poona Critical Edition;
only Mahābhārata references are given without title reference.
7 Michel Defourny “Le Mythe de Yayāti dans la littérature épique et purāṇique,”
(doctoral thesis, University of Liège, 1973), pp. 62–63, 229–30.
8 See ibid., pp. 52, 62–71.
9 See nn. 4 and 7 above. The reader must consult these works, from which I can
only summarize the following: Dumézil emphasizes Yayāti’s role as a “first king,”
partitioning the earth among his five sons with one at the center, differentiating the
three functions, and articulating a full complement of royal virtues; Defourny delin-
eates the “the cosmic function” of Yayāti’s royal role as mediator between dharma and
adharma, Ksạ triyas and Brahmins, Devas and Asuras, and the three worlds of heaven,
earth, and the Underworld.
10 See n. 4 above, and bibliography and discussion in A. A. Macdonell and
A. B. Keith, Vedic Index of Names and Subjects (1912; Delhi, Motilal Banarsidass
1967), 1: 438–39.
nahusạ in the skies: a human king of heaven 389
epic tells his story in three full-length narratives: a detailed, somewhat
rambling and inconsistent account in the Udyogaparvan (5.11–17),
a short prose version in the Śāntiparvan (12.329.29–41) that seems
to show a hand bent on smoothing out inconsistencies and exalt-
ing brahmins,11 and a Bhṛguized account in the Anuśāsanaparvan
(13.101.44–103.37) bent on exalting Bhṛgu.12 The Āraṇyakaparvan
(3.176–78) also has recollections of the episode by Nahusạ after his fall
and the completion of his curse. The Udyoga and Śānti set the legend
as the sequel to Indra’s sin-ridden-slayings of Viśvarūpa and Vṛtra,
and the Anuśāsana—probably implying that background—is told to
illustrate the importance of ceremonially offering garlands, incense,
balis (food offerings), and, above all, lights. Though I have discussed
the legend elsewhere (see n. 11), it deserves a closer look. I shall con-
fine myself to the Mahābhārata’s versions,”13 and follow them together
in their main narrative blocks.
Nahusạ ’s earthly reign and selection as Indra’s replacement. For rea-
sons which vary, the human Nahusạ is requested by the gods and Ṛsịs
to “protect the kingdom in heaven” (5.11.4). In the Udyoga it is for his
śrī (5.11.1), “beauty” or “prosperity” (in a king they go together); the
Śānti mentions his dharma and connection with the Lunar dynasty
(12.329.31) as apparent qualifications; and the Anuśāsana cites his
tapas and the various rites (karman) he performed well both on earth
and, for a time, in heaven (13.103.2–9). But his energies must be aug-
mented before he can rule in heaven. In the Udyoga, he complains
that he is too lacking in “power” (balam: 5.11.3 and 7; śakti: 5.11.3) to
protect the gods, and all the gods and chief Ṛsịs promise that he will
rule “aided by our tapas” (4). More specifically they say: “When gods,
11 See my The Ritual of Battle: Krishna in the Mahābhārata (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1976), pp. 233–35, nn. 13–15, 17–19. I agree with Dumézil, The
Destiny of the Warrior (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970), p. 25, that the
Udyoga inconsistencies point to precious and “archaic” retentions. Opposed, see Adolf
Holtzman, “Indra nach den Vorstellungen des Mahābhārata”, Zeitschrift der Deutschen
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft [hereafter ZDMG) 22 (1878): 309–10; Holtzmann, “Der
heilige Agastya nach den Erzählungen des Mahābhārata,” ZDMG 34 (1890): 593.
12 See V. S. Sukthankar, “Epic Studies, VI: The Bhṛgus and the Bhārata: A Text-
Historical Study,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (hereafter
ABORI) 18 (1936): 49, 54–56; Holtzmann, “Agastya,” p. 594.
13 The story is first told in the Mahābhārata and is intimately connected with the
epic; see my Ritual of Battle, pp. 232–37, 242–43, 279–80. The different epic variants
also suggest textual developments within the epic. Purāṇic versions follow the epic in
the main and add as a sort of doublet the story of Nahusạ ’s brother Raji (both usurp
Indra’s throne); see Ruben (n. 5 above), pp. 22–24.
390 chapter fourteen
Dānavas, Ṛsịs, as also Rāksạ sas, Gandharvas, and Bhūtas turn in the
range of your eyesight [caksụ rvisạ yavartiṇam], seeing them, you will
receive their tejas and will come to possess balam” (6). Thus increased
by tejas and tapas (16.24), he becomes tejoharam, a “seizer of tejas”
(26). In the Śānti, the gods and Ṛsịs anoint Nahusạ ; and, “with five
hundred lights on his forehead burning so that they robbed the tejas
of all [pañcabhiḥ śatairjyotisạ̄ ṃ lalātẹ jvaladbhiḥ sarvatejoharais],
Nahusạ protected heaven” (12.329.30). In the Anuśāsana, his position
is made secure by a boon from Brahmā that “whoever crosses the path
of my sight [yo me dṛsṭ ịpatham gacchet], he will be under my sway”
(17).14 There is no mention of robbing others’ tejas, but Bhṛgu’s abil-
ity to overcome Nahusạ seems to be enhanced by the repeated insis-
tence that Bhṛgu is mahātejas, “of great tejas” (102.14; 103.13 and 14),
although he says it is by his ojas, “vigor, etc.,” that he will overcome
him (102.23). The qualities involved are remarkably consistent with
the Ādiparvan’s capsule summary: Nahusạ “accomplished Indrahood
having overcome the gods by tejas and tapas, as also by strength and
ojas” (1.70.27).15
Nahusạ ’s faults, his tyranny, and fall.—Nahusạ ’s heavenly reign
begins fairly well: he stabilizes the lokas in the Śānti (12.329.30) and,
in the Anuśāsana, continues to perform the same good ceremonial
karman as he had on earth. The Udyoga observes that upon obtaining
heaven’s throne he changed from one “of virtuous soul” (dharmātmā)
to one “of sensuous soul” (kāmātmā; 5.11.8; see also 15.21), but
his sports seem innocent enough until he covets the absent Indra’s
wife, Śacī. This is the initial miscalculation that leads to his downfall
in both the Udyoga and Śānti versions, although the more detailed
Udyoga adds that his new-found power makes him “terrible” (raudra;
14.14), “of terrible energy” ( ghorvīryaḥ; 16.25) and “of terrible form”
( ghorarūpa; 16.29).16 In the Anuśāsana, where Śacī does not figure,
overcome by ego and pride (13.102.12 and 22) and “deluded by the
power of lordship” (28), Nahusạ abandons his virtuous ceremonial
14 He also drinks amṛta (13.102.14), a boon with no echoes in the Śānti version.
15 Tejas is the indispensible entry. Tapas functions as a subordinate motif to make
Nahusạ the rare (unique?) human who succeeds in winning heaven’s throne by “asceti-
cism”; see my “The Burning of the Forest,” in Hinduism: New Essays in the History of
Religions, ed. Bardwell L. Smith (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1976), p. 223, n. 45. On ojas, see
5.15.19 and notes.
16 There is probably a play on Rudra-Śiva here; see. 5.12.8, Nahusạ , saying it will be
“well” (śivam) for the gods if he gets Śacī; see Visṇ ̣u’s role, treated below.
nahusạ in the skies: a human king of heaven 391
acts (102.12; 103, 10–11). With no other motivation, the Anuśāsana
moves right to the ultimate folly upon which all versions agree: he
makes the Ṛsịs carry him.
The other two versions, however, get to this point only through Śacī.
Most of the peculiarities of the Udyoga account have some connec-
tion with her story, and have been noted by Holtzmann. The Udyoga
presents three journeys to find the vanished Indra, each one ostensi-
bly to forestall Nahusạ ’s advances upon Śacī. In the first, Indra has
gone to “the end of the lokas” where, “overcome by his own sins,
concealed, he dwelt in the waters, restless like a serpent”17 (cesṭ ạ māna
ivoragaḥ; 5.10.43). Agni leads the gods to Visṇ ̣u (5.13.8), who pre-
scribes an Aśvamedha to remove Indra’s sin, and the gods (still headed
by Agni?), preceptors, and Ṛsịs perform this rite before Nahusạ has
been deposed. Indra sees the invincible Nahusạ and vanishes again
(5.13.15–20). As Holtzmann has observed, this Aśvamedha changes
nothing in the plot; in the Śānti, the Aśvamedha is prescribed by Visṇ ̣u
after the fall of Nahusạ , and is directly connected with Indra’s return
to his throne (12.329.39–41).18 In the second, Indra has gone into a
lake of heavenly five-colored lotuses to hide there in a lotus stalk, and
Śacī is led there by the goddess Upaśruti (5.13.22–14.8), about whom
more shall be said. And in the third Indra goes into a more nonde-
script lotus, where Agni, who has “taken on the wonderful appearance
of a woman” (strīvesạ madbhūtam; 15.27) and been strengthened by
Bṛhaspati’s eulogies so as to be able to enter the waters, finally finds
him. Holtzmann and Dumézil are probably right that the quest (or
quests?) of Agni reflects an older theme than the quest of Upaśruti.19
In particular, the two Agni-led visits are concerned with the require-
ments and preparations for Indra’s return to his throne: in the first, the
sin-cleansing Aśvamedha; in the second, Indra’s alliances with other
gods, including Agni, which will be discussed. These connections point
to an earlier version of the cycle of Indra’s dethronement and resto-
ration. In Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 1.6.3.1–17, after defeating Viśvarūpa,
that demon’s successor Vṛtra “came to be possessed of Agni and
17 He has slain the Brahmin Viśvarūpa and used falsehood (anṛta) to slay Vṛtra; see
my Ritual of Battle, p. 234 and n. 15.
18 Holtzmann, “Indra,” pp. 309–10; the Udyoga’s placement, however, still prepares
for Indra’s reenthronement.
19 Ibid.; Dumézil, Destiny of the Warrior, p. 125 and n. 23; cf. Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa
2.234: Indra, helped by Agni, “as a serpent got rid of its skin, . . . got rid of all his
evil.”
392 chapter fourteen
Soma” plus various qualities, and Indra did not become “what Indra
now is” until all the devas and the various qualities returned to him,
whereupon he slew Vṛtra. In this and other Brāhmaṇa references to
the Indra cycle, Nahusạ does not appear?20 It is in the Mahābhārata
that he first assumes the role of Indra’s replacement. It is thus signifi-
cant that Nahusạ ’s ouster is handled outside the two Agni-led quests;
rather, it is from the journey led by Upaśruti that Śacī learns what to
do about her tormenter. And in its streamlining of the story, that is
enough for the Śānti, where there are only two journeys to find Indra:
the first led by Upaśruti from which Śacī learns what to do about
Nahusạ , the second traveled by Śacī to the same place after Nahusạ ’s
fall to bring Indra to his Aśvamedha and reenthronement. As to the
Anuśāsana’s Bhṛguized version, it streamlined further by eliminating
Śacī, Upaśruti, and any need to find Indra at all.
Where the Nahusạ story is incorporated into the Indra cycle, its
dynamics thus feature Śacī and Upaśruti very prominently. A few
words are necessary on each. As seen earlier, his own power aug-
mented by the tejas and/or tapas of the gods and Ṛsịs, Nahusạ obtains
the energy to absorb the tejas of any being who crosses his sight. His
“poison sight” (dṛsṭ ịvisạ m) is mentioned several times, and the gods,
“not looking [at him],21 move about in hidden forms” ( gūḍharūpās;
5.16.26; see also 16.30) to avoid it. Śacī, however, seems immune to
his baleful gaze: when he becomes kāmātmā and devoted to pleasures,
“even while the high-souled Nahusạ was sporting about, the god-
dess, Sakra’s beloved wife, came into his view” (saṃprāptā darśaṇam;
5.11.13). The matter of sight is reinforced in the next śloka: “having
seen her” (tāṃ saṃdṛśya; 14), he covets her and asks why she does
not serve him; and when she goes to Nahusạ and requests delay to
learn Indra’s whereabouts, “having seen her endowed with youth and
beauty” (12.32), Nahusạ is overwhelmed with desire and anticipation.
It is never stated that she is immune to his glance, but it is clear that
she is unaffected. If the expression can be pardoned, there is more to
Śacī than meets the eye: she functions in this story as the śakti.
20 Cf. Aitareya Brāhmaṇa 7.28: the gods temporarily exclude Indra from Soma for
a skien of sins headed by slaying Viśvarūpa and Vṛtra.
21 Nahusạ ’s “poison sight” seems to require eye contact; see 13.103.18.
nahusạ in the skies: a human king of heaven 393
As to Upaśruti, her name means “hearing” or “listening” and has
been translated as “Rumor”22 and “Divination.”23 The latter render-
ing best meets the context. Kisari Mohan Ganguli has a note to this
effect: “Divination was practiced by reference to the stars at night.”24
Upaśruti is invoked through the goddess Night (devīṃ rātrīm; nisāṃ
devīm; 5.13.23 and 24), who is, at the time, “progressing on the
Northern Course” ( pravṛttamuttarāyaṇe; 23). Due to Śacī’s “devo-
tion to her husband and truth,” she is able to “perform divination”
(sopaśrutimathākarot; 24), that is, bring forth Divination personified
from the night sky during the period of the sun’s movement to the
north, from winter to summer solstice. In this manner she is able to
learn Indra’s whereabouts in the far north, beyond the Himālaya, and
to receive from her husband his nīti (5.15.2) on how to oust Nahusạ .
Indra’s “policy” is to take advantage of Nahusạ in his lust and mount-
ing arrogance: secretly Śacī should go to Nahusạ and tell him she will
be his if he comes to her “on a divine vehicle borne by Ṛsịs” (15.15).
Śacī’s clever elaboration of this advice and Nahusạ ’s blundering reply
must be followed closely. Śacī says: “Indra’s conveyances were horses,
elephants, as well as chariots. I wish your vehicle here to be unprec-
edented [apurvam; so also 12.329.16], O lord of gods, one which has
been neither Visṇ ̣u’s, Rudra’s, the Asuras’ nor the Rāksạ sas’. Let the
Ṛsịs, joined together, O lord, bear you with a palanquin [śibikā], O
king. Surely that pleases me. You can’t be [merely] equal to the Asuras
and gods. Receive the tejas of all with your own energy by means of
sight. No one possessing energy wishes to stand before you” (15.11–
13). This novel idea delights Nahusạ , who boasts of his ability to put
all beings—including the Munis (15.16)—under his power. He then
concludes with the promise: “Therefore I will do your bidding with-
out doubt, O goddess. The Seven Ṛsịs will bear me, as also all the
Brahmarsịs [saptarsạ yo māṃ vaksỵ anti sarve brahmarsạ yastathā]. See
our glorification and growth, O fair complexioned lady” (19).
This is the Udyoga’s only specification that it is the Seven Ṛsịs
who, along with the Brahmarsịs, bear Nahusạ . Elsewhere the bearers
22 Dumézil, Destiny of the Warrior, p. 124, n. 21, citing E. W. Hopkins, Epic Mythol-
ogy (1915; New York, Biblo & Tannen, 1969), p. 130.
23 Pratap Chandra Roy, ed. Kisari Mohan Ganguli, trans., The Mahabharata, vol. 4,
Udyoga Parva (1884–96; New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1970), p. 24; M. N. Dutt,
trans., A Prose English Translation. of the Mahābhārata (Calcutta: H. C. Dass, 1895–
1905), Udyoga Parva, p. 17; Holtzmann, “Indra,” p. 309.
24 Roy, ed., Mahābhārata, vol. 4, Udyoga Parva, p. 24.
394 chapter fourteen
are referred to as Ṛsịs (5.15.4; 12.20), Ṛsịs equal to Brahmā (17.14),
Maharsịs (15.24; cf. 17.8), Devarsịs (16.21; also 17.8), and Munis (15.16;
cf. 17.8–11). The Śānti refers only to Ṛsịs (12.329.36) and Maharsịs
(37–38); the Ādiparvan mentions Ṛsịs (1.70.26); and the Āraṇyaka
has Nahusạ recall after ten thousand years as a serpent that he was
drawn by a thousand brahmins (3.177.8).25 The Anuśāsana does give
Seven Ṛsịs, but only in a southern variant to Ṛsịs (13.102.11 and nn.).
Yet despite such apparent diversity, G. S. Ghurye exaggerates when he
says: “The whole episode leaves the question of the precise status of the
Rishis quite nebulous.”26 It is surely significant that Nahusạ specifies
that it is the Seven Ṛsịs, along with the Brahmarsịs, at the very point
when he is about to ride them.27 Aside from the Brahmarsịs—usually
“mental sons” of Brahmā and primal progenitors28—the other titles are
either general or interchangeable. As Hopkins notes, the Seven Ṛsịs
“are the most famous of all Ṛsịs groups,” and “are sometimes implied
by the word Devarsịs.”29 Nahusạ ’s travesty is thus a transgression of
dharma (5.15.24; 13.102.26) that is audacious in the extreme. Not only
does he “despise brahmins” (3.176.13); as the Ādiparvan puts it, he
treats the Ṛsịs “like animals” ( paśuvat; 1.70.26). That they are “Divine
Ṛsịs” makes the “offense” (asatkāram; 13.102.11: literally “doing what
is counter to truth, order”) even more improper—under Nahusạ ’s
reign the human becomes divine and the divine animal.
Nahusạ now, “having made [the Ṛsịs his] bearers, roams the lokas”
(5.16.25). After a certain time, and under circumstances which vary,30
he angrily touches Agastya—who is not one of the Seven Ṛsịs31—with
25 The passage insists that Nahusạ has not lost his memory (176.20), but it shows a
persistent pattern of exalting brahmins; see 177.15 ff.
26 G. S. Ghurye, Two Brahmanical Institutions: Gotra and Charana (Bombay: Popular
Prakashan, 1972), p. 120.
27 Others do recognize the Seven Ṛsịs: see Hermann Jacobi, “Agastya,” Hastings
Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics (New York: Scribners, 1924–27), 1:181; V. S. Apte,
The Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary (Poona: Prasad Prakashan, 1957–59), s.v.
“Nahusạ ḥ.”
28 Hopkins, p. 189; see also pp. 177, 181.
29 Ibid., pp. 177, 182.
30 In the Udyoga he and the Rṣ ịs argue (Holtzmann, “Agastya” p. 593; interpolation)
over the authenticity of some Vedic mantras for “cow sprinkling” (5.17.9), Nahusạ
taking the ascetic position that they are inauthentic, contrary to his role as king of the
sacrifice-requiring gods; cf. Dumézil, Destiny of a King, pp. 62–64, on Vasu Uparicara.
In the Anuśāsana Agastya is prodded with Nahusạ ’s goad (103.19), then kicked; the
Śānti is without background.
31 See Hopkins, p. 126; the usual list is Vasisṭḥ a, Kaśyapa, Atri, Viśvāmitra, Gautama,
Jamadagni, Bharadvāja.
nahusạ in the skies: a human king of heaven 395
his feet (12.329.38), or with his foot on the head (5.17.11; left foot:
13.103.20). He immediately becomes “deprived of tejas and divested
of śrī” (5.17.12), the first the splendor which he robbed from all beings
and the second the quality which in the Udyoga led to his rule in
heaven. And Agastya, or else Bhṛgu whom the Anuśāsana has hidden
in Agastya’s matted-locks, curses Nahusạ to become a serpent “on the
earth’s surface” (5.17.20; 13.103.22). The Udyoga and Anuśāsana remit
the curse so that Nahusạ can retain his memory and eventually be
freed by his descendant Yudhisṭḥ ira, whereas in the Śānti he is cursed
to “become a serpent for as long as earth and her mountains shall
remain” (12.329.38).32 In either case, the punishment is appropriate.
Nahusạ , who had inverted earth and heaven, men and gods, the godly
and the animal, commits the one last intolerable inversion of kicking
a Ṛsị in the head. As a result the man who became king of the gods
becomes an animal.
The restoration of Indra. Each full account, including the Anuśāsana
one, tells of Indra’s restoration. The Śānti links it with the performance
of the Aśvamedha (see above n. 18). In the Anuśāsana, Brahmā bids
the gods anoint Indra (13.103.32–34). But the Udyoga is the most
revealing. We are taken back to the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa version of
the Indra cycle, where Agni, Soma, and the Devas come over to Indra
from Vṛtra. Here in the epic, after Agni has found Indra in the lotus
and been joined by Bṛhaspati, this threesome is met by Yama, “the old
god Soma” (purāṇo devaśca somo), Varuṇa, and Kubera (5.16.27), a
group which the passage refers to as the Lokapālas, “World Regents”
(17.1).33 Just as in the Brāhmaṇa, then, Indra is rejoined by Agni and
Soma. The latter is an irregular Lokapāla whose inclusion, as well as the
designation “old god,” probably derive from the more ancient account.
Indra promises these gods that if they help him topple Nahusạ (which
they never have to do: Agastya soon arrives to tell them that Nahusạ
is banished), they will obtain “high consecration” (16.30–31). Then he
offers to Agni a part in the “Indrāgna” share of the sacrifice, to Varuṇa
lordship over waters, to Kubera over Yaksạ s and riches, and to Yama
over the Pitṛs (32–34). Finally, when Agastya finishes his report on
Nahusạ ’s fall, he tells Indra: “Go forth to heaven, protect the lokas, O
Śacīpati” (17.7).
32 Only in the Āraṇyaka does he become a “boa” (ajagara); usually it is sarpa, once
ahi (13.102.26). Nāga is not used.
33 On instability among Lokapālas (usually Indra is one), see Hopkins, pp. 149–51.
396 chapter fourteen
At this point, having recounted the epic’s versions of the Nahusạ
story, one can appreciate its place in the Kuru dynasty prior to Yayāti.
The two figures are in many respects opposites. Nahusạ , a man,
becomes king of the gods, and is cursed to become a serpent on the
surface of the earth. Yayāti ascends to heaven only after the fulfillment
of his earthly rule,34 commits a less grievous offense, and is bounced;
but he never touches the earth. Rather he reascends to heaven.35 These
contrasting destinies are bound up with the two kings’ relations with
the various categories of beings. The instability among classes which
Yayāti does so much to stabilize (see n. 9) is exacerbated under Nahusạ .
Whereas Yayāti mediates between the worlds of Gods and Asuras,
Nahusạ becomes an “Indra” only to be cursed into a snake.36 The snake
form is often associated with Asuras, and in the Ṛg Veda particularly
with Vṛtra,37 so it is significant that after slaying Vṛtra, Indra also, in
one of his Udyoga retreats, dwells concealed in the waters “restless
like a snake” (10.43). Such interlocking themes do not stand alone in
the epic, where Yayāti is a model for Yudhisṭḥ ira38 and Nahusạ for
bringers of chaos like Śalya39 and usurpers like Duryodhana. The lat-
ter tie is the most intriguing here, for Duryodhana—like both Indra
and Nahusạ —becomes snakelike after losing his throne. It is after his
army’s defeat and, with the death of Śalya, the loss of his śrī,40 that
Duryodhana hides in a lake at Kuruksẹ tra to rest until, taunted by
Yudhisṭḥ ira, “sighing like a great snake in a hole” (śvabhre mahānāga
iva śvasan; 9.31.33; see also 35; 5.71.23; 5.1;26.22), he emerges to fight
his final mace duel with Bhīma.
These are symbolic connections rather than structural or narrative
ones between the two sets of figures, but they are significant because
they deal with two transitions in the Kuru dynasty: one between the
Dvāpara and Kali Yugas marking the change from the “heroic age” to
the “present,” the other near the dawn of the Kṛta Yuga marking the
34 See Defourny (n. 7 above), p. 63: in the Padma Purāṇa Yayāti rejects heaven to
conclude his earthly reign.
35 See Dumézil, Destiny of a King. pp. 32–35.
36 Nahusạ named among the snakes (1.31.9; 5.101.9); see Hopkins, p. 24; S. A. Dange,
Legends in the Mahābhārata (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1969), pp. 87–88.
37 See A. A. Macdonell. Vedic Mythology (1898; New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1974), p. 73.
38 See my Ritual of Battle, pp. 275, 284, 289, 348.
39 Ibid., pp. 241–43, 280–81.
40 Ibid., pp. 213, 267.
nahusạ in the skies: a human king of heaven 397
transition between primal instability and the establishment of order.
In this vein one more juxtaposition between the Nahusạ and Yayāti
stories is pertinent. Following Nahusạ ’s misrule, Indra’s return to the
throne is marked by the establishment of the Lokapālas and, hence-
forth, the protection of the lokas. Cosmic disorder is followed by a
fixing of cosmic order. Then, during Yayāti’s reign, the earth is parti-
tioned among Yayāti’s five sons into four outlying regions and a center
(1.82.5). One thus moves from the divine ordering of all the lokas to
the human ordering of the earth. Indra’s battle with Vṛtra and its vari-
ous aftermaths are thus seen in a cosmogonic setting not only by the
poets of the Ṛg Veda41 but by those of the Mahābhārata. The differ-
ences, however, are major and can only be understood by a closer look
at the cosmological themes underlying the Nahusạ legend.
Nahusạ , Agastya, and the Seven Ṛsịs
It is widely known that the Seven Ṛsịs are identified with the con-
stellation Ursa Major or Big Dipper,42 and it is also no secret that
Agastya is identified with the star Canopus.43 Both associations are
well established by the time of the Mahābhārata (see nn. 42 and 43).
Nor has it escaped the notice of scholars that the primal “history” of
the Kuru dynasty, especially in its Lunar dynasty variant (see nn. 5 and
6), draws heavily from the heavenly bodies. Hopkins points to several
ways in which the dynastic mythology “has been effected by the star
cult,” both concerning Nahusạ 44 and, rather tentatively, Yayāti.45 But
41 See W. Norman Brown, “The Creation Myth of the Ṛg Veda,” Journal of the
American Oriental Society (hereafter JAOS) 62 (1942): 95–98; Brown, “Theories of
Creation the Ṛg Veda,” JAOS 85 (1965): 23–34.
42 See bibliography and discussion in Macdonnell and Keith (n. 10 above), 1.107.117,
numerous authors noting ṚV 1.24.10 where ṛksạ̄ ḥ, “bears,” refers to stars and probably
the Seven Ṛsịs. Ghurye (n. 26 above), pp. 111–21, argues that the bear identification
is Indo-European, and that by 900–800 B.C. it was fixed in India as the Saptarsị. See
also Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 2.1.2.4, and Hopkins, pp. 181–85.
43 See Ghurye, p. 123: “By 600 B.C.”; see Hopkins, p. 185; Auguste Barth, The
Religions· of India (1879–81; Varanasi: Chowkhamba, 1963), p. 23 and n. 2; H. Kern,
trans. The Bṛhat-Saṇhitā, or, Complete System of Natural Astrology of Varāhamihira
(London: Trübner, 1869), p. 82, n. 1.
44 Nahusạ ’s mother is Svarbhānu’s (Rāhu, the eclipse demon’s) daughter.
45 The inclusion of Dhruva sometimes (1.70.28 and nn.) among Nahusạ ’s sons beside
five brothers whose names, like Yayāti’s, can be related to the root yā, “to go,” suggest
they “may have been stars”; Hopkins, pp. 52–53.
398 chapter fourteen
when one pushes back from Nahusạ ’s father Āyus to the three figures
included in the lineage in its Lunar dynasty form, one finds Budha
(Mercury), Soma (Moon), and Atri (one of the Seven Ṛsịs). Add to this
that Bṛhaspati (Guru = Jupiter) and Kavi Uśanas (Śukra = Venus) are
opposite numbers in the Yayāti legend, and the conclusion is inescap-
able that astronomical concerns were prominent at least at some point
in the development of these legends.
As Hopkins notes, the epic recognizes Agastya and the Seven Ṛsịs as
a special group in relation to the stars: they are mentioned at the head
of a group who serve “as examples of those who became hermits . . . and
eventually rose to heaven ‘not as Naksạ tras but as clusters of lights’ ”
(12.236.16 ff; anaksạ trāh . . . jyotisạ̄ ṃ gaṇāḥ; 21). He remarks that “no
difficulty is experienced in treating the seven [one could add Agastya]
as at once persons and stars,” and that they are “still affected by earthly
struggles.”46 This is important, for many of the stories concerning such
Ṛsịs should be read on more than one level. Their connections with the
stars are not simply through postmortem etiologies. However, before
turning to the particular roles of Agastya and the Seven in the Nahusạ
legend, a wider lens looks at the stars in the epic is advisable.
Pitṛs and Ṛsịs, as Hopkins notes,47 appear as stars, a good refer-
ence being when Arjuna learns after his stay on Mount Mandara that
the “self-refulgent worlds” (lokānātmāprabhān) of Rājarsịs, Siddhas,
and heroes slain in battle are seen “in the form of stars on earth”
(tārārūpāṇi bhūtale; 3.43.32–35). There are probably Vedic precedents
for such ideas, and not only in connection with the Seven Ṛsịs.48 But
the best instance of such beliefs in the epic is bound up with Nahusạ .
One can now appreciate the connection drawn in the Anuśāsana
between his story and the ceremonial offering of garlands, incense,
balis, and lights. I cite, from remarks by Bhīsṃ a to Yudhisṭḥ ira, the
most pertinent verses:
46 Ibid., pp. 182, 185.
47 Ibid., p. 34; the stars are also a common simile for Ksạ triya gatherings, both in
assembly and on the battlefield. Most interesting, the Pāṇḍavas after the Aśvamedha
“shone, surrounded by the assembled kings [mahipalaiḥ; literally [‘Earth-protectors’],
like the planets among the hosts of stars” ( grahastaraganairiva; 14.91.30). Can it be
fortuitous that, if the Pāṇḍavas are five planets, their brother Karṇa represents the Sun,
their heir Abhimanyu the Moon (i.e., seven of the nine navagrahas, presumably. omit-
ting Rāhu and Ketu), and their wife Draupadī, among other things, the Earth?
48 See Barth, p. 23.
nahusạ in the skies: a human king of heaven 399
Light [ jyotis] is described as tejas and brilliance [prakāśa], and as having
upward movement. Therefore the gift of tejas increases the tejas of men.
Dark is [the hell] Andhaṃtamas, and so too is the Daksịnāyana. Therefore
the Uttarāyaṇa is proclaimed for giving lights [ jyotirdānam]. . . . Since the
gods have become endowed with tejas, splendor [prabhā], and are light-
makers, and the Rāksạ sas with darkness, therefore let lamplight (dīpaḥ) be
given. . . . One who robs a lamp [dīpahartā] would become blind, roaming
through the darkness, deprived of good splendor [asuprabhaḥ]. Offering
lamps, one shines forth garlanded by lamps in heaven [svargalokaḥ]. . . .
Being the lustre of his lineage [kuloddyota], of purified soul, the man who
is ever an offerer of lamps attains brilliance [prakāśatvam] and residence
in the world of the stars [ jyotisạ̄ ṃ caiva sālokyam]. [13.101.45–53]
Although Bhīsṃ a and Yudhisṭḥ ira converse at equal length about the
other types of offerings, it is certainly “lights” which form the link with
the Nahusạ narrative. As king in heaven, Nahusạ performed all such
rites as have been mentioned, and more (102.6–9; 103.3–10). But when
he stopped, “the sphere of his sacrifice was obstructed by Rāksạ sas”
(103.11). As just seen, the antidote to Rāksạ sas and darkness is offer-
ing lamps. But there is more. The passage on lights draws together a
number of terms that are found in the Nahusạ story. Connections and
equivalences are drawn between jyotis, meaning both light and star,
tejas, and such other terms as prakāsa and prabhā, and lamps (dīpa).
Now, whereas the passage warns against lamp stealing, Nahusạ steals
others’ tejas. The Śānti says he has “five hundred jyotis [lights-lamps-
stars] burning on his forehead”; this is much like being “garlanded by
lamps in heaven.” The lamp thief becomes blind and roams through
the darkness deprived of good splendor (asuprabhaḥ); in the Udyoga,
Agastya curses Nahusạ to “fall from heaven divested of splendor”
(hataprabhaḥ; 5.17.14–15).49
Such concordances are certainty illuminating. They open the Nahusạ
legend to three avenues of interpretation: ceremonial, allegorical, and
soteriological.
Dipāvali, Agastyārghyadāna.—The passage on lights and lamps can-
not help but remind one of Dīpāvali (“Row of Lamps”) or Dīvāli. This
great autumnal festival in which lamps are lit and (at least today) star-
shaped lights are hung includes a number of ceremonies over its five-
day span, and is integrated with a number of myths and legends.50 Its
49 See also 13.102.27: Bhṛgu says Nahusạ will fall having his “glitter” (tviṣ)
destroyed.
50 On Dīpāvali, see Johann Jacob Meyer, Trilogie Altindischer Mächte und Feste der
Vegetation, pt. 2, Bali (Zurich: Max Niehaus, 1937); P. K. Gode, “Studies on the History
400 chapter fourteen
importance across castes marks it as one of the most important Hindu
(also Jain) festivals, and on this level it can hardly be compared with
the Agastyārghyadāna, one of a vast number of routine vratas or obser-
vances. However, certain features of Dīvāli allow the comparison, once
one observes that Agastya’s appearance in the Nahusạ legend refers
to the same event as the ritual offering of an arghya, a water offering,
to Agastya. Both refer to the rising of Agastya-Canopus, a star of the
first magnitude and the second most brilliant star, after Sirius, in the
southern skies. The epic Nahusạ legends do not spell out this star iden-
tification any more than for the Seven Ṛsịs. But there are some broad
hints. In the Udyoga, when Agastya comes (from the south) to tell
Indra (who is in the far north) that Nahusạ is finished, the text reads
“the tapas-possessing lord Agastya became visible there” (tapasvī tatra
bhagavānagastyaḥ pratyadṛśyata; 5.17.1)—a cumbersome expression
if all one needed were “then Agastya got there.” And the Anuśāsana is
even more suggestive: instead of carrying Nahusạ jointly, the (Seven)
Ṛsịs bear him “in succession” (paryāyaśva; 13.102.13); “and so fell out
the turn (paryāya) of Agastya” (14). Paryāya, “revolution, rotation,”
easily refers to the movement of the stars. As to the ritual, the offering
of water to Agastya is done at the rising of Canopus. As the sixth-
century astronomer Varāhamihira remarks, Agastya rises at different
times at different latitudes,51 but those mentioned for his worship are
consistently in the month of Bhādrapada (August–September), and his
appearance is correlated with the setting in of autumn after the close
of the rains and the clearing of the waters.52
Bearing such facts in mind, there are two correlations between Dīvāli
and its mythology and the ritual observance and mythology connected
with the appearance of Agastya. First, the myths most prominently
connected with both ceremonies concern victories over opponents of
of Hindu Festivals: Some Notes on the History of the Dīvālī Festival (between ca. A.D. 50
and 1945),” ABORI 26 (1945): 216–62; M. M. Underhill, The Hindu Religious Year
(Calcutta: Association Press, 1921), pp. 59–63; F. R. Allchin, Neolithic Cattle Keepers
of South India (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1963), pp. 127–30; P. V. Kane
History of Dharmaśāstra, 2d ed. (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1974),
pp. 194–200; B. A. Gupte, “Divali-Folklore,” Indian Antiquary 32 (1903): 237–39.
51 Kern, trans., p. 83 (Bṛhat-Saṃhitā 7.14).
52 See ibid., pp. 80–85; Kane, pp. 255–56 (Dharmaśāstra, V, 1); Apte, Dictionary,
s.v. “Agastyaḥ”: Jacobi (n. 27 above), p. 181; on the rite itself, see Matsya Purāṇa
1.51.42–54. in Jamna Das Akhtar, ed., ‘The Matsya Puraṇam (Dehli: Oriental Publish-
ers, 1972), pp. 188–89.
nahusạ in the skies: a human king of heaven 401
Indra who have usurped the latter’s throne.53 At Dīvāli is celebrated
Visṇ ̣u’s victory over Bali, which makes possible Indra’s reenthrone-
ment.54 At the “rising” of Agastya, Nahusạ is overthrown and Indra
is restored. It seems likely that in each case the victory has some con-
nection with the end of the rainy season. Visṇ ̣u’s awakening at the
end of the varsạ or “Rains” is said to occur on the eleventh day of the
waxing moon of Kārttika (October–November),55 but it is also asso-
ciated with Dīvāli and, the triumph over Bali, celebrated just eleven
days earlier on the first of the same month.56 And as just noticed, the
rising of Agastya is associated with the closing of the rains. Now, the
rainy season is traditionally associated with ill omen and more par-
ticularly with snakes.57 It is the latter form that Nahusạ —whose name
has other associations with snakes (see above, n. 36)—must take after
Agastya appears, that is, after the rainy season closes. In this connec-
tion, Varāhamihira says that it is Indra’s normal function to control
the Nāgas during the varsạ : “The water which has been poured out at
Indra’s command by the snakes, whose bodies are wrapped in clouds,
and thus has been stained by burning poison, becomes pure at the
appearance of Agastya.”58 One would have to look further into this
discrepancy of over a month in dating the end of the monsoon. It may
reflect the regional origins of the two myths (see n. 59). But it seems
likely that both myths refer to returns of Indra after a rainy season
which—contrary to the norm—he did not supervise, and, in accord
with the new season of śarad,59 a cleansing not only of the waters but
the skies and heavens.
53 On the similarity, see Sukumari Bhattacharji, The Indian Theogony (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1970), p. 282; but her historicized explanation is pointless.
54 I echo Meyer, pt. 2, pp. 18–21, 105–14, 186–93,242–67, on the centrality of the
Bali Myth for Dīvāli. Kane, p. 202 (Dharmaśāstra, V, 1), observes that in many Purāṇas
Bali (like Nahusạ ) makes the gods lose their tejas.
55 Underhill, p. 85.
56 Garrett Jan Held, The Mahābhārata: An Ethnological Study (London: Kegan Paul,
Trench, Trübner & Co., 1935), pp. 194–95. There is thus also variance as to when to
celebrate Visṇ ̣u’s Vāmana (Dwarf) incarnation: at Dīvālī (ibid., p. 192), or at Vāmana
Jayanti, on Bhādrapada Śukla twelfth (Underhill, p. 76).
57 Held, pp. 189–90.
58 Kern, trans., p. 83 (Bṛhat-Saṅhitā 7.12).
59 Here too are variant datings that correspond to those in the two myths: “the
sultry season of two months succeeding the rains; in some parts of India comprising
the months” Bhādra and Āsvina, in other places Āsvina and Kārttika, fluctuating thus
from August to November”; Sir Monier Monier-Williams, Sanskrit-English Dictionary
(1899; Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964) s.v. “śarad.”
402 chapter fourteen
The second correlation between Dīvāli and the Nahusạ -Agastya
cycle concerns the giving of lights and the Ancestors. The practice
of lighting lamps to guide the Pitṛs on the amāvāsya or new moon
night of Āśvina (the night before the celebration of the victory over
Bali) is connected with the offering of śrāddhas—balls of rice meal
to the Pitṛs—at the same juncture, and the release of the Pitṛs from
Yama’s realm to Svarga.60 Meyer and Allchin even hold that Dīvāli
shares the same prehistory as Hallow-e’en and the Christian feasts of
All Souls and All Saints in an autumnal festival of the dead.61 Simi-
larly, we have seen the Nahusạ legend connected in one account with
the giving of lamps and the attainment of starlike brilliance in Svarga
where one can shine forth as “the lustre of his lineage.” These corre-
spondences have not gone unnoticed. Kane cites the Anuśāsana passage
and mentions that “some writers [he does not say who] regard these
as a reference to the Dīvāli.”62 But as he says, no sure connection can
be drawn. The Anuśāsana references to offering lamps certainly do not
refer to the Agastyārghyadāna, a rite which seems to have no connection
with the Pitrṣ . But the authors of the Anuśāsana may well have noted
parallels between the lore surrounding Agastya, Nahusạ , and the Seven
Rṣ is and the practices of Dīvāli,63 and drawn them for a brief moment
together.
Nahusạ ’s palanquin. When Śacī determines to learn where Indra
is, she invokes Upaśruti, Divination, through the goddess Night who
is “progressing on the Uttarāyana.” Not only is Śacī thus enabled to
find Indra north of the Himālaya. The Uttarāyaṇa is associated with
the stars of the northern skies, and particularly with the Seven Ṛsịs:
as Hopkins notes, a name for the Uttarāyaṇa, is the Vāsisṭ ḥ i kāsṭ ḥ ā,64
the “course of Vasisṭḥ a,” the ṛsị who stands at the head of the Seven.
Since Indra tells Śacī to trap Nahusạ during the Uttarāyaṇa, it is not
surprising that when Nahusạ agrees to do Śacī’s bidding, it is the Seven
Ṛsịs whom he picks to carry him.
Our constellation of the Great Bear was known in India anciently as
“the Bears,” and at least by the time of the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa as “the
60 Drawn from Gode, pp. 229, 250; Kane, pp. 197–98 (Dharmaśāstra, V. 1); Gupte,
p. 238; Underhill, p. 60.
61 Meyer, pt. 2, pp. 48–51, 235–42, 250–67; Alchin, pp. 127, 137.
62 Kane, pp. 206–7 (Dharmaśāstra, V. 1).
63 Gode, pp. 251–53, claims that Dīvālī practices can probably be traced back to
around A.D. 50–100. This would be in plenty of time for the late-epic Anuśāsana to
have drawn a connection.
64 Hopkins, p. 182, a variant at 5.107.15 cf. 109.12.
nahusạ in the skies: a human king of heaven 403
Seven Ṛsịs” (see n. 42). But it was also seen “in the form of a wheeled
carriage.”65 In the Nahusạ story the “vehicle” is a śibikā, a palanquin,
palkee, or litter (5.15.12; see also 3.176.13 and nn.). But the important
point is that the shape of the Big Dipper suggests a means of convey-
ance, whether it be a carriage or litter or, as it is widely and anciently
known in the west, a wain (cart) or wagon.66 Only two scholars—the
two Adolf Holtzmanns, uncle and nephew—have noted this connec-
tion, but without elaboration. The older Holtzmann remarked: “Die
sieben Rischi sind noch am Himmel zu sehen, wie sie den Wagen des
Nahuscha ziehen. . . . Daneben sieht man auch noch Nahuscha, wie er
eben als Schlange von Wagen herabstürtzt.”67 At least one of the iden-
tifications is secure: the Seven Ṛsịs fit the story by the vehicular shape
of the constellation. As to identifying Nahusạ as “die Schlange,” that
is, the constellation Draco which is beside the Big Dipper, things are
less certain. Nahusạ ’s earthly destiny is a structurally significant aspect
of the story, and as best I can determine Indian astrology does not
recognize Draco as a snake.68 But if the myth is not a simple allegori-
cal star etiology, there are reasons to think a more complex cosmic
allegory is involved.
The Nahusạ story is set in a cosmic drama that carries along some
of the cosmogonic implications of the slaying of Vṛtra. Without an
Indra, heaven and the trailokya are in turmoil. As the Anuśāsana puts
it, “the gods cannot subsist [vartayitum; literally, ‘keep things turning’]
without a king” (13.103.32). The human Nahusạ only makes things
worse. But his asatkāra is more than just the violation of dharma and
of taxonomic classifications mentioned earlier. “Having made [the
Seven Ṛsịs] his vehicle, he roams the lokas” (yāti lokān; 5.16.25). This
65 According to Śrīdhara Swāmin (ca. A.D. 1400) commenting on Bhāgavata Purāṇa
12.2, as cited by H. T. Colebrooke, “On the Indian and Arabian Divisions of the Zodi-
ack,” Asiatic Researches 9 (1809): 323–76.
66 Ghurye (n. 26 above), p. 112; E. J. Webb, The Names of the Stars (London: Nisbet
& Co., 1952), p. 73; Henry C. King, The Background of Astronomy (London: Watts,
1957), pp. 37–42; Homer used a word for the constellation meaning either “wain” or
“plough.”
67 Adolf Holtzmann (the elder), ed. and trans., Indische Sagen, reedited by Moriz
Winternitz (1845–47 and 1854; Jena: Eugene Diederichs Verlag, 1921), p. 295, n. 74;
arguing that the remission of Nahusạ ’s curse is a late feature of the story, the younger
Holtzmann, “Agastya,” p. 594, said that the original myth saw “in Nahusha die Schlange
neben dem Sternbilde des Wagens.”
68 See Manual of the Administration of the Madras Presidency, vol. 3, Glossary
(Madras: Government Press 1893), p. 543, s.v. “Nakshatram,” listing Draco with no
corresponding Sanskrit name or identity.
404 chapter fourteen
must mean that he leads that constellation out of position, subjects it
to his own whim. This is a disruption of the first magnitude, for the
Seven Ṛsịs are the very symbols of cosmic stability and fidelity. On
every parvan (full and new moon) they resort to Mount Meru (6.7.19)
and are said to “sit around Dhruva” (12.126.25), the Pole Star.69 With
Vasisṭḥ a’s wife Arundhatī (a small eighth star beside the Vasisṭḥ a star),
they are regarded already in the Baudhāyana Ghṛyasūtra (1.5.12–14)
as “so auspicious and the symbol of stability as to be invoked and wor-
shipped by a newly-wed couple before the marriage-rites could come
to an end.”70
Astronomical literature, however, frequently does not mention the
Seven Ṛsịs alone. Rather they are mentioned together with Agastya. An
epic example of this has been noted, and Varāhamihira devotes suc-
cessive chapters to them distinctly separate from his discussion of the
Naksạ tras or “lunar mansions.”71 There are some indications that the
Seven Ṛsịs and Agastya were thought of as having revolutions inde-
pendent of the Naksạ tras.72 All this points up again the significance of
the Anuśāsana verse which identifies the rotation by which Agastya
arrives as a paryāya. The Udyoga and Anuśāsana versions abound in
references to temporal rhythms. Before Nahusạ sees Śacī, “the Six Sea-
sons in embodied form” serve him (5.11.12). Numerous gods speak
of the need for Time (kāla) to delay Nahusạ (5.12.26; 13.14.19–20;
15.1.9), and Nahusạ grants the same (5.14.13). Then “a long time
passed” (13.101.46) while Nahusạ rode the Ṛsịs. Add to this such allu-
sions to “turning” (root vṛt) as have been mentioned earlier. But the
key is in the references to the Uttarāyaṇa (5.13.23–25; 13.101.46). For
if the Seven Ṛsịs are associated with the northern skies, Agastya is
associated with the southern.
When Agastya “becomes visible” before Indra to tell him about
Nahusạ , he is described as tapasvī, endowed with tapas. It is no doubt
by his “heat” that he is more than a match for the king who robbed
others’ tejas. Already described as ugra, vigorous (related to ojas)73 in
69 See Hopkins, pp. 181–82; their mythology, its relation to the Vedas, the Seven
Prajāpatis, Manu and the Manvantaras, Indra, and their wives (in connection with
themes of chastity, abstinence, infidelity) deserves a full study.
70 Ghurye, pp. 118–19; see also Underhill, pp. 71–74, for related legends.
71 Kern, trans., chap. 12 (Agastya, pp. 80–85) and chap. 13 (Seven Ṛsịs, pp. 85–87);
see also Kane, p. 479 (Dharmaśāstra, V, 1).
72 Colebrooke, pp. 361–62; Ebenezer Burgess, Sūrya Siddhānta: A Textbook on Hindu
Astronomy (New Haven, Conn.: American Oriental Society, 1860), pp. 212–13, 220.
73 Ghurye, pp. 123–24.
nahusạ in the skies: a human king of heaven 405
Ṛg Veda 1.179.6, he is at least by now the lone but brilliant star of
the southern quarter. As such, he is able to redress the wrongs com-
mitted in the Uttarāyaṇa and right the balance of the cosmos. He is,
moreover, a form of brilliance, even fire,74 who emerges at the point
in the Daksịṇāyana when the rainy season comes to an end. In this
respect he is structurally the equivalent of Agni who, in the portions
of the myth concerned with Indra’s restoration, must enter the waters
to find him.
In sum, we must occasionally look beyond our earthbound con-
ceits and still familiar taxonomies to interpret a myth. And just to
show that this celestial excursion has not been illusory, I must mention
that there are at least two more Agastya legends that bear on simi-
lar themes.75 In one, he prevents Mount Vindhya from growing, thus
leaving the Sun still only one mountain, Meru, to traverse on its path
(Mbh 3.102.1–15): he thus keeps North and South distinct and, again,
rights the balance of the cosmos. And in the other he swallows the
Ocean (3.102.16–108.19), a feat which has as its result that the Heav-
enly Gaṅgā—“a kind of Milky Way”76—will henceforth flow through
the three worlds. This is probably echoed when Varāhamihira says of
Agastya’s great gulp: “It is he who made the sea shine as heaven, with
dolphins for its white clouds, with precious stones for stars, with crys-
tal for its moon, with its drained bottom for a serene harvest [śarad]
sky, and with the radiant gems in the hoods of snakes for comets and
planets.”77
Devayāna, Pitṛyāna. By the time of the Sūtra period if not before,
and particularly in connection with the Baudhāyana Śrauta Sūtra,
74 Kern, trans., p. 80, n. 1, derives Agastya from aj, añj, “to brighten”; Ghurye, p. 124,
apparently agrees: “the effulgent one.” Manfred Mayrhofer, Kurzgefasstes etymologisches
Wörterbuch der Altindischen (Heidelburg: Carl Winter, Universitätsverlag, 1953), s.v.
“agástiḥ,” favors a Dravidian origin from the flowering plant Agati gandiflora (Tamil
akatti).
75 One should keep in mind such cosmic and cosmogonic settings when dealing
with the astounding feats of other Ṛsịs. As to the more earthbound side of Agastya’s
career and his ties with south India, see K. N. Sivaraja Pillai, Agastya in the Tamil
Land (Mylapore: University of Madras, n.d.), p. 4: Agastya like Visṇ ̣u in the Vāmana-
Bali myth is a dwarf ! Jean Filliozat, “Agastya et la propogation du brahmanisme au
Sud-Est Asiatique,” Adyar Library Bulletin, V. Raghavan Felicitation Volume 31–32
(1967–68): 442–49.
76 Heinrich Zimmer, Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civilization (New York:
Harper & Row, 1962), p. 113; see also Stella. Kramrisch, “The Indian Great Goddess,”
History of Religions 14 (1975): 242–43; this point was first made to me by Randy
Kloetzli.
77 Kern, trans., p. 81 (Bṛhat-Saṃhitā 12.5).
406 chapter fourteen
which Ghurye dates at about 400–500 B.C., the numerous Brahmin
gotras or lineages were reduced to forty-nine complexes. These in turn
were subdivided into eight gotras said to descend from eight epony-
mous pravara Ṛsịs, or Ṛsịs to whom one made “invocation” (pravara),
and the eight gotras were the basis for the system of “sept-exogamy”
or marriage outside one’s “eponymous clan.” The eight pravara Ṛsịs
were the Seven plus Agastya,78 who thus together represent the fabric
of brahmindom.
Now as Ghurye mentions, this enumeration confronts an interest-
ing variant which may be an elaboration, but which almost certainly
has some relation to similar ideas found in Iran.79 It is given clearly
in Āpastamba Dharma Sūtra 2.9.23.4–580 (ca. 300 B.C. according
to Ghurye) but without reference to the pravara Ṛsịs, alluded to by
Patañjali (ca. 200 B.C.) with reference to them, and elaborated in the
Yājñavalkya Smṛti (ca. A.D. 300) and the Vāyu Purāṇa (ca. A.D. 500).81
I translate the passage from Yājnavalkya 3.184–88:82
78 Ghurye, pp. 7, 10, 13.
79 Ghurye suspects an Indo-Iranian continuation (ibid., pp. 108, 116–17, 121–23); the
“Seven” stars of the Haptō .iringa (probably Ursa Major) are associated with the north
and with 99,999 Fravashis (p. 117) or spirits of the righteous, whereas Fomalhaut, the
star of the south (Canopus is not visible in Iran), “keeps watch over a mountain and
facilitates the regular appearance of the sun” (p. 123). I am indebted to Bruce Lincoln
for calling to my attention the following information and citations. The etymology
for Haptō .iringa is probably “that which has seven signs”: Avestan hapta-= Sanskrit
sapta-; Av. iringa-=Skt. lin̄ga-; see Christian Bartholomae, Altiranisches Wörterbuch
(Strassburg, 1904), col. 1767. The constellation is associated with the daēvas just as in
Hinduism it is linked with the devas, but the daēvas, whom Zoroastrianism reckoned
as demons rather than gods, are (along with other malevolent beings) kept in check at
the gate of hell (which is in the north) by the Fravashis and watched over by the Haptō
.iringa as the latter revolve around and thus guard the north. The twelve constellations
of the zodiac also proceed “by the power and help” of tho Haptō .iringa; see Dīnā-ī
Maīnōg-ī Khirad 49.15, trans. E. W. West, Pahlavi Texts, 3, Sacred Books of the East,
vol. 24 (1885; Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1970), pp. 91–92 and nn. 6 and 8.
80 See Georg Bühler, The Sacred Laws of the Āryas, Sacred Books of the East, vols. 2
and 14 (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1966), 2: 158.
81 Ghurye, pp. 109–11. The dates Ghurye proposes fall toward the median of those
advanced by other scholars; on the Yājñavalkya Smṛti, see Robert Lingat, The Classical
Law of India, trans. J. Duncan M. Derrett (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1973); pp. 99–100.
82 Bapu Shastri Moghe, ed Yājñavalkyasmṛti or the Institutes of Yajñ̃avalkya with
the Commentary Mitāksharā of Vijñāneshvara” (Bombay: Janārdan Mahadev Gurjar,
Remwadi, 1892), pp. 337–38.
nahusạ in the skies: a human king of heaven 407
The Pitṛyana is what is between the Ajavīthī83 and Agastya [Canopus]. By
it Agnihotrins, desirous of Svarga, go toward heaven [divam]. And those
who are duly devoted to giving and endowed with the eight qualities,84
they also, devoted to truth and religious observances, go by that path.
There are eighty-eight thousand Munis, performers of domestic rites, who
return again [to birth], having become seeds who promote the dharma
[bījabhūtā dharmapravartakaḥ].
Between the Seven Ṛsịs and the Nagavithi [see n. 83] are so many
Munis too, free from all undertakings, abiding in Devaloka, Through
tapas, chastity [brahmacarya], the abandonment of attachment, and
through mental vigor, having gone there they remain until the dissolu-
tion of created things.85
As Ghurye says: “It is clear from this that the cosmic region lying
between the Saptarshis or Ursa Major and the star Agastya or Canopus
was conceived as the domain of all sages or Munis, i.e., the great sages,
the ancestors of Brahmanic Aryandom.”86 Moreover, it is the position
of these eight pravara Ṛsịs that delimits the two eschatological paths:
the Devayāna and Pitṛyāna.
The period when these soteriological statements were formulated
is concurrent with the Mahābhārata. Considering the references in
the Nahusạ story to the Uttarāyaṇa and, in connection with Agastya’s
paryāya, the implicit reference to the Daksịṇāyana (the two of which
form indispensable way stations within the Devayāna and Pitṛyāna,
respectively),87 there is no reason to think that the epic poets were
uninformed by these ideas. Mahābhārata 2.11.34 probably knows
a variant where it says that Brahma’s sabhā (roughly, the Universe;
see the full description) is visited by eighty thousand ascetics (Yatis)
whose seed is drawn up, and by fifty thousand Ṛsịs who have begotten
offspring. The “policy” by which Indra and Śacī cause Nahusạ ’s fall
is, ultimately, to have him foul up the very possibilities of salvation.
The Devayāna is the path to moksạ that proceeds by the Uttarāyaṇa.
As Varāhamihira says, it is by the course of the Seven Ṛsịs that “the
83 Ajavīthi (“Goat’s Road”) and Nāgavīthī (“Serpent’s Road”) are subdivisions in
the southern and northern skies by which the sun, moon, and planets move through
various asterisms; see Monier-Williams, Sanskrit-English Dictionary.
84 Virtues enumerated by the commentator Vijñāneshvara; see Hopkins, p. 35.
85 That is, according to Vijñāneshvara, they remain to the end of the prākṛta-
pralaya.
86 Ghurye, p. 110.
87 On Devayāna and Pitṛyana and their connection with the Uttarāyaṇa and
Daksịṇāyana see Paul Deussen, The Philosophy of the Upanishads (New York: Dover,
1966), pp. 334–38; Hopkins, p. 35.
408 chapter fourteen
northern region is, as it were, protected.”88 And the Pitṛyāna is not
only the path of rebirth, but the path through the Daksịnāyana by
which the Ancestors can attain a relative fixity in Svarga or the worlds
beyond, whether or not that fixity be permanent.89 There is thus a con-
nection between Nahusạ ’s absorption of others’ tejas and his disrup-
tion of the two paths. Nahusạ destroys the mechanisms by which the
Pitṛs, as well as the Ṛsịs, can shine in heaven. Thus the Anuśāsana
concludes its account: “Having died [pretya], a giver of lights obtains
celestial sight. And givers of lights become indeed resplendant as the
full moon. As many as there are twinkles [or winks] in an eye, so
many years does a man who is a light-giver glow [ jvalate], possessing
beauty and wealth” (13.103.36–37). It is also significant that Agastya
is a Ṛsị who has a special connection with the Pitṛs: he is one of those
about whom the tale is told90 that, because in his ascetic life he sired
no children, he once came upon his forebears hanging upside down in
a cave, demanding offspring. When he finally has a son, Agastya frees
his Pitṛs to “attain the worlds they desired” (3.97.26). He thus stands
as a paradoxical model of the karmakāṇḍa, just as the Seven Ṛsịs and
their wives, the Kṛttikās or Pleiades, stand, despite their significance as
models of marital fidelity (see n. 70), as paradoxical models of brah-
macarya and the jñānakāṇḍa, prevented by their distance from each
other in the heavens from having sexual relations.91
These remarks point to a final contrast between Nahusạ and Yayāti.
It is certainly likely that the Nahusạ narrative represents an effort to
synthesize Upanisạ dic soteriology with epic concerns about how the
origins of the world in the Kṛta Yuga are related to the founding of
the Lunar dynasty. One can only speculate on what elements of the
Nahusạ story might be pre-epic. No doubt some traits are old, as the
88 Kern, trans., p. 85 [Brḥ at-Saṃhitā, 13.1); compare the analogous situation, mutatis
mutandis, in Iran, n. 79 above.
89 For the complexities and ambiguities on this point, see David M. Knipe,
“Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa: The Hindu Rite of Entry into Heaven,” mimeographed, from the
author: the deceased migrates from lower to higher worlds until, after three genera-
tions, he can join the “remote ancestor’s who are dispersed to the four quarters of the
transcendent region beyond these worlds” (p. 16). However it is never forgotten that
“unlike the gods, the pitaraḥ are themselves subject to repeated death” (p. 13). See
now Knipe 1977.
90 3.94.11–97; compare 1.13 and 41–53, story of Jaratkāru.
91 Thus Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 6.1.2.2–5; Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty, Asceticism
and Eroticism in the Mythology of Śiva (London: Oxford University Press, 1973),
pp. 94–103.
nahusạ in the skies: a human king of heaven 409
Ṛg Veda already knows him as a primal king. All one can say is that
his story is adapted in the epic to the mythology of the Indra cycle
and the Upanisạ dic doctrine. We thus have a coalescence of what
J.A.B. van Buitenen has called Upanisạ dic and Baronial lore.92 The
example he discusses concerns Yayāti, and as van Buitenen shows,
Yayāti is presented as an authority on rebirth. He is “a guide who
knows the country” (ksẹ trajña; 1.84.12) and an authority on the move-
ment between lokas (1.83.3; 84.13–16). But I think Yayāti may be the
choice as such an authority on transmigration for another reason
besides his being “about to go through it.”93 It is Yayāti’s reign that
has stabilized the relations between the different lokas and among the
different castes, particularly the Brahmins and Ksạ triyas. In contrast,
it is in connection with the legend of his father Nahusạ that Ksạ triya
and brahmin lore were synthesized to depict not only a chaos of the
lokas and an intolerable breach of Ksạ triya-Brahmin protocol, but an
overthrow of the divine order and a menace to the proper functioning
of the postmortem routes. What the two legends in fact present are
the three destinies mentioned in Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upanisạ d 6.2.15–16
and developed in Chāndogya Upanisạ d 5.10.1–7: the Devayāna and
Pitṛyāna in the Nahusạ legend, and the animal fate of the wicked, “who
do not know these two ways” (Br. Ār. Up. 6.2.16), in the Yayāti leg-
end (1.84.10; 85.10–11 and 19–20). How appropriate yet paradoxical
it is that whereas Nahusạ suffers the fate delineated by Yayāti, Yayāti,
who travels by the Devayāna (1.83.9), obtains the reward Nahusạ had
almost effaced.
92 J.A.B. van Buitenen, “Some Notes on the Uttara-Yāyata,” Adyar Library Bulletin,
V. Raghavan Felicitation Volume 31–32 (1967–68): 632–35.
93 Ibid., p. 631.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
KṚSṆ ̣A IN THE MAHĀBHĀRATA:
THE DEATH OF KARṆA
Whatever one makes of a few slight references to Kṛsṇ a in texts that
are probably older than the Mahābhārata, and of the many efforts to
imagine him prior to his literary debut in the epic, the Mahābhārata is
the first text to portray him as both divine and human, and to conceive
of his humanity and divinity on a forceful and complex scale. From
his almost casual introduction in the epic’s first book as a knowing
bystander at the wedding of Draupadī1 to his death—along with the
deaths of all his kinsmen—as the outcome of a drunken clan brawl
in book 16, one can trace Kṛsṇ a’s epic involvement through an arc.
Along this arc, his prominence reaches its peak from books 5 to 11:
from the Udyogaparvan, or “Book of War Preparations,” through
the Strīparvan, or “Book of the Women,” that ends the war with the
epic’s mothers, wives, sisters, and daughters mourning over their slain
menfolk. These central books give Kṛsṇ a the role of ringmaster on the
text’s center stage.
To select a passage representative of Kṛsṇ a along this curve, it seems
best to catch him at its top. The one selected for translation here
describes his involvements in the killing of the Kaurava hero Karṇa: a
continuous narrative from the last five adhyāyas (“chapters,” “lessons,”
or “readings”) at the end of the Karṇaparvan (Mahābhārata 8.65.16—
69.43), the book in which Karṇa is—for two days, the sixteenth and
seventeenth in the eighteen-day Kuruksẹ tra war—the marshal and vir-
tually the last hope of the Kaurava army.2 The passage exemplifies the
1 See Hiltebeitel ([1976] 1990), 81–85.
2 Much has been written recently on Karṇa in the Mahābhārata, mostly involv-
ing comparison with other myths and epics in fascinatingly different ways—most
remarkably, three doctoral dissertations: McGrath (2001), seeking an “archaic” Karṇa
to exemplify pre-Mahābhārata features of Indo-European heroism; Adarkar (2001),
examining the question of literary character around Karṇa; and Greer (2002), explor-
ing how Karṇa is knotted into the Mahābhārata’s literary “net”—an image similarly
used by Adarkar (189). Adarkar and Greer are to me the most persuasive and stimu-
lating. See also Biardeau (2002, 1:743–754, 993–1119; 2:116–119, 219–229, 271–387,
523–532); Woods (2001, 43–46); Jarow (1999). For earlier treatments, see Dumézil
412 chapter fifteen
forcefulness and complexity of Kṛsṇ a’s wider epic portrayal; it reveals
the depth and intricacy of his being God, and of the epic’s delineation
of bhakti; and it is a famous episode rich in its subsequent Sanskrit
and vernacular unfoldings.3
The passage is also illustrative of the textual issues that bear upon
strategies of reading and interpreting the Mahābhārata. I present it on
the assumption that this epic is a work of written literature, and not
a product of oral composition. Although many hold the latter view in
one form or another, for this passage it must suffice to mention the
work of Mary Carol Smith, who argues on the basis of a preponder-
ance of irregular metric features in this segment and throughout much
of the Karṇaparvan that it preserves signs of archaic oral composition.4
While it is important to recognize metric variation and to appreciate
that it would enhance recitation from the text, it is clear that by the
time the Mahābhārata was composed, its authors used varied meters
for stylistic effects, including juxtaposition and archaization. What
needs to be stressed—since it has been trivialized by so many modern
interpreters inclined to see some kind of pristine oral core behind its
literary “monstrosity”—is that the Mahābhārata was written to move
people, that it succeeded in doing so, and that what it has to say about
Kṛsṇ a is vital to both the authorial motivation and the text’s success.
Kṛsṇ a’s divinity is not a literary after-effect.5
Whatever may have preceded the Mahābhārata orally, culti-
cally, or in other unknown forms, the Poona Critical Edition of the
Mahābhārata shows that for about two millennia, the work that has
moved people has been a book, and in that sense one can speak of all
(1968, 124–144); Biardeau (1975–76, 173–174; 1976–77, 143–146; 1978, 129–130,
170–175; 1978–79, 147–151; 1979–80, 171–174; 1980–81, 223–227); Biardeau and
Péterfalvi (1985, 1986); Hiltebeitel (1980a, 1982a); Shulman (1985, 380–387); and
Adarkar (2001, 48–56) (a review).
3 Especially the Sanskrit play Karṇabhāra, ascribed to Bhāsa, on which see
Miller (1991), and the terukkūttu-style Tamil play Karṇamōkṣam, attributed to
Pukalēntippuluvar, on which see de Bruin (1998, 1999); Hiltebeitel (1988, 395–413).
On other south Indian treatments of Karṇa, see Shulman (1985, 380, 387–400). On
Mahābhārata folk epic traditions on Karṇa in North India, see Sax (2000, 2002,
157–185); Hiltebeitel (1999a, 102–103 [in the Rajasthani Pābūjī] and 121–262 [in the
Hindi Ālhā]). See further Adarkar, 2001, 43–45.
4 See Smith (1972, 1992). Most of the epic (about 90 percent) is in śloka verses of
two sixteen-syllable lines, while most of the rest is in trisṭụ bh verses, regularly of four
eleven-syllable lines. Smith has argued that trisṭụ bhs form the epic’s “core” and irregular
trisṭụ bhs its “nucleus” (1972, 65).
5 See Hiltebeitel (2005c, 98–107); on the notion of “literary monstrosity,” see Hilte-
beitel (2001a, 1).
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 413
its audiences as readers.6 Moreover, the manuscript evidence reveals
the beginning of a literary history. The Poona Critical Edition makes
this history sufficiently accessible through its apparatus for one to get
a reasonable purchase on the flavor of what is stable and what has
been “improved.” In the passage translated here, for instance, one
can see that it is carefully constructed. It shows artistry: in framing
devices; in its play of tropes, especially irony; in the juxtaposition of
Vedic and Purāṇic allusions; in the swirl of affinities between heroes
and deities:7 and in the orchestration of epithets. It also requires of
us a sense of pacing: an awareness of what has come before it and of
what will follow it. One is alerted to the epic’s wider representations
of authorship, audience, and character.8 Noteworthy is the positioning
of characters at key moments in their unfolding: not only the principal
opponent, Karṇa, but the deepening portrayals—indeed, the “charac-
ter development”—of the side-characters Yudhisṭḥ ira and Dhṛtarāsṭṛa.
On the other hand, some of the main characters—Arjuna, Śalya, and
Kṛsṇ ̣a, for example—do nothing surprising in this segment. Indeed,
as Yudhisṭḥ ira tells Kṛsṇ ̣a in bringing the scene to closure, all Kṛsṇ ̣a
had to do ‘to make things turn out right’ was to act in character. By
this time in the war Yudhisṭḥ ira knows almost as much about Kṛsṇ ̣a’s
doings as the reader.
A. Immediate Setting and Wider-Background
The preparations for the final fight between Arjuna and Karṇa begin
with a passage (8.63.30–62) in which the two heroes’ divine fathers,
Indra (king of the gods and storm god) and Sūrya (the sun god), lead
the gods and demons, other celestials, and various classes of beings,
incarnate texts, and cosmic entities in declaring their preferences in
the incipient duel. In the course of this side-taking, Indra reminds
Brahmā and Śiva that Arjuna’s victory is certain (dhruva; 50): Arjuna
6 As A. K. Ramanujan has so nicely put it, “no Hindu ever reads the Mahābhārata
for the first time” (1991a, 419), and “in India . . . no one ever reads the Rāmāyaṇa
or the Mahābhārata for the first time” (1991b, 46). See Hiltebeitel (2000). See now
chapter 2.
7 Karṇa is like Rudra (65.36), but so is Arjuna, who must be reminded of the ways
he is like Rudra, Krsṇ ̣a, and Indra (65.18–20). Arjuna is like Indra (65.37), but then so
is Karṇa, fallen and beheaded, “one whose acts equaled those of the god of a thousand
eyes” (i.e., Indra; 67.37).
8 On authorship, see Hiltebeitel (2001a, 32–91, 278–322); on character, see Adarkar
(2001); on reader response, see Greer (2002).
414 chapter fifteen
and Kṛsṇ ̣a are the invincible “two Kṛsṇ ̣as” and are the ancient Ṛsịs
Nara and Nārāyaṇa (53–54). Since Kṛsṇ ̣a, who joins Indra’s son Arjuna
on the chariot, is ultimately Visṇ ̣u incarnate, Indra hereby invokes the
sanction of the epic’s three most supreme deities, Visṇ ̣u, Śiva, and
Brahmā, in effect anticipating the classical doctrine of the trimūrti, or
“three forms,” of the Hindu godhead.9 Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a as “the two
Kṛsṇ ̣a on one chariot” have behind them their further paired identities
not only as Nara and Nārāyaṇa but as the Vedic “friends” Indra and
Visṇ ̣u. The passage evokes all these associations, and makes the last
the most mysterious.
The pivotal character of this duel is thus underlined by the atten-
tion drawn to all the divine and cosmic agencies that converge not
only to witness it but also to have some kind of substantial part in its
unfolding. Its decisiveness can be measured by the fact that it is the
only duel in the Mahābhārata war in which divinities choose sides, as
they do not only in the Iliad, repeatedly, but just before the climactic
chariot duel between Cúchulainn and the “horn-skinned” Fer Diad
in the Táin Bó Cúalnge.10 Yet to appreciate that the result is already
known on high is only to begin to register that the death of Karṇa is
probably the most overdetermined event in the Mahābhārata war—
indeed, in the entire Mahābhārata. Karṇa is beset by a skein of fatali-
ties that unravels to bring upon him a gathering sense of doom. As
we find him in his final scene, he is left to imagine—and readers, too,
insofar as they sympathize and forget for a moment, like him, that his
defeat is divinely certain—that had it not been for these fatalities, he
could have defeated Arjuna; had it not been . . . for Kṛsṇ ̣a, whose divin-
ity Karṇa himself does not fail to recognize.11 Indeed, given what the
same reader comes to know about not only Kṛsṇ ̣a but about Vyāsa, the
author, Karṇa really didn’t stand a chance.12 Yet it is typical of God,
authors, and texts to leave openings, and, as we shall see, it is never
quite that straightforward.
9 See Biardeau (2002, 1:432; 2:318).
10 See Hiltebeitel (1982a, 106). The extensive parallels between these episodes in the
Irish and Indian epics remain to me an intriguing puzzle. See now chapter 16.
11 Karṇa recognizes Kṛsṇ ̣a as “the creator of the universe [srasṭọ jagatas]” (8.22.49)
even as he tries to counteract him by demanding Śalya as his charioteer; see Hiltebeitel
(1982a, 89; 1984, 9).
12 See Hiltebeitel (2001a, 59); Vyāsa drops in on the battlefield to prevent Yudhisṭḥ ira
from fighting Karnạ (7.158.51–62) thus keeping Yudhisṭḥ ira “in character” and appear-
ing to save his life and kingship but, more important, steering matters, like Kṛsṇ ̣a, to
assure that the decisive duel will be between Arjuna and Karṇa.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 415
B. Opening the Book on a Hero’s Life
Around Karṇa’s life, one can discern two framing passages: one (at
1.104) that virtually introduces him by his birth;13 the other (at 12.1–5)
that ends all narration of his life with a stark and knowing postmor-
tem. The debut birth passage is jewel-like in its glimpses into facets of
Karṇa’s destiny that problematize themselves as his story unfolds, par-
ticularly in the more fully developed birth narration in book 3, at the
point when Indra robs him of his natural-born armor and earrings.
Full of possibilities but also signs of danger, the debut birth passage
contrasts with Nārada’s sad but knowing obituary at the beginning of
book 12. Both passages, however, leave out what they wish among the
many forces that stack up against Karṇa. I will concentrate on these
fatalities as they close in upon him, filling out the picture between
these frames, especially as it relates to Kṛsṇ ̣a. The skein of occurrences,
as best I can reconstruct it from the Critical Edition,14 includes the
following thirteen episodes, all of which are significant for the death
passage in one way or another. As we shall see, Nārada’s postmortem
will also describe further episodes, showing that the list that follows
is incomplete. In introducing the main passage here, however, I will
concentrate primarily on episodes 7, 11, and 13 in this sequence, since
they have the most to do directly with Kṛsṇ ̣a.
1. Karṇa is abandoned at birth by his mother Kuntī (1.104; 3.297–98).
2 and 3. Karnạ is doubly cursed. First, after he has inattentively killed a
brahmin’s cow, the Brahmin curses him: may the earth swallow his wheel
at a time of greatest peril. Second, after he has pretended to be a Brahmin
in order to obtain a Brahmā-weapon from the brahmin weapon-master
Rāma Jāmadagnya, the latter curses him: may he forget the weapon at
the time he will be killed (8.29; 12·3, especially verse 31).
4. Although Karṇa exhibits matchless valor at a tournament of arms,
the appearance of his low-caste sūta father brings ridicule upon him.
Duryodhana, however, sees a formidable ally in Karṇa and appoints him
king of Aṅga.
5. The snake Aśvasena escapes the Fire (Agni)-feeding slaughter, by
Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a, of almost all the creatures at Khāṇḍava Forest and
13 Prior to this, he is described only in a partly formulaic verse (1.63.82), the last line
of which occurs two other times (1.104.11ab, 1.126.2ab): “The great chariot-warrior
Karṇa was begotten by Sūrya on the virgin Kuntī; his face alight with earrings, he wore
natural-born armor [sahajaṃ kavacaṃ vibhrat kuṇḍaloddyotitānanaḥ.].”
14 Thus leaving out Draupadī’s rejecting Karṇa as a suitor.
416 chapter fifteen
enters Karṇa’s quiver, becoming a snake arrow determined to kill Arjuna
in revenge (1.218).
6. Arjuna swears he will kill Karṇa after the humiliation of Draupadī
at the dice match (2.68.32–36).
7. Karṇa is possessed by Naraka Bhauma (3.240.19).
8. Indra, disguised as a brahmin, begs the gift of Karnạ ’s natural-born
earrings and armor, which make Karnạ immortal; Karnạ , not fooled by the
disguise but bound by his vow of gifting, flays his body, earning the name
Vaikartana, “the flayed,” and gives the earrings and armor in exchange for
Indra’s infallible spear that will kill whomever it strikes but can be used
by Karṇa only once, whereupon it will return to Indra (3.284–94).
9. Śalya, king of Madra, promises Yudhisṭḥ ira he will destroy Karnạ ’s
energy, or tejas (5.8).
10. During a Kaurava war-meeting, Karnạ recalls (reveals?)15 the fraud
of pretending he was a brahmin to Rāma Jamadagnya, but reassures
Duryodhana, “That weapon is still completely with me.” But Bhīsṃ a,
knowing better, says Karṇa lost his dharma and tapas when he lied to
“the blameless lord Rāma” for that weapon. Karṇa now decides for the
first time to lay down his weapons until Bhīsṃ a has fallen (5.6I).
11. Karṇa rejects the temptations offered by Kṛsṇ ̣a and Kuntī (5.138–
144).
12. Asked by Duryodhana to rank his warriors before battle, Bhīsṃ a
says, “Because of Rāma’s curse and the brahmin’s speech [abhiśāpāc ca
rāmasya brāhmanạ sya ca bhāsạ nāt],” he rates Karnạ only “half a warrior.”
Here Bhīsṃ a mentions the double curse, and Karṇa makes his second
refusal to fight until Bhīsṃ a is slain (5.165). Karṇa’s life is so disjointed
at this point that van Buitenen was led to admit, mistakenly, in a note
on this verse: “Rāma’s curse: this incident is unknown to me; at any rate
it is probably Bala-Rāma” (1978, 555)!
13. Karṇa uses up the never-failing spear against Ghatọ tkaca (7.154–
158).
14. Arjuna kills Karṇa (8.65–68).
After the fatalities at 2 and 3, which occur together, it does not seem
possible to determine their order in relation to the fatalities at 4, 5,
and 7. Unlike Yudhisṭḥ ira and Arjuna, who as winning heroes are the
15 It is possible to infer, as Biardeau does (2002, 1:745), that the Kauravas would not
know about Rāma Jāmadagnya’s curse when Karṇa says in book 3 that, after befriend-
ing Duryodhana and studying archery with Droṇa at Hāstinapura, he obtained “the
fourfold canon of weapons [astragamaṃ caturvidham]” from Droṇa, Kṛpa, and Rāma
(3.293.15–17). Indeed, Karṇa does not even seem to tell Sūrya of the curse when he
tells him he obtained weapons from Rāma Jāmadagnya (3.286.8). So this could be
where Bhīsṃ a learns about it. However, by the time Karṇa and Bhīsṃ a reconcile, after
Bhīsṃ a’s fall, Bhīsṃ a reveals that he has learned about Karṇa’s birth from Nārada,
Vyāsa, and Kṛsṇ ̣a (6.116.9), so he also could have heard about the curses from one or
more of these as well—and, of course, done so earlier.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 417
subject of consecutive narrative, Karṇa is the subject of a fragmented
countertext—what David Quint calls a loser’s epic of resistance16—that
the poets leave readers to piece together from segments where he is
part of the main story and patches where he is the subject of selective
memories—not only others’ memories but his own.17 Indeed, because
it is so fragmented, I had to abandon an original intention of arranging
Karṇa’s fatalities in the order of their mention in the text rather than
in the reconstructed order of their occurrence in his life. Yet some
order emerges when we recognize that most of Karṇa’s troubles cluster
around three connections: those with his mother, Kuntī, those with
Brahmins (including Indra disguised as one), and those with Kṛsṇ ̣a.
Karṇa’s debut passage, which mentions events in his life up to his
obtaining Indra’s spear in exchange for his own armor and earrings,
occurs before Kṛsṇ ̣a enters the Mahābhārata, which he does at the
wedding of Draupadī. But by the time Karṇa and Indra actually make
this exchange, it is the last year of the Pāṇḍavas’ exile, and Kṛsṇ ̣a has
become involved. Nonetheless, even the opening passage anticipates
that Kṛsṇ ̣a will be the son of Kuntī’s young brother Vasudeva, and
thus her nephew (at least in terms of her family of birth). Accordingly,
Karṇa is not only the unknown elder brother of the Pāṇḍavas; still
more hiddenly, he is, as much as Arjuna, a cross cousin of Kṛsṇ ̣a—
known from the start to Kuntī, soon known to Kṛsṇ ̣a, and eventually
known to Karṇa himself. As far as I can recall, this relationship goes
unmentioned. But it points up one facet of a deep and largely unex-
pressed rapport between Karṇa and Kṛsṇ ̣a that we must explore.
16 See Quint (1993, 11): “episodic dismemberment of narrative” in stories with no
place to go; “deliberately disconnected and aimless” stories, over and against the “master
narratives” (15) of “epic triumphalism” (41).
17 A telling instance occurs shortly before Karṇa’s duel with Arjuna, when he sud-
denly remembers the brahmin’s curse concerning the wheel after first recalling the curse
of Rāma Jāmadagnya: “‘Your wheel will fall into a hole’, a brahmin told me, ‘while
you are fighting in battle fearful in dire straits’. Therefore I fear mightily because of
the brahmin’s utterance” (8.29.31–32b). According to Nārada, this curse would have
preceded Rāṃa’s, since it was provoked soon after Rāma had accepted Karṇa as his
disciple. In Karṇa’s account, its abruptness has a surreal quality, as if his memory were
itself fragmentary, like his story. The Critical Edition shows the likelihood that later
Norhern redactors edited around this passage to bring it into line with more consecutive
narrative and with the more orderly version later told by Nārada. Cf. 3.42.20, where
Arjuna (whose memory is also often spotty) gets a strong hint as to Karṇa’s siring by
Sūrya. Just after Arjuna has obtained the Pāśupata weapon from Śiva, Yama gives him
his staff-weapon and says, “Karṇa, who is a particle of my father, the god who sends
heat to all the worlds, the mighty Karṇa will be slain by you, Dhanaṃjaya.”
418 chapter fifteen
C. Karṇa Is Possessed by Naraka Bhauma (Episode 7)
During the epic’s seventh book, in which Droṇa marshals the Kaurava
army, Kṛsṇ ̣a saves Arjuna by intercepting a weapon intended for him,
receiving it on his chest. Arjuna protests that when Kṛsṇ ̣a agreed to
drive Arjuna’s chariot, he vowed to be a noncombatant. Kṛsṇ ̣a then
explains his intervention by telling a “secret of old.” This weapon just
hurled by Bhagadatta, king of Prāgjyotisạ (Assam), was the Vaisṇ ̣ava
weapon, and no one else could have neutralized it. Bhagadatta got it
from the former Prāgjyotisạ king Naraka Bhauma, “Naraka the son
of Earth,” who got it from Kṛsṇ ̣a’s fourth (caturthi) form (mūrti).18
Pṛthivī (Earth) had requested the Vaisṇ ̣ava weapon for her son Naraka
to make him invincible by gods and demons. After Kṛsṇ ̣a had killed
Naraka,19 the weapon passed on to Bhagadatta, whom Arjuna, says
Kṛsṇ ̣a, should now “divest of that supreme weapon as I formerly slew
Naraka” (7.28.16–35).
Naraka Bhauma would thus seem to have gotten his weapon long,
long ago; but when did Kṛsṇ ̣a kill him? If a sequence in the Nārāyaṇīya
is to be taken as implying consecutiveness, Kṛsṇ ̣a killed Naraka after
Kṛsṇ ̣a and his Yādava clan had moved to Dvārakā, and before the
killing of Jarāsaṃdha, an event that occurs near the beginning of
book 2.20 Kṛsṇ ̣a’s slaying of Naraka is first recalled at the beginning of
book 3. When Kṛsṇ ̣a first visits the Pāṇḍavas in the forest and is enraged
at their exile, Arjuna calms him by reciting his past deeds; among
18 Indeed, Kṛsṇ ̣a’s secret story is deeper still. He continues: “Eternally engaged in
protecting [trāṇa] the worlds, I have four forms. Dividing my own self here, I bestow
the worlds’ welfare. One form, stationed on earth, does the practice of tapas. Another
beholds the right and wrong done in the universe. Another, having resorted to the
human world, performs action. The fourth, however, lies in sleep for a thousand
years. My form that awakens at the end of a thousand years gives at that time the best
of boons to those worthy of boons. Pṛthivī [Earth], having known that time to have
arrived, then asked me for a boon for the sake of Naraka. Listen to it” (7.28.23–27). A
similar terminology is used in a devotional section of Śāntiparvan called the Nārāyanị̄ya,
where Nara, Nārāyaṇa, Hari, and Kṛsṇ ̣a are said to be the four forms [caturmūrti] of
Nārāyaṇa, “born into the house of Dharma” (12.322.2ab; see 326.13; 332.19; 335.1).
It is not certain, however, how one might correlate the “four forms” in the two texts,
and I leave the topic in the hope of discussing it elsewhere.
19 It is not clear how Kṛsṇ ̣a overcomes Naraka’s alleged invincibility. Perhaps as a
man Kṛsṇ ̣a is neither deva nor asura.
20 See 12.326.82–89; Dvārakā is mentioned at 12.326.84–85. See Harivaṃśa 91.4–92:
Kṛsṇ ̣a comes from Dvārakā against Naraka riding with his wife, Satyabhāmā, on his
divine “mount,” the great bird Garuḍa! On the Nārāyaṇīya, see note 18 here.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 419
them are the following: “You slew Naraka Bhauma taking the two jew-
eled earrings [nihatya narakaṃ bhaumam āhṛtya maṇikuṇḍale]. . . .
The Mauravas and Pāśas have been set down, Nisunda and Naraka
slain; the road to Prāgjyotisạ city has again been made secure [kṛtaḥ
ksẹ maḥ punaḥ pantha puram prāgjyotisạ prati].”21 And this victory is
soon recalled in other passages that laud Kṛsṇ ̣a’s past deeds, three of
them in book 5.22
In addition to getting the Vaisṇ ̣ava weapon from his mother Earth,
Naraka Bhauma thus stole Aditi’s earrings, which Kṛsṇ ̣a killed him to
retrieve. The epic does not say what Kṛsṇ ̣a did with these earrings. But
in what appears to be the first full account in the Harivaṃśa (91.5–92),
once Kṛsṇ ̣a slew her son Naraka, Bhūmi (Earth) picked up the ear-
rings and gave them to Kṛsṇ ̣a, saying, “Even given by you, Govinda,
so this one is made to fall by you; as you desire, so you are like a
child at play with his toys. Protect these two earrings, O God, and his
children.”23 Kṛsṇ ̣a then gave the earrings to Indra on Mount Meru,
and he and Indra then returned them to Aditi (HV 92.46–56). But
now one may recall that Karṇa’s earrings were once Aditi’s to give
to Sūrya (3.291.16–23). If they are the same earrings that Sūrya then
gave to Karṇa, Sūrya must have gotten them from Aditi after they
were recovered from Naraka. But that would seem difficult to square
with Karṇa’s being born with them, which would seem to have been
earlier than Kṛsṇ ̣a could have retrieved them. For if Kṛsṇ ̣a carries out
this mission after having settled the Yādavas in Dvārakā, he must have
slain Naraka and retrieved the earrings after his childhood, and thus
apparently fairly recently. So, more likely, Sūrya would have gotten
21 3.13.16ab and 26. Between these verses Arjuna also recalls that Kṛsṇ ̣a, as Visṇ ̣u,
is the son of Aditi and younger brother of Indra (23), perhaps suggesting that the
earrings link these stories.
22 The gods had been unable to wrest the earrings from the robber [dasyu] Naraka
in “Prāgjyotisạ , the terrible invincible fort city of the Asuras [durgam puraṃ ghoram
asurāṇāṃ asahyam]”; when Kṛsṇ ̣a succeeded, they gave him the boons of no fatigue in
battle, the ability to step on water and air, and impenetrability to weapons (5.47.74–81).
Further, Kṛsṇ ̣a slew Naraka, and other foes such as Kaṃsa and Śiśupāla, “as if in play
[krīḍann iva]”] (5.66.4); “having cut the nooses of Muru,” slain Naraka Bhauma, taken
the jeweled earrings, various other gems, and sixteen thousand women [to become his
wives, according to the Harivaṃśa, he obtained his Śārṅga bow (5.155.8–9; Harivaṃśa
92.18–35). The speakers in these passages are Arjuna as reported by Saṃjaya, Saṃjaya,
and Vaiśampāyana, respectively. Dhṛtarāsṭṛa also knows of the killing of Naraka and
Muru among Kṛsṇ ̣a’s feats (7.10.5) and the Nārāyaṇīya, in an ancient prophetic voice,
foretells it as a future act of Nārāyaṇa-Kṛsṇ ̣a (12.326.83–85).
23 Harivaṃśa 91.59 and 1083* (the middle line about the toys being an interpolation).
420 chapter fifteen
a different pair of Aditi’s earrings directly from her, as her son, and
imparted them to Karṇa. By the time Indra has gotten the latter ear-
rings from Karṇa, Aditi has already gotten back Naraka’s earrings, and
we are in the dark as to what Indra then did with Karṇa’s.
So if Aditi’s jewelry were all that connected Karṇa and Naraka, the
two pairs of earrings would be a dead end. But there is more that
connects Naraka and Karṇa. Both are born virtually immortal: Karṇa
with his earrings made of amṛta; Naraka with a boon of immortality.
Each rules with some question of illegitimacy: Karṇa, the low-caste
sūta’s son, rules Aṅga as a gift of Duryodhana; Naraka is a demon
named “Hell” who menaces the gods. Their countries are both to the
east: Aṅga is to the east of Madhyadeśa, the Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas’
“middle land”; Prāgjyotisạ means “lighted from the east” or “eastern/
eastward light.” Along with retrieving the stolen earrings, Kṛsṇ ̣a comes
from Dvārakā in the west to “make safe the road to Prāgjyotisạ , the
Eastward Light.”24 Karṇa worships the morning sun at such lengths
that his back gets burnt. Naraka’s full name, Naraka Bhauma, can
mean “Hell on Earth,” as in the story of Yayāti, who is bounced from
heaven;25 afterward, this “Hell on Earth” is his destination.26 Karṇa’s
life becomes a kind of hell on earth. Indeed, this Earth defines both
their mothers. Naraka’s is Bhūmi or Pṛthivī, Earth herself; Karṇa’s is
Pṛthā, “Broad (like the Earth).” This affinity is so tangible that Pāṇḍav
Līlā folklore makes Bhūmi and Kuntī sisters, with Kuntī as Mother
Earth’s elder sister! Mother Earth’s son Bhaumāsura (Earthly Demon,
a fitting shorthand for Naraka) is thus Karṇa’s cousin, as is Kṛsṇ ̣a. He
is also the father of Bhagadatta, who agrees to help Arjuna find the
path to the underworld when Arjuna bribes him with golden earrings!27
It is as if there were an implicit micromyth linking two pairs of solar
earrings with demonic realms to the east that capture them, and from
24 Perhaps it is significant that he comes with Satyabhāmā, whose name means “light
of truth (Biardeau, 2002, 1:910).
25 Mahābhārata 1.85.3–9, 187.6–7; see Dumézil (1973, 30–37). See the story of
Somaka, who sacrificed his only son to get all his wives pregnant with sons. It worked,
but when he died and found that his priest had gone to Naraka for officiating, he
decided not to leave hell without him (3.128)—Somaka negotiates this with Yama
Dharmarāja in a story told to Yudhisṭḥ ira, who faces a similar quandary at the end
of the Mahābhārata.
26 Biardeau (2002, 1:683), sees Naraka as “the asura who gives his name to the hell
reserved for men.”
27 See Sax (2002, 71–74). Bhagadatta seems to have become a brahmin in this story.
Kuntī’s great old age is a recurrent theme in Pāṇḍav Līlā folklore; see 144, 154.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 421
which they must be retrieved for a way to be opened.28 Karṇa and
Naraka do not have parallel careers, but it is as if they were drawn
from the same metonymic gene pool and the same stock of cosmo-
logical images.
Moreover, there is an actual fusion between Naraka and Karṇa.
Shortly before Indra robs Karṇa’s earrings, the despairing Duryod-
hana, determined to fast to death, is spirited to the underworld realm
of demons29 by a kṛtyā—a female personification of black magic,
or abhicāra30—whom the demons have sent for him. There Duryo-
dhana’s demon hosts tell him that Naraka has possessed Karṇa:
“the soul [ātman] of the slain Naraka resides in the form of Karṇa
[karṇamūrtim upāśritaḥ]” (3·240.19ab). Indeed, it is “knowing this”
that Indra will now rob Karṇa of his earrings (20—21)! For as we learn
further from the epic’s main narrator, Vaiśampāyana, Karṇa’s posses-
sion by Naraka has intensified Karṇa’s cruelty in his determination to
kill Arjuna: “Karṇa too, his mind and soul possessed by the inner soul
of Naraka [āvisṭ ạ cittātmā narakasyāntarātmanā], then set his cruel
mind [krūram akarot sa matiṃ tadā] on Arjuna’s death” (32). Indeed,
not only has Naraka possessed Karṇa; Bhīsṃ a, Droṇa, and Kṛpa have
also now been possessed by Dānavas and the Saṃśaptakas have been
possessed by Rāksạ sas (33–34)—all, it would seem, within the same
recent time frame that includes Karṇa’s possession by Naraka. It would
appear that Naraka’s affinities with Karṇa have drawn Naraka to pos-
sess Karṇa as a means of revenge against Kṛsṇ ̣a, his slayer.
Yet if Karṇa is demonically possessed from at least this time to
his death,31 as would seem to be implied, this fusion will have its
28 I use the term micromyth in the sense defined by Doniger (1998, 88): “an imagi-
nary text, a scholarly construct that contains the basic elements from which all possible
variants could be created.”
29 They are terrible (raudra) daityas and dānavas who dwell in Pātala or Rasātala
(3.239.18 and 25), not in Naraka (hell); see note 25 and 26 here.
30 See Hiltebeitel (2001a, 190–91), noting that Draupadī has kṛtyā traits; and so
does Kuntī, with her abhicāra mantra from Durvāsas. On abhicāra, see further Türstig
(1985).
31 Karṇa has a modified demonic nature in the Draupadī cult Terukkūttu (a point
missed in Hiltebeitel, 1988, 400); see de Bruin (1999, 294–296, 315). It comes to
him at birth from the demon Tānācuran̠, the “gift-demon” or “liberal asura” (295),
no doubt a fabulous transformation (a thousand heads, two thousand earrings) of
Naraka. Karṇa’s being demonic from birth could be pertinent, as de Bruin suggests,
to his “black, ‘demonic’ side” at Draupadī’s disrobing (294). And of course even in the
Sanskrit Mahābhārata, Naraka could have possessed Karṇa by then.
422 chapter fifteen
limits.32 As the epic ends, Yudhisṭḥ ira will find Duryodhana in Heaven,
and, rather than reside there with his former enemy, he will demand
to be with his loved ones, even if they are in Hell, Naraka. There
Yudhisṭḥ ira’s presence redeems them all, and of Karṇa, in particular,
Vaiśampāyana says: “Nor was the truth-speaking hero Karṇa, O King,
long worthy of Naraka [narakārhaś ciram]” (18.3.36cd). So Karṇa was
no more worthy of hell than of the demon who possessed him.
D. Karṇa’s Temptations by Kṛsṇ ̣a and Kuntī (Episode 11)
As a series of failed negotiations gives way to full preparation for war,
Kṛsṇ ̣a, the last negotiator to find peace beyond reach, saves for the end
of his embassy a conversation with Karṇa. Once Kṛsṇ ̣a leaves, Karṇa
is also approached by Kuntī. These two conversations take Karṇa into
the depths of his predicament, confront him with his own truths, and
reveal that, no matter how many forces work against him and no mat-
ter how base he has at times been or how possessed he might become,
he is a great hero and a good man. As Kṛsṇ ̣a will put it—with terrible
irony—after Karṇa’s death: “He who announced Kṛsṇ ̣ā [Draupadī]
won by dice, the vilest of good men [satpurusạ̄ dhamaḥ]—today the
earth drinks that sūta’s son’s blood” (8.69.17).)
Kṛsṇ ̣a takes Karṇa on Kṛsṇ ̣a’s chariot out from the Kaurava capi-
tal, and tells him he is legally a son of Pāṇḍu (5.138.1–9). That being
so, he offers to consecrate him king and promises, rather shockingly,
that even “Draupadī will come to you at the sixth time” (9, 15, 18).
Karṇa says he doesn’t doubt that Kṛsṇ ̣a speaks “out of friendship and
affection, and so as a friend [you] have my best interests at heart”
(139.1). Their surprising friendship on Kṛsṇ ̣a’s chariot resonates with
other epic pairings between charioteers and warriors: in particular, the
contrast between the Kṛsṇ ̣a and Arjuna as friends on Arjuna’s char-
iot and Śalya and Karṇa as antagonists on Karṇa’s chariot.33 Karṇa
32 If the case of Nala is a Mahābhārata parallel, such possession is an off-and-on
matter; see Hiltebeitel (2001a, 220–236); Biardeau (2002, 2:516): Karṇa, “possédé par
l’asura Naraka, ne lui a pas plus cédé que Nala n’a cédé au Kali.”
33 See Adarkar (2001, 96 n. 36). We learn at the end of this exchange that Saṃjaya
has come too (5.141.48), which explains how he can narrate the dialogue to Dhrṭarāsṭṛa
and not need the “divine eye,” which he gets only later from Vyāsa (6.2.9–13), to narrate
the war. But when does Saṃjaya tell this to Dhṛtarāsṭṛa? Clearly, he and Dhṛtarāsṭṛa
know things about Karṇa that they will keep from Duryodhana.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 423
knows details about his birth beyond what Kṛsṇ ̣a tells him, suggesting
he already knows he is Kuntī’s son. He will remain loyal to Duryo-
dhana and continue to cast his lot with the sūtas, who have loved,
raised, and married him into their lineage (3–16). It is thus for the
best, he tells Purusọ ttama,34 that they suppress their conversation, for
if Yudhisṭḥ ira were to know Karṇa as his elder brother, he would not
accept the kingdom; and if Karṇa were to accept it he would give it
to Duryodhana. Better, he says, that “Yudhisṭḥ ira be king forever, he
who has Hṛsị̄keśa for his guide [netā],35 Dhanaṃjaya as his warrior”
(20–23, 57). Karṇa foresees that Duryodhana will now perform a great
“sacrifice of weapons” at which Kṛsṇ ̣a will be witness and the Adh-
varyu (ringmaster) priest (29). He admits that he now “burns from
the karma” of his harsh words (katụ kāṇi) to the Pāṇḍavas, uttered to
please Duryodhana (45), and we must grant that these would include
his insults to Draupadī.36 He asks the Lotus-Eyed one that the ksạ triyas,
“old in learning and old in days,” may by death in battle ascend to
heaven “on the Kuru field, holiest even in the triple world” (52–54.)—a
favor Kṛsṇ ̣a grants (140.16–20). Karṇa’s worship of the Sun thus does
not eclipse his deeper acknowledgment of Kṛsṇ ̣a bhakti. Kṛsṇ ̣a smiles,
then laughs and asks, “Does this offer of a kingdom not even tempt
you?”37 With Karṇa’s resolution, the Pāṇḍavas’ victory is now certain
beyond a doubt (140.1–3). Karṇa asks Kṛsṇ ̣a why “you wish to bewil-
der me [māṃ . . . sammohayitum icchasi]” when you already know my
answer, and admits that he is among the Kauravas bringing destruction
to the earth (141.1–2). After their final words, Karṇa, having “clasped
Mādhava tightly,” descends from his chariot, and Kṛsṇ ̣a speeds back
to the Pāṇḍavas (47–49).
The Kaurava elder Vidura now goes to Kuntī and tells her he can’t
sleep (142.1–9). “Sick with woe herself,” Kuntī broods over Karṇa’s
obstinacy and the danger he poses to the Pāṇḍavas (17). Recalling her
34 5.139.20b. Uses of this name for Kṛsṇ ̣a play between its ordinary resonance as
“best of men” and its theological import as Kṛsṇ ̣a’s highest divine name, equivalent to
God or Supreme Being (see Kṛsṇ ̣a’s explanation of his uttamaḥ purusạ ḥ, or “supreme
spirit,” in Bhagavad Gītā 15.17).
35 Arjuna follows Krṣ ṇ ạ ’s “lead.” Krṣ ṇ ạ is “guide” as Hrṣ ị̄keśa, “master of the senses”;
the name also can mean “he whose hair bristles with joy” (Biardeau, 2002, 1:595).
36 See Hiltebeitel (1981, 101–103). On the night before he takes command of the
Kaurava army, Karṇa even shares regrets with Duryodhana, “recalling the pain they
had caused Kṛsṇ ̣ā [Draupadī] at the dicing” (8.1.7).
37 Literally, “burn you” (tapet). Kṛsṇ ̣a would be able to explain his silence on this
exchange as a promise to Karṇa, but no one ever asks.
424 chapter fifteen
vulnerabilities at his conception, she asks herself “Why should this
kānīna [son of an unmarried girl], who has returned to me as a son,
not do my word that is so salutary for his brothers?” (25). Kuntī is
right that Karṇa would be covered by the law’s retrospective intent
regarding unwed mothers. But she would get no support from The
Laws of Manu (9.160) on the crucial point of Karṇa’s status as inheri-
tor of the kingdom: a kānīna is one of six types of sons “who are
relatives but not heirs”!38 Karṇa would not inherit the kingdom, but
of course Yudhisṭḥ ira would “give” it to him, as Karṇa has just said
to Kṛsṇ ̣a. Yet Kuntī is drawing on another resonant theme here: sons
should listen to their mothers. Indeed, she is used to having her sons
take her word as absolute command, for it was she who once told
them “Share it all equally,” when she thought they were coming back
with alms and instead they were talking about a “girl” just like she
once was herself, Draupadī, whom Arjuna had just won in marriage.39
So Kuntī goes to the Gaṅgā to find Karṇa. There she hears him recit-
ing and stands behind him, waiting for him to finish. While he faces
east with his arms raised, she stands in the shade of his upper garment
like a withered garland of lotuses, hurting from the sunburn. At last,
“having prayed up to the burning of his back [āpṛsṭ ḥ atāpāj japtvā] he
turned around, and seeing Kuntī he saluted her with joined palms,
as was proper, this proud man of great tejas, the best of dharma’s
upholders” (30). It is a precise evocation both of the tejas Śalya has
sworn to destroy, and of the conditions under which Karṇa, while
praying, gives boons “to Brahmins especially, and always to all who
are good [sarvesạ̄ ṃ sarvadā satām]” (3.286.6cd).40 So we know that
Kuntī might have done best had she come to make her request with
a brahmin. It would now be sometime in the early afternoon, and she
has, moreover, waited until Karṇa has finished his prayers. So he need
give her nothing. Perhaps she knows all this and waits to make it clear
that she is not trying to trap him. By the end he will make her a great
gift of his own devising.
38 Olivelle (2005a, 199): See The Laws of Manu 9.172.
39 See Hiltebeitel (1988, 200).
40 See 1.104.14–17: While growing up, “he worshiped Āditya (the Sun) up to the
burning of his back [āpṛsṭḥ atāpād ādityam upatasthe], at which time while muttering
prayer [yasmin kāle japan aste] there was nothing the great-souled hero, true to his word,
would not give at that time to Brahmins [nādeyam brāmaṇesṿ āsit tasmin kāle].”
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 425
Kuntī tells Karṇa he was her first-born, a kānīna; about Sūrya being
his father, the earrings, armor, and so forth (143.2–5)—nothing new
to him, but perhaps she doesn’t know that. Then she gets to the point:
“It is not proper, son, especially for you, that, without knowing your
brothers, you serve the Dhārtarāsṭṛas from delusion [mohād]. In deci-
sions about men’s dharma, this is the fruit of dharma, son—that his
father, and one-eyed mother too,41 are satisfied” (6–7). Is she saying
that as the fruit of her dharma Karṇa should satisfy her? In any case,
she tells how splendid it would be if Karṇa joined forces with Arjuna
.
and the rest, and concludes: “Endowed with virtues, eldest and best
among relations who are the best, you will no longer be called ‘sūta’s
son.’ You are a heroic Pārtha” (12). An elitist, Kuntī appeals to what
can only be Karṇa’s sorest spot. And just at this point Karṇa hears
“a voice [that] issued from Sūrya, difficult to transgress, affectionate,
and uttered like a father: ‘Kuntī has spoken the truth, Karṇa, do your
mother’s word’” (5.144.1–2b). Unlike the Pāṇḍavas, who have only
their mother’s word to obey when she orders them to share equally,42
Karṇa hears his mother’s command reinforced by his father’s. This is
a lot of pressure from these absentee parents, but “Karṇa’s thought did
not waver, for he was firm in truth” (3). He tells Kuntī he does not
doubt her word; it would be his gateway to dharma to carry out her
command (niyoga).
But by casting me away, the wrong you have done me, destructive of
fame and glory, is irreversible. . . . When there was time to act, you did
not show me this crying out [anukrośa]. And now you have summoned
me, whom you have denied the sacraments. You never acted in my inter-
est like a mother, and now, here you are, enlightening me solely in your
own interest! (4–8)
41 Van Buitenen has a note (1975, 553): “Nīlakaṇtḥ a: ‘having eyes only for her son,’
but I suspect an idiom here: a mother without her husband, the son’s father.”
42 “Mother Kuntī’s orders” are nicely thematized in the Pāṇḍav Līlās of Garhwal;
see Sax (2002, 71), and especially (153–155) where Arjuna follows them to find out
who Draupadī and Kuntī really are: the two chief “hags” (panchali, “bird”—Hindi
paksị̄, and evoking Draupadī’s name Pāñcāli) among the sixty-four yoginīs who have
determined the outcome of the Mahābhārata war! Indeed, as this episode reflects,
the Pāṇḍavas end up marrying a woman rather like their mother, pushed to do so
by Kuntī’s unintended word that she utters absent the higher word of the Pāṇḍavas’
deceased father. See Ramanujan (1991a, 437), on “autonomous action complexes” that
can move from one character to others (I would add, “especially within a family”); so
that “once set into motion, the act chooses its personae, constitutes its agents”; char-
acters are “not quite ‘fixed,’ or ‘finite’ as they are open to past lives as well as other
lives around them” (440).
426 chapter fifteen
He will not do her bidding; he will fight her sons with all his strength.
But her effort will not be vain: he will spare her other four sons in
battle and only seek to kill Arjuna; whether it is he or Arjuna who
dies, five will survive. Why does Karṇa say this? It is, he says, “while
trying to persevere in the conduct of noncruelty that befits a good
man [ānṛśaṃsyam atho vṛttaṃ raksạ n satpurusọ citam]” (144.19ab).
To Kuntī’s self-serving “crying out” (anukrośa), Karṇa responds with
“noncruelty” (ānṛśaṃsya)! It is these two virtues, especially befitting
of a king, that Yudhisṭḥ ira spends a lifetime learning to put together.43
But in this impasse, the two cannot be one—unless they are implicitly
one in Karṇa. “Having heard Karṇa’s answer, Kuntī shuddered from
sorrow.” But her closing words are remorseless. Embracing Karṇa,
recognizing that his words mean destruction for the Kauravas and that
“fate is all-powerful,” she says:
promise your commitment to that pledge you have given [tvayā . . . dattaṃ
tat pratijānīhi saṃgarapratimocanam], enemy-plougher, for the safety
[abhayam] of your four brothers. Good health and good luck. . . . Pleased,
Karṇa saluted her [tāṃ karṇo ‘bhyavadat prītas]. Then they both went
their separate ways. (24–26)
It is an iconic moment, this “pleased” salute, for he has made his sad
amends with God and his mother.
E. Karṇa Uses Up the Never-Failing Spear (Episode 13)
Indra gave Karṇa the never-failing spear in exchange for his golden
armor and earrings. In the terrible night battle after the fourteenth
day of war, Bhīma’s half-Rāksạ sa son Ghatọ tkaca wreaks havoc. The
Kauravas panic and, in a surprisingly brief appeal, press Karṇa to use
the spear against him (7.154.48–50). Caught in the moment, Karṇa
hurls it and kills Ghatọ tkaca, but the spear is gone: “that resplendent
spear soared aloft in the night entering the intervals of the constel-
lations [naksạ trāṇām antarāṇy āviśanti]” (51–57)—to disappear, one
assumes, into the nighttime outer space where Indra awaits its return
to his hand.44 The Kauravas rejoice (62–63). But the poets are not
interested in the weapon’s fate or even the fall of Ghatọ tkaca, who as
43 See Hiltebeitel (2001a, 202–214, 230–231, 268–277; Lath 1990).
44 See 3.294.24–25.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 427
Dhṛtarāsṭṛa soon realizes, “was as insignificant as straw [tṛṇabhūtam]”
(158.10d); they are interested in the import of Karṇa’s wasting
this weapon, and, with that, in imagining what might have been
otherwise.
The Pāṇḍavas weep over the death of Bhīma’s son (155.1)—until
Kṛsṇ ̣a shocks them: “But Vāsudeva was filled with great delight. As if
agitating, he shouted leonine shouts, Bhārata, and shouting great shouts
he embraced Phālguna. Shouting great shouts and tying the reins, he
danced wrapped with joy like a tree shaken by the wind” (155.2–3).
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s joy mounts until Arjuna, finding that it looks unseemly, asks,
“If it is not a secret . . . Madhusūdana, tell me what has removed your
gravity today; I think the levity of your action, Janārdana, is like the
drying up of the ocean or the creeping along [visarpaṇam] of Mount
Meru” (9c-10).45 Kṛsṇ ̣a replies that Karṇa was invincible with his
never-failing spear. From the time he got it for his armor and earrings,
which also made him invincible, he
always thought you were slain in battle, but even with it gone he can
only be slain by you. . . . He has now become human [so ’dya mānusạ tāṃ
prāpto]. . . . There will be only one means [eko hi yogo] to his death, in
an opening brought on by his own inattentiveness. In that difficult situ-
ation, you should kill him when his chariot-wheel is sunk. I will signal
you beforehand. (23, 2.7e, 28)
So Kṛsṇ ̣a knows Karṇa’s whole story in advance, from the two curses
on. Having found the means (yogais; 29) to kill other wicked foes, Kṛsṇ ̣a
implies that it was he who was behind the staying of Ghatọ tkaca—a
Rāksạ sa, moreover, who hated brahmins and sacrifices and violated
dharma; had Karṇa not killed him, Kṛsṇ ̣a would have had to do it
himself “for the sake of the establishment of dharma,46 my imperish-
able vow” (156.25–28). Kṛsṇ ̣a must conjure up generic Rāksạ sa traits
here to justify killing Ghatọ tkaca, whose epic profile and stories hardly
support the charge that he hated brahmins and the rest.
Dhṛtarāsṭṛa soon recalls that Kṛsṇ ̣a did indeed dispatch Ghatọ tkaca
to nullify Karṇa’s spear. He has just heard Saṃjaya narrate those
very events (7.148.21–52): with Karṇa blazing like the Sun at night,
45 In effect, the simile suggests that Kṛsṇ ̣a looks like the pivot of the universe turn-
ing into a snake.
46 Echoing Bhagavad Gītā 4.7–8 with the phrase dharmasaṃsthāpanārtham
(156.28c).
428 chapter fifteen
Yudhisṭḥ ira had urged Arjuna to fight him, but Kṛsṇ ̣a had said that
so long as Karṇa still held Indra’s spear, it was not yet time for that
(34). Kṛsṇ ̣a had convinced Arjuna that Ghatọ tkaca should fight
Karṇa, and then told Ghatọ tkaca to use the advantages Rāksạ sas have
at night (51–52). So now, recalling that Arjuna had vowed to meet
any challenge, Dhṛtarāsṭṛa asks why didn’t Karṇa challenge Arjuna
while he had the spear? What was wrong with Duryodhana’s intelli-
gence (buddhi) and counselors? “Vāsudeva has cheated Karṇa of that
spear through Ghatọ tkaca. As a bilva fruit would be snatched from the
hand of a withered arm by a stronger man, so the never failing spear
has become a failure [śaktir amoghā sā moghī bhūtā] in Ghatọ tkaca”
(157.3–5, 6c-7). Saṃjaya replies that Kṛsṇ ̣a has just saved Arjuna with
another of his yogas: “Having known what Karṇa wished to do, king,
the slayer of Madhu commanded the lord of Rāksạ sas to duel with
Karṇa. . . . That spear would have killed Kaunteya like a tree hit by a
thunderbolt” (11, 16).47 Hearing Saṃjaya tell him that Dhṛtarāsṭṛa’s
own “bad counsel” (12) is in part to blame, Dhṛtarāsṭṛa tries to shift
the blame to Saṃjaya: “Why was this great goal also neglected by
you, Gāvalgaṇi; why weren’t you wise to it, greatly wise one?” (18).
Saṃjaya says he was always in the inner circle where it was resolved
every night: Karṇa should use the spear against Arjuna; or if Arjuna
falls, kill Kṛsṇ ̣a; or kill Kṛsṇ ̣a even before Arjuna, since he is the root
of all the Pāṇḍavas’ successes (19–26). Daily they would awake with
this resolution (buddhi)
regarding the immeasurable Hṛsị̄keśa, lord of the thirty gods, but at the
time of battle it was confounded [vyamuhyata]; and Keśava also always
protected Arjuna. . . . He never wished to place him fac ing the sūta’s
son in battle. . . . That is how the never-failing spear was made a failure.
(27–29)
Not only that, Saṃjaya heard Kṛsṇ ̣a tell his kinsman Sātyaki that it was
he himself who baffled Karṇa’s plan for the spear:
I confused [mohayāmi] Rādheya . . . I do not regard my father, mother,
yourselves, my brothers, or my breaths [as] so worthy of prot ection as
Bībhatsu48 in battle. . . . So it was that the Rāksạ sa was sent by me to fight
47 Note that Kṛsṇ ̣a will then dance “wrapped with joy like a tree shaken by the
wind,” as just cited.
48 Implying recognition of Arjuna’s reluctance to kill Karṇa as requiring this pro-
tection?
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 429
Karṇa; surely there was no other to withstand Karṇa in a battle at night.
(36, 40, 43)
Dhṛtarāsṭṛa is now all the more dissatisfied with the Kauravas, and
tells Saṃjaya “and you especially, son [tāta tava viśesạ taḥ],” did
not see to it that Karṇa hurled the spear “at Phālguna or the son of
Devakī”:(158.1–3). Saṃjaya repeats that Karṇa went to battle every
day with that advice,
but when morning came, king, Karnạ ’s and the other warriors’ int elligence
was destroyed by divine destiny [daivataiḥ . . . buddhir naśyate]. I think
fate [daivam] is supreme, since Karṇa, with that [spear] in hand, did not
kill Pārtha or Kṛsṇ ̣a the son of Devakī in battle. That spear held in his
hand was raised like the Night of Time! Karṇa was a lord who possessed
an intelligence afflicted by fate [daivopahata buddhitvān]. Confused by
the gods’ illusion [mohito deva-māyayā],49 he did not release that Vāsavī
[weapon of Vāsava, Indra] for death’s sake into Devakī’s son Kṛsṇ ̣a or
into Pārtha. (6–9)
Dhṛtarāsṭṛa is then given the last word, speaking in the second person,
perhaps as if to all of us: “You are destroyed by fate, by your own intel-
ligence, and by Keśava; the Vāsavī is gone, having slain Ghatọ tkacha
who was as insignificant as straw” (10); and with no more to say on
the matter, he asks Saṃjaya, So what happened next . . .?
The passage takes us to new and uncharted depths. There have been
hints elsewhere that although Karṇa offers his devotions to Sūrya by
day, the power that links him to Sūrya is strongest at night.50 After
debating every night how to use the spear, it is now in the dead of
night when Karṇa burns fiercest with his “spear raised like the Night
of Time”—probably an image of the pralaya, in which, after seven suns
desiccate and burn the triple world, they leave not much, if any, time
for night, until they bring on the cosmic night known as the night of
Brahmā.51 It is the power of Rāksạ sas at night that provides Kṛsṇ ̣a with
49 The same prase—mohito devamāyayā—will refer to Indra’s deception of Karṇa
in Nārada’s postmortem, the passage next cited.
50 E.g., “the radiant one [Sūrya] showed himself [to Karṇa] at night, at the end of
a dream” (3.284.8ab) to warn him about Indra. As we shall see, Sūrya will take his
son Karṇa back to himself as he descends into night. It seems Karṇa seeks to draw
strength from Sūrya with his prayers up to the early afternoon, and is weakest—as
Kṛsṇ ̣a knows—when the sun sets; see Biardeau (2002, 2:345).
51 From a different angle, see Biardeau (1976–77, 143–145; 1978, 173–174 [Karṇa as
the errant Sun of the pralaya]; 2002, 2:531–532 [the apocalyptic face of Sūrya]).
430 chapter fifteen
the pretext to order Ghatọ tkaca to his death as the means to extract
the spear, which sails off into the night sky.
It is also, I believe, a revelation that Karṇa and the Kauravas con-
sider the option of killing Kṛsṇ ̣a. Could Karṇa—and this never-failing
spear—really have done that? We are left to ponder the death of God.
And what did Karṇa think of this option? We do not have his words.
Maybe he was a Sūryabhakta only pro tem, and only by default.52 We
could imagine he only listened to such advice, determined as he was
to fight only Arjuna, and lifted by Kṛsṇ ̣a’s friendship and his prom-
ise of heaven for the Ksạ triyas who would die at Kuruksẹ tra. And
then, too, Karṇa would know that Kṛsṇ ̣a was his cousin, the son of
his mother’s younger brother. But he also knows more than that, as
does the reader. This is one of those passages that confirms Made-
leine Biardeau’s insight into the importance of the poets’ contextual
use of epithets, and in particular the selective and intensified uses of
the name Devakīputra, “Son of Devakī”—closing with three usages in
seven verses—to underscore that the daiva has been the play of Kṛsṇ ̣a
from the day his mother Devakī bore him.53
The passage is thus artful in unfolding Kṛsṇ ̣a’s relation to fate: that
when all is said and done, he is fate, but never without ambiguity.54 If
52 See Biardeau (2002, 1:752): “Peut-être sa piété pour Sūrya—sa longue louange
d’adoration quotidienne an dieu—lui cache-t-elle Visṇ ̣u?”
53 Biardeau argues that the poets use Kṛsṇ ̣a’s name Devakīputra to evoke his double
association with divine fate and divine play as a linguistic play on the two roots div-: one
(alternately dyu-) behind associations with the gods (deva), the day sky (Dyaus), and fate
(daiva), the other behind the play of dicing (dyūta, devana). The name’s occurrence in
Chāndogya Upanisạ d 3.17.6 also provides Kṛsṇ ̣a’s sole anchor in the Vedic revelation.
See Biardeau (2002, 1:405, 574 and n. 4; 2:319, 358 n. 37)—she does not highlight the
usages in this particular passage (see her summary of it: 2:226–228).
54 See Matilal (1991) on Kṛsṇ ̣a’s non-omnipotence (notably 414–415): “as the inner
manipulator of every being, [Kṛsṇ ̣a] would bring about the intended destruction”; but
“courses of certain events cannot be stopped. All that Kṛsṇ ̣a was able to do was to sal-
vage justice at the end of the battle.” Cf. Woods (2001, 39–58, 146), and notably (54):
although he is the “master magician [māyavin],” Kṛsṇ ̣a is “in the final analysis . . . him-
self . . . a product of this māyā.” Indeed, the author, the Island-Born Krṣ ṇ ạ Vyāsa, works
hand in hand with Kṛsṇ ̣a Vāsudeva to shape the illusions and fates of epic characters
(see Hiltebeitel, 2001a, 90–91, and note 12 here), often tipping his hand of authorial
omnipotence, as when he tells Dhṛtarāsṭṛa: “Still, the character [śīla] that is born in a
man at his birth, that, they say, great king, does not leave him before he dies” (3.9.10;
van Buitenen, 1975, 236; see Woods, 2001, 57)—to which Dhṛtarāsṭṛa replies that he
blames fate (vidhi; 3.10.1) rather than himself for all that has happened up to this point,
and all that will inevitably follow. Vyāsa can only agree while complicating matters
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 431
Dhṛtarāsṭṛa says he thinks fate (daiva) is supreme and that Karṇa’s
buddhi was “afflicted by daiva,” it is uncertain whether “his buddhi
was destroyed by des tiny,” as seems smoothest in the translation just
given, or “by divinities” (daivataiḥ), which looks odd but is at least
equally accurate. Similarly, when Dhṛtarāsṭṛa says Karṇa was mohito
devamāyayā, does he mean Karṇa was “confused by the gods’ illu-
sion,” as translated earlier, or “confused by the illusion of the god?”
We know that it is really the latter.
F. Toward Karṇa’s Death
Taken in isolation and looked at sequentially, these three moments
in the life of Karṇa appear to have little in common, other than that
among the fatalities that drive things toward his death, they are the
three that have the most to do with Kṛsṇ ̣a. Nonetheless, they do align
the hero toward this end by tracing his affinities and connections in
three different spheres: the first in the realm of the demonic; the sec-
ond in the human domain of family and friends; and the third in rela-
tion to God. In that, we might say there is some movement.
As the final duel with Arjuna takes shape, Karṇa recognizes Kṛsṇ ̣a as
“the creator of the universe [srasṭ ọ jagatas]” (8.22.49) even as he tries
to counteract him by demanding Śalya as his charioteer.55 More than
any other Kaurava or Kaurava partisan, Karṇa is not just the Pāṇḍavas’
problem but Kṛsṇ ̣a’s. All the other great Kaurava heroes either make
their pact with death with Yudhisṭḥ ira or pose just momentary chal-
lenges to Arjuna. Only Karṇa is possessed by a demon whom Kṛsṇ ̣a has
slain. Only Karṇa meets with Kṛsṇ ̣a alone. Only in foreseeing Karṇa’s
death does Kṛsṇ ̣a do such a dance. Flawed and demonically possessed
as Karṇa may be, more than any foe Kṛsṇ ̣a finds the means to kill,
Karṇa inspires admiration, affection, and a wish for things to have
gone otherwise, as is ultimately expressed by Kuntī and Yudhisṭḥ ira.
That Karṇa does inspire such things thus deepens Kṛsṇ ̣a’s problem
with him, and the reader’s problem with Kṛsṇ ̣a. Says Kṛsṇ ̣a, losing his
spear made Karṇa human. Until then, like Kṛsṇ ̣a, was he divine? For
further. See Biardeau (2002, 1:405): “le daiva reste imprévisible et Kṛsṇ ̣a lui-même doit
s’y conformer”—as with his absence from the dice match.
55 See Hiltebeitel (1982a, 89; 1984, 9); see note 11 here.
432 chapter fifteen
readers he was always more human than divine. Or perhaps one could
better say, more than being divine, or for that matter demonic, he
was always human. Approaching this point from other astute angles,
Aditya Adarkar sees Karṇa having the “psychological strength of a
child who has been raised by loving parents” (2001, 187)—that is, of
course, his foster parents; Madeleine Biardeau, savoring his boastful-
ness, or “rodomontade,” says that it is Karṇa’s possession by a demon
that humanizes him (2002, 11, 119–20); while for Patricia Greer, “he
uniquely represents the audience” (2002, 58).
G. Postmortem
Once Karṇa is killed and his identity as the Pāṇḍavas’ eldest brother
is revealed to them, it is left to the great Kṛsṇ ̣a bhakta Nārada to give
some narrative form to Karṇa’s life. He does this in response to a tor-
tured question of Yudhisṭḥ ira that opens Yudhisṭḥ ira’s lengthy post-
war grieving in the Śānti and Anuśāsana Parvans: “Why did the Earth
swallow his wheel in battle? Why was my brother cursed?” (12.1.43a–
44a). After unveiling a number of hitherto untold tales,56 Nārada closes
with words steeped in irony that are nonetheless an elegy.
To secure your57 welfare the chief of the gods begged of Karṇa the divine
natural-born and supremely radiant earrings, and also the natural-born
56 Before Karṇa went to Rāma Jāmadagnya, he sought instructions in weapons from
Droṇa, but was denied them because he was a sūta (12.2.9–13). Then, some time after
the double curse by the two brahmins (the second being Rāma Jāmadagnya), while
serving as a charioteer (rathin) for Duryodhana at the svayaṃvara (“self-choice” mar-
riage ceremony) of the princess of Kalinġ a, Karnạ helped Duryodhana abduct the bride
after she snubbed Duryodhana; Karnạ fought off all the other kings, including Śiśupāla,
Jarāsaṃdha, Śṛṅgala, and Aśoka (12.4.2–21; 6–7 on these defeated kings). Third,
Jarāsaṃdha wanted to test the might Karnạ had shown at Kalinġ a, and challenged him to
a wrestling match; Karnạ ruptured the seam that held Jarāsaṃdha’s body together (later
to be split fully by Bhīma). Gratified with Karṇa’s prowess Jarāsaṃdha gave him the
city of Mālinī, and, after this, Karnạ “became king of the Anġ as” (55.1–7)—p resumably
the tournament at which Duryodhana appointed Karnạ to the Anġ a throne would have
come after the bout with Jarāsaṃdha, but Nārada does not mention that episode. It
is then, once he has told these stories, that Nārada now strings together other later
episodes in the postmortem elegy now quoted. On the possible Buddhist allusions in
these stories linking Karṇa, Jarāsaṃdha, and Duryodhana with Aśoka and Kaliṅga, see
Biardeau (2002, 2:54, 527–532, 757). See also Hiltebeitel (2005b, 118).
57 He is speaking to Yudhisṭḥ ira.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 433
armor, and he was confused by the god’s illusion [mohito devamāyayā].58
Deprived of those earrings and natural-born armor, he was killed in battle
by Vijaya while Vāsudeva watched. Because of the curse of the high-souled
brahmin Rāma, because he granted Kuntī’s wish, because of Śatakratu’s59
illusion, because of Bhīsṃ a’s contempt while tallying the warriors that
he was but half a chariot warrior,60 because of Śalya’s destruction of his
tejas, and by the lead61 of Vāsudeva, Karṇa Vaikartana, of brilliance
equal to the sun’s, was slain in battle by the Gāṇḍīva bowman while he
had received divine weapons from Rudra, the king of the gods, Yama,
Varuṇa, Kubera, and Droṇa, and also the high-souled Kṛpa. So your
brother was cursed and also deceived by many [evaṃ śaptas tava bhrātā
bahubhiś cāpi vañcitaḥ]. Do not grieve. That tiger among men surely
gained death in battle (12.5.8–15).
H. The Death of Karṇa
Following some preliminary fighting and some last-minute thoughts
of reconciliation, the. duel between Karṇa and Arjuna begins. The two
warriors range against each other like elephants or mountains, each
urged on by his allies, until Bhīma goads Arjuna into doing better,
offering to kill Karṇa himself with his mace if Arjuna is not up to the
task (65.1–15). We pick up from there, with Kṛsṇ ̣a prodding Arjuna
further by offering to lend him his discus. (Trisṭ ụ bh verses are ren-
dered line by line and numbered sequentially; śloka portions are ren-
dered in paragraph and numbered as units.)62
58 See the discussion of mohito devamāyayā at the end of the section before the
previous one. Following Tokunaga ([1991] 1994), these are the only two usages of this
phrase in the Mahābhārata.
59 Śatakratu is Indra, the god of a hundred sacrifices.
60 5.165.6: When asked by Duryodhana to rank his warriors before battle, Bhīsṃ a
had belittled Karṇa in this fashion, leading Karṇa to reply in kind and refuse to fight
until Bhīsṃ a was slain (11, 27)—this being the second time a provocation from Bhīsṃ a
leads Karṇa to vow not to fight until Bhīsṃ a’s fall; see 5.61.12–13. When Bhīsṃ a has
fallen and accepted Karṇa’s gestures of reconciliation, he tells Karṇa that he used
harsh words as “occasion for the destruction [of your] tejas [tejo-vadhanimittam]”
(6.117.10)—that is, to the same end as Śalya (as mentioned by Nārada here next); see
Hiltebeitel (2001a, 267): Karṇa learns here (6.117.9) that Bhīsṃ a knows him to be
Kuntī’s son from Vyāsa, Nārada, and Keśava. See Adarkar (2001, 213). See episodes
10 and 12 in the list of fatalities in section B.
61 Nayena; see Kṛsṇ ̣a as netṛ, “guide” or “leader” (at note 35 here), from the same
root ni-, “to lead.” See further Biardeau (1978–79, 150; 2002, 1:872).
62 On these meters see note 4 here.
434 chapter fifteen
65.16. Then, having seen the chariot and arrows thwarted, Vāsudeva63
also spoke to Pārtha,64 “What is this, Kirītịn,65 that Karṇa has now
crushed your weapons with his weapons?
Why are you stupefied? Are you not attentive? The joyful Kurus are
dancing! Honoring Karṇa, surely they all saw your weapon downed
by his weapons.
With the resolution that has destroyed the weapon of darkness from
yuga to yuga, and also, in wars, terrible Rāksạ sas and Asuras sprung
from pride,66 with that resolution of yours, slay the sūta’s son.67
Or with that razor-edged Sudarśana68 entrusted69 by me, cut off the
head of this foe by force, just as Śakra70 did with the thunderbolt to
the foe Namuci.71
20. And with the strength by which you completely satisfied the
lord who took the form of a hunter,72 regaining that firmness, hero,
kill the sūta’s son together with his followers.
Then bestow the abundant earth with her belt of oceans, towns,
and villages, and her host of foes destroyed, on the king.73 Obtain
unequalled fame, Pārtha.”
63 Kṛsṇ ̣a, “son of Vasudeva”; also one of the most theologically charged of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s
names; for Hudson (1996, 68), “God who dwells in all things and in whom all things
dwell,” citing Bhagavad Gītā 7.1–19, the last verse of which uses this name (one of
four such usages in the Gītā). Names and titles will be glossed here for their first
appearance only.
64 Son of Pṛthā: here and throughout this passage, Arjuna; though it could also
refer to Yudhisṭḥ ira or Bhīma. It would also be an implicit name for Karṇa as Pṛthā’s
hidden firstborn son.
65 Arjuna: the one who wears the diadem, a tiara, on his head.
66 Dambhodbhāvaś cāsurās; Dambodbhava is a “prideful” Asura slain by Nara
and Nārāyaṇa (Mahābhārata 5.94). Kṛsṇ ̣a is rekindling Arjuna’s awareness that he
is Nara.
67 Karṇa.
68 “Of beautiful aspect,” Kṛsṇ ̣a’s cakra, or discus.
69 It could be that nisṛsṭạ means “hurled [by me],” but the imperative is directed
at Arjuna.
70 Indra.
71 On this and further allusions to Indra’s conquests of the demons Namuci and
Vṛtra; see note 211 here.
72 Śiva, who took the guise of a mountain hunter (kirātạ ) when Arjuna sought the
Pāśupata weapon from him (Mahābhārata 3.40–41).
73 Yudhisṭḥ ira.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 435
Challenged by Bhīma and Janārdana,74 remembering himself, con-
sidering his mettle,75 and having understood about the coming of the
great-souled one,76 he spoke purposefully to Keśava.77
“I will bring forth this great fierce weapon for the good of the world,
for the destruction of the sūta’s son. May you—and also the gods,
Brahmā, Bhava,78 and all who know Brahman—permit me to use it.”
Thus invoking the invincible Brahmā weapon that was manageable
only by the mind, he brought it forth. Then the many-splendored one
shrouded all the regions and the intermediate points with missiles.
The Bhārata bull also released high-speed arrows numerously by the
hundreds.
25. In the midst of combat Vaikartana79 also released hosts of
arrows by thousands. Resounding, they approached the Pāṇḍava like
torrents of rain released by Parjanya.80
And having struck Bhīmasena and Janārdana and Kirītịn too with
three arrows each, of inhuman feats and terrible might, he roared
awfully with a great sound.
Having seen Bhīma and Janārdana struck with Karṇa’s arrows,
Kirītịn could not bear it, and again Pārtha drew out eighteen arrows.
Having pierced Susẹ na81 with one arrow and Śalya with four and
Karṇa with three, he then hit Sabhāpati,82 clad in golden armor, with
ten that were well released.
The headless, armless prince then fell without horse, driver, or ban-
ner from the front of his chariot, his luster demolished, like a śāla tree
cut down with axes.
30. Having again struck Karṇa with three, eight, twelve, and four-
teen arrows, having slain four hundred tuskers equipped with weap-
ons, he slew eight hundred chariot warriors, a thousand horses and
horsemen and eight thousand brave foot-soldiers.
74 Kṛsṇ ̣a, “tormentor of people,” a name often used when Kṛsṇ ̣a is awesome, over-
whelming, and frightening.
75 His sattva: goodness, higher nature.
76 Ganguli, Karna Parva ([1884–96] 1970, 7:361), takes this as Arjuna “calling to
mind the object for which he had come into the world.” But mahātmanas seems to
refer to Kṛsṇ ̣a rather than Arjuna.
77 Kṛsṇ ̣a, as having attractive hair.
78 Śiva.
79 Karṇa; on this name see episode 8 in section B.
80 Usually a name for Indra, parjanya could also mean a rain cloud.
81 One of Karṇa’s sons.
82 A little-known warrior on the Kaurava side.
436 chapter fifteen
Then, having seen those two fighting at the battlefront, desirous of
seeing those two foremost foe-slaying heroes Karṇa and Pārtha, the
folk83 stationed in heaven and stationed on earth stood still, restrain-
ing their vehicles.
Then the Pāṇḍava’s bowstring, forcefully overdrawn, was cut off.
In that moment the sūta’s son then cut Pārtha with a hundred small
shafts,
like sloughed snakes, sharp, rinsed in sesame oil, winged with feath-
ers. He pierced Vāsudeva with fifty arrows. In that interval the Soma-
kas84 fled.
Then, having quickly shaken his bowstring, having dispersed those
arrows of Ādhiratha,85 filled with rage at having his limbs wounded by
Karṇa’s arrows, Pārtha caught hold of the Somakas in battle.
In the sky no birds flew at the spread of darkness that was quick-
ened by the weapon.
35. Pārtha forcibly pierced Śalya’s armor with ten arrows, laughing.
Then he pierced Karṇa with a well-released dozen, having again struck
him with seven.
Hard-struck by those feathered arrows of fierce speed impelled with
great force from Pārtha’s bow, with his body bathed in the wounds of
his cut limbs, his arrow drawn, Karṇa shone like Rudra.86
Then Ādhiratha pierced Dhanaṃjaya,87 who was like the ruler of the
gods, with three arrows. Then he sped forth five arrows burning like
snakes; they wished to strike upon Acyuta.88
Well-released, having pierced Purusọ ttama’s89 gold-decked armor,
they fell down; very fast, they speedily drove into the earth, and, hav-
ing bathed,90 returned toward Karṇa.
83 Jana, “folk” or “people” of heaven and earth, translated throughout, rather for
lack of anything better, as “folk.”
84 Pāṇḍava allies, a branch of the Pañcālas, Draupadī’s people.
85 Karṇa, as adoptive son of the sūta Ādhiratha.
86 Numerous northern texts add “at play in the middle of the crematorium during
the terrible hour, his limbs wet with blood (prakrīḍamāno ‘yaṃ śmaśānamadhye/ raudre
muhūrte rudhirārdragātraḥ)” (8.1072*).
87 Arjuna, “Winner of wealth.”
88 Kṛsṇ ̣a, “the unfallen.”
89 Kṛsṇ ̣a as “best of men” or “supreme male,” God; see note 34 here.
90 Ganguli, Karna Parva [1884–96] 1970, 7:268): “(in the waters of the Bhogavati
in the nether region).”
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 437
With five well-released swift shafts, Dhanaṃjaya of the great horses
cut them each into three pieces; partisans of the son of Taksạ ka,91 they
fell down on the earth.
40. Then the diadem-crowned one92 blazed forth with wrath, like
Agni burning dry wood. He then pierced Karṇa at his vital points93
with many blazing, fatal arrows drawn to the ear and released. Karṇa
trembled from the pain, but from firmness, he whose firmness was
beyond measure stood his ground.
Then, while Dhanaṃjaya was angry, the intermediary and cardinal
points, the solar nimbus, and the chariot of Karṇa became invisible,
O King, covered with the streams of arrows like a cloud covered with
rain and fog.
The single hero Savyasācin,94 bull of the Kurus, then led to destruc-
tion in battle all the wheel-protectors, foot-protectors, the vanguard
and rear guard, the foe-destroyers approved by Duryodhana,
the accumulated two thousand most excellent fine chariot-warriors,
prime heroes of the Kurus, the charioteers and the horses with the
chariots, all in an instant.
Then, deserting Karṇa, your remaining Kuru sons fled, abandon-
ing the slain and those wounded with arrows, and wailing sons and
fathers.
45. Seeing himself abandoned by the fear-ridden Kurus and the
region everywhere emptied, Karṇa did not waver there, Bhārata,95 but
rushed at the defiant Arjuna.
66.1. Then, going beyond the range of the fall of arrows, the Kurus,
staying at a distance, their army broken, saw Dhanaṃjaya’s weapon
raising on all sides the shimmer of lightning.
Quickly released then in the great tumult by the angry Pārtha for
the destruction of Karṇa, that weapon of Arjuna, expansive like the
sky, its sound unbounded, devoured the heroes.
91 Taksạ ka is a prominent nāga, or snake, and the arrows are thus snake arrows.
92 Arjuna.
93 Marmāṇi. These are an important topic in Indian medicine and martial arts.
94 Arjuna, “left-handed archer,” “one who draws with the left hand.”
95 Saṃjaya is addressing Dhṛtarāsṭṛa.
438 chapter fifteen
By a foe-annihilating Atharvan weapon96 of great power obtained
from Rāma,97 Karṇa destroyed that burning weapon of Arjuna and
struck Pārtha with keen arrows.
Then the pounding became very great between that Arjuna and
Ādhiratha, O King, the two striking one another with arrows like two
elephants with the fierce blows of their tusks.98
5. Then Karṇa, wishing to remove Phālguna’s99 head in battle, aimed
the foe-slaying serpent-mouthed arrow that was well-sharpened, burn-
ing, terrible, well-rubbed in battle, so long kept secret with Pārtha as
its object,
ever-worshiped, bedded in sandalwood powder and lying in a
golden quiver, of great venom,100 blazing, and born in the lineage of
Airāvata.101
Having seen Vaikartana, his arrow aimed, the high-souled Madra
king102 said to him, “This arrow will not reach his neck, Karṇa. Having
marked distinctly, fix a head-destroying arrow!”
Thereupon, his eyes reddened with wrath, Karṇa said to Śalya, hold-
ing the arrow in check, “Karṇa does not fix an arrow twice, Śalya.
Those like me are not given to deceit.”
96 Probably released with a mantra from the Atharva Veda.
97 Rāma Jāmadagnya; see episodes 2–3 in section B.
98 Here, the Critical Edition notes two mainly Northern insertions: the first (App. 1,
no. 39, of four trisṭụ bhs) tells of such fighting that heavenly beings applaud; the second
(App. 1, no. 4o, of five trisṭụ bhs, five śloka lines, and one more trisṭụ bh) tells how the
snake Aśvasena, who, unlike his mother, survived the burning of Khāṇḍava Forest,
flies out of the underworld into the sky to see the battle, and, to avenge Arjuna’s killing
his mother, enters Karṇa’s quiver in the form of an arrow (l. 12: śararūpadhārī)—this
in seeming contradiction to what is noted elsewhere (see episode 5 in section B) and,
just below, that Karṇa has long worshiped this snake arrow kept in his quiver. The net
of arrows from the two combatants spreads darkness. Apsaras (nymphs) come to fan
the heroes in their fatigue, and Indra and Sūrya brush their sons’ faces. Then, as Karṇa
realizes he cannot defeat Arjuna, he recalls the arrow in his quiver.
99 Arjuna’s: Phālguna is a Vedic name for Indra and a spring month.
100 Here and throughout this segment, “poison” is always that of a serpent, and
thus “venom.”
101 Airāvata is another prominent nāga. Star passages 8.1083* and 1084* are inserted
here. (A so-called star passage is deemed an interpolation in the Critical Edition’s
apparatus.) In the first, a trisṭụ bh, the world regents and Śakra wail at the filling of
the sky with meteors, when the arrow in snake form is fixed to Karṇa’s bow; in the
second, a half-trisṭụ bh, Karṇa did not know that Aśvasena had entered his quiver with
the aid of yogabāla, “yoga power.”
102 Śalya; this would seem to be one of the points where he seeks to undermine
Karṇa’s tejas; see episode 9 in section B.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 439
Having so spoken, he shot that snaky arrow that he had worshiped
for many years. “Phālguna, you are slain,” he said. So hastening, he
sent it forth strengthened.
10–11. Having seen that snake aimed by Karṇa, Mādhava,103 the
best of the strong, stepped powerfully on the chariot with his two feet.
When the chariot was immersed in the earth, the horses went to their
knees. Then the arrow struck that insightful one’s diadem.104
With rage and great pains at discharging that powerful weapon, the
sūta’s son thus struck off Arjuna’s head-ornament—celebrated through
the earth, sky, heaven, and the waters—from his head.
Having the brilliance of the planets, fire, moon, and sun, adorned
with nets of jewels, pearls, and gold, it was carefully made with auster-
ity for the sake of Puraṃdara105 by the inciter of the world himself.106
103 Kṛsṇ ̣a, as named after another month in spring.
104 Vaidya (1954, 695–696), as editor of the Karṇaparvan for the Critical Edition,
includes these stanzas (10–11) “most reluctantly,” arguing that doing so “is not fully
justifiable. All the same, they are included, on the sole consideration that their contents
are supported by all the MSS.” His main argument is that the manuscripts agree in
“substance” but not in form; Śāradā/Kaśmīrī manuscripts in ślokas, which provide his
reconstituted text, “have parallel versions,” some of them “shorter” and in trisṭụ bhs, in
central and southern groups of texts—notably 8.1089*, which he regards as the southern
trisṭụ bh stanza that “first introduced” the theme, which northern versions then took up,
modifying the meter. Vaidya can thus argue that the ślokas are metrical “misfits,” that
without them there would be no break and that the “ballad-form” of the duel “would
improve” with their absence. Opening on to what he recognizes as “higher criticism”
and speaking “from the rationalistic point of view” (of which his “I do not think that
Śalya played treacherous with Karṇa” is further instance), his “explanation is that the
subject-matter of these stanzas was introduced . . . at a considerably late stage, to glorify
the divine power of Kṛsṇ ̣a, when the Kṛsṇ ̣a-cult influenced the redactors of the Epic.”
But there is no reason to think that the Kṛsṇ ̣a cult was late in influencing the epic.
Vaidya’s “first introduced” trisṭụ bh could thus indeed be “original”:
Having seen that blazing [arrow] rushing forward moving in the air, the chief
hero of the Vṛsṇ ̣i lineage, having forcefully pressed down on the chariot’s wheel,
caused it to sink five finger-breadths, a hero indeed. (8.1089*)
Indeed, this trisṭụ bh stanza eliminates the second śloka’s doubling in advance of the
arrow’s hitting Arjuna’s diadem. The Critical Edition’s standing preference for the
Northern Śāradā/Kaśmīrī manuscripts may account for Vaidya’s choice of the poorer
text and his overlooking the better explanation, in support of which it may be noted
that this Southern verse appears quite prominently among Southern recension manu-
scripts in the Malayālam group (otherwise it appears only in Grantha manuscripts
and two Telugu manuscripts), which should probably have provided the editors with
testimony of equal value to that of the Śāradā/Kaśmīrī manuscripts (see Hiltebeitel,
2006a, 252–53).
105 Indra.
106 Bhuvanasya sūnunā; the reference is not clear to me. If the translation is right,
it would suggest the sun god, which seems incongruous here, given Sūrya’s favoritism
for Karṇa. Sūnu could also mean “son,” giving us “son of the world” or “son of the
440 chapter fifteen
Having beauty of great worth, bringing fear to foes, and fragrant, it
kindled exceeding joy. The lord of the gods, favorably minded, gave it
himself to Kirītịn when he had attacked the gods’ enemies.107
15. What Vṛsạ 108 forcibly struck off with the snake was unassailable
by the protectors known as Hara, the Lord of Waters, and Ākhaṇḍala;109
by the foremost darts, the thunderbolt, the noose, and the Pināka bow;110
and even by the foremost gods.111
Torn off by that best of arrows, that supreme diadem of Pārtha’s,
burning with the fire of venom,112 radiant, dear over the earth, fell like
the blazing sun from the Asta Mountain.113
The snake then114 forcibly struck off the diadem adorned with
many jewels from Arjuna’s head like great Indra’s thunderbolt strik-
ing a lofty tree-bearing summit, with fine sprouts and flowers, from a
mountain.
As the earth, sky, heaven, and waters appear agitated by the wind,
just so was the sound among the worlds then. Perturbed folk strove
and stumbled.
Then Arjuna, standing unperturbed, having bound up his hair with
a white cloth, shone with his head so arranged like Udaya Mountain115
with the sun at full radiance.
20. Then, sped from Karṇa’s arms, the serpentine arrow, the great
snake who had made enmity with Arjuna, of great radiance like sun
or fire, having struck down the diadem, arose.116
earth”—which do not readily explain themselves either. The Vulgate and numerous
texts have vibhunā svayaṃbhuvā, “by the self-born lord,” probably Brahmā, who could
be meant here in either case.
107 While residing in Indra’s heaven, Arjuna received the diadem from Indra (3.171.5)
after he had defeated some foes of the gods.
108 Karṇa.
109 Śiva, Varuṇa, and Indra, respectively.
110 Śiva’s bow.
111 Vaidya (1954, 696), says the verse is “one of the so-called Kūtạ ślokas [purpose-
fully enigmatic verses] commented on by Vimalabodha.” A Northern insert adds: “That
wicked-natured [dusṭạ bhāva] snake . . . swept away the diadem from Arjuna’s head, and
it fell to the earth” (8.1093*-1094*).
112 From the snake.
113 The western Sunset Mountain.
114 The verse reads repetitively. Perhaps “then” (tatas) suggests ongoing description
rather than “next.”
115 The Sunrise Mountain.
116 Here a patch of inserts: 1098*: the snake urges Karṇa to shoot him again, and
Karṇa asks who this fierce-formed snake is; 1102*: the snake reveals his enmity for
Arjuna; 1103*: even if Indra protects him, he will go to the land of the fathers; 1104*:
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 441
It said to him,117 “Know him118 to have committed an offense against
me, Kṛsṇ ̣a, an hostility now born of the death of my mother.” Then
Kṛsṇ ̣a said to Pārtha in battle, “Slay the great snake who has made
enmity with you.”
Thus addressed by Madhusūdana,119 the wielder of the Gāṇḍīva
bow,120 whose bow was fierce to foes, said, “Who now is my snake
who has come on his own into the mouth of Garuḍa?”121
Kṛsṇ ̣a said, “When you were holding the bow invigorating the god
of variegated luster at Khāṇḍava,122 this multiform snake went to the
sky, his body cut by arrows. His mother was slain.”123
Then Jisṇ ̣u,124 eschewing leftovers,125 cut the snake moving in the
sky, as if flying upward, with six keen arrows. His body cut, he fell on
the earth.126
25. At that time, with ten stone-whetted peacock-feathered shafts,
Karṇa struck that foremost hero among men, Dhanaṃjaya, who was
glancing obliquely.
Then Arjuna, delivering with twelve keen arrows released from the
ear, quickly released an arrow stretched fully to his ear, its speed equal
to venom.
The foremost of arrows, well-released, having riven Karṇa’s armor,
as if driving out his breath, having drunk his blood, entered the earth
smeared with bloody feathers.
Karnạ will not, he says, rely on another’s might to win victory, or shoot the same weapon
twice; 1105*: he will continue using his own weapons; 1106*: the snake, unable to bear
these words, resumes the form of an arrow determined to kill Arjuna on his own.
117 Presumably, though it would seem unexpectedly, the snake addresses Kṛsṇ ̣a.
118 Arjuna.
119 Kṛsṇ ̣a as “destroyer of Madhu,” one of two demons Visṇ ̣u slays upon awakening
from his cosmic sleep. The epic poets frequently use the name where Kṛsṇ ̣a is linked
with killing.
120 Gāṇḍīva is the name of Arjuna’s bow.
121 Visṇ ̣u’s heavenly bird-mount and a proverbial devourer of snakes.
122 Feeding Agni (Fire) at the Khāṇḍava Forest. Here and in what follows, see epi-
sode 5 in section B.
123 At 8.1114* Kṛsṇ ̣a adds that Arjuna should now remember him and shoot him
from the sky.
124 Arjuna, “the victorious,” and a name connecting him, at least to the ear, with
Visṇ ̣u.
125 Leftovers (śesạ̄ n) may evoke the great world-snake, Śesạ .
126 At 8.1115* is added: “When that snake had been slain by Kirītịn, the lord
Purusọ ttama, himself of mighty arms, O king, quickly lifted up [samujjahāra] the
chariot from the surface of the earth with his two arms.”
442 chapter fifteen
Then Vṛsạ , angry at the fall of that arrow, like a great snake beaten
with a rod, as one acting quickly, released the finest arrows like a snake
of great venom spewing the ultimate venom.
He pierced Janārdana with twelve arrows, and Arjuna too with
ninety-nine; and again, having pierced the Pāṇḍava with a terrible
arrow, Karṇa roared aloud and laughed.
30. The Pāṇḍava paid no heed to his joy. Knowing about the vital
points, he then cut his vital points. Having the prowess of Indra he
struck the foe with feathered arrows even as Indra struck Bala127 with
energy.
Then Arjuna released on Karṇa ninety-nine arrows that were like
death’s rod.128 His body, severely pained by those arrows, trembled like
a mountain riven by a thunderbolt.
That one’s head-ornament, adorned with gold, precious jewels,
and the finest diamonds, was pierced by Dhanaṃjaya with feathered
arrows and fell down on the earth, as did his fine earrings.
His fine and shining very costly armor, carefully made by the best of
craftsmen working for a very long time, the Pāṇḍava cut in a moment
into many pieces with his arrows.129
Thereupon, angered, he130 pierced the armorless one with fine arrows,
four of them. Struck forcibly by his foe, Karṇa trembled exceedingly,
like a sick person with bile, phlegm, wind, and wounds.
35. With whetted arrows released from the circle of his great bow
discharged with care and action, and with strength, Arjuna chopped
at Karṇa with many of the best arrows, and so too speedily cut his
vital points.
Hard-struck by Pārtha’s feathered arrows of fierce speed and varied
sharp points, Karṇa shone like a mountain reddened with ores of red
chalk flowing with cascades of red water.131
127 A demon.
128 Antakadaṇḍasaṃnibhāḥ. Antaka is death as the Finisher, and a name for Śiva
and Yama. The daṇḍa is the rod of punishment.
129 These earrings and armor have replaced Karṇa’s originals, which he gave to
Indra.
130 Arjuna.
131 App. 1, no. 41, of six trisṭụ bhs, comes here: Arjuna hits Karṇa with another
deadly arrow; Karṇa reels. Arjuna prefers not to kill him while he is in distress. Kṛsṇ ̣a
then rebukes him: no warrior of mettle lets a foe regain his strength; kill him as Indra
slew the (largely Vedic) demon Namuci. Arjuna says “So be it,” honors Janārdana, and
strikes Karṇa with arrows as Indra did Saṃvara, another of his Vedic foes.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 443
Kirītịn then covered Karṇa and his horses and chariot with calf-
toothed arrows, Bhārata, and, with every care, he shrouded the regions
with arrows feathered with purified gold.
Covered by those calf-toothed arrows, the broad and thick-chested
Ādhiratha shone like a well-flowered aśoka, palāśa, or śālmāli tree, or
a mountain furnished with spandana and sandalwood trees.
With those arrows manifoldly sticking to his body, Karṇa shone in
battle, O King, like a great mountain132 possessing auspicious Karṇikāra
flowers amid ridges and glens filled with trees.
40. He dispatched hosts of arrows with his bow; Karṇa shone
radiating masses of arrows like the sun facing the Asta Mountain, its
blood-red disc beaming crimson.
Having assailed the regions, keen-pointed arrows released from
Arjuna’s arms scattered the blazing arrows like mighty snakes released
from the bend of Ādhiratha’s son’s arms.133
Then his wheel fell into the earth. When his chariot was reeling
from the brahmin’s curse and the weapon obtained from Rāma no
longer shone, the sūta’s son was agitated in battle.
Not tolerating those misfortunes, he shook his hands reviling,134 say-
ing, “Dharma protects those eminent in dharma, so those who know
dharma always say. But now it is sunk135 for me. It does not protect its
devotees. I think dharma does not always protect.”136
132 I follow those manuscripts (the Vulgate and others) that have mahāgiri rather
than the Critical Edition’s mahendra (Indra) here, since it better fits the simile.
133 Here comes a series of inserts: 1120*: Recovering his dhairyam, firmness, Karṇa
hits Arjuna and Krṣ ṇ ạ with ten and twelve snakelike arrows; 1121*: Dhanaṃjaya shoots
an iron weapon that is like venom, fire, and Indra’s thunderbolt; then (more widely
attested than the previous or following): “Invisible Kāla (Time), O king, because of
the curse of the brahmin, indicating the death of Karṇa, speaking, said, ‘The earth is
swallowing your wheel,’ when the time for Karnạ ’s death had arrived. The great Brahmā
weapon was destroyed in his mind which the great-souled Bhārgava had given him.
The earth swallowed the left wheel. O hero among men, when that time for death had
arrived, the chariot then whirled about, O lord of men, from the curse of that best of
brahmins” (8.1122* and 1123*). Alternately, the Southern recension’s trisṭụ bhs make
Kāla the presence of death that comes with the earth’s swallowing the left wheel, and
causes the chariot to reel because of the curse (1124* and 1125*).
134 Yudhisṭḥ ira censures dharma at the end of the Mahābhārata with the same verb
(vi-garh-; 18.2.50c); see Hiltebeitel (2001a, 274).
135 The verb seems to combine dharma with the sunken wheel, implying a dhar-
macakra or “wheel of dharma.”
136 See Halbfass (1988, 318; see 325, 329–330) on dharma as that which “protects
its protectors.” See Hiltebeitel (2001a, 203–205).
444 chapter fifteen
So saying, shaken from the injury to his vital points by the fall of
Arjuna’s weapons, unsteady in his actions, his charioteer and horses
staggering, he again and again censured dharma.
45–50. Then Karṇa pierced Pārtha in battle with three fiercely sped
arrows, and wounded him with seven. Then Arjuna released seven-
teen sharp-edged unswerving ones that were like fire and terrible as
Indra’s thunderbolt. Having pierced him with terrible speed, they fell
on the earth’s surface. Shaken to the core, Karṇa displayed motion
with power. Thereupon, steadying with strength, he invoked a Brahmā
weapon. Seeing it, Arjuna summoned an Indra weapon. Having blessed
the Gāṇḍīva bow and arrows, Dhanaṃjaya released showers of arrows
like Indra releasing rains. Then those energized high-potency arrows
released from Pārtha’s chariot appeared in the vicinity of Karṇa’s
chariot.
51–56. The great chariot warrior Karṇa then baffled those shot in
front of him. When the weapon was destroyed, the Vṛsṇ ̣i hero137 then
said, “Release the foremost weapon, Pārtha. Karṇa swallows arrows.”
And Arjuna, having intoned the Brahmā weapon, thereupon fixed it.
When Arjuna had then shrouded Karṇa and roamed about, Karṇa,
angered, cut his bowstring with well-sharpened arrows. Putting on
and polishing another bowstring, the Pāṇḍava filled Karṇa with blaz-
ing arrows by the thousands. Between the cutting of his bow and his
attention to restringing it in battle, it was so quick that Karṇa did
not perceive it. That was like a wonder. Rādheya138 counteracted
Savyasācin’s weapons with weapons. Displaying his own prowess, he
did better than Pārtha.
57–65. Then Kṛsṇ ̣a, having seen Arjuna tormented by Karṇa’s
weapon, considering, said to Pārtha, “Use a superior weapon.” Then
Dhanaṃjaya, having blessed another iron-made divine arrow that
looked like fire and was equal to a serpent’s venom, taking hold
of a Raudra weapon,139 desired to shoot. Then the earth swallowed
137 Kṛsṇ ̣a, who comes from the Vṛsṇ ̣i clan of the Yādavas.
138 Karṇa as the son of the sūta Adhiratha’s wife Rādhā. Here begins a series of
pointed and increasingly ironic uses of epithets, beginning with only the narrator
Saṃjaya juxtaposing Karṇa as son of Rādhā with Arjuna as Pārtha, son of Pṛthā or
Kuntī, when, of course, both are sons of Kuntī. Soon the two combatants are calling
each other by these pregnant names, as is Kṛsṇ ̣a, who knows what the names conceal.
139 A weapon of Rudra-Śiva, possibly his Pāśupata weapon; see Hiltebeitel (1982a,
107).
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 445
Rādheya’s wheel in the great fight.140 Then Rādheya, his wheel swal-
lowed, wept tears out of wrath, and said to Arjuna, “O Pāṇḍava, fore-
bear a bit. Having seen this wheel of mine swallowed by fate, Pārtha,
abandon the intention practiced by cowards. As kings do not attack a
king, Arjuna, so heroes do not attack in combat one with disheveled
hair, one facing away, a brahmin, one with joined palms, one who has
come for refuge, one whose weapon is lowered, one also who has gone
to ruin, one without arrows, one whose armor has fallen, or whose
weapon has fallen or broken. You are a hero, Kaunteya.141 Therefore,
forebear a bit, Dhanaṃjaya, while I draw this wheel out of the earth.
Standing on your chariot, you cannot slay me standing ill-equipped
on the earth. I fear neither from Vāsudeva nor from you, Pāṇḍaveya.142
Surely you are a Ksạ triya, one who shows compassion, an increaser
of a great lineage. Recalling instruction about dharma, forebear a bit,
Pāṇḍava.”
67.1. Then Vāsudeva, standing on the chariot, said, “Luckily you
remember dharma here, Rādheya! Sunk in disasters, when it comes
to renouncing life, those who are base blame fate, not their misdeeds,
whatever they are.
Having led Draupadī singly clad into the hall—you, along with
Suyodhana,143 Duḥśāsana, and Śakuni, the son of Subala144—your
dharma did not become evident there, Karṇa.
3–5. When the dice-knowing Śakuni vanquished the dice-ignorant
Kaunteya Yudhisṭḥ ira in the hall, where did your dharma go then?145
When Kṛsṇ ̣ā146 was having her period, standing under Duḥśāsana’s
power, you laughed in the hall, Karṇa. Where did your dharma go
140 8.1130*: Karṇa descends (avatīrya) to try to lift the wheel, but instead raises the
earth four fingers.
141 Son of Kuntī (see note 139 here). Although Arjuna doesn’t know it, Karnạ is
appealing to him—with what looks like intended irony—as his co-uterine brother.
142 Arjuna, a metrically longer way of saying Pāṇḍava.
143 Duryodhana as “easy to combat”; see Biardeau (2002, 1:886 n. 4, 900).
144 Duḥśāsana, the second oldest Kaurava, who tried to disrobe Draupadī after she
was gambled away, and Śakuni, the dicing master whose trickery won her, have been,
along with Karṇa, who ordered her disrobing, Duryodhana’s inner circle; see note 36
here.
145 In inserts, Kṛsṇ ̣a adds: Where was your dharma when Duryodhana ordered the
poisoning of Bhīma (8.1142*); or at the lacquer house (1143*)? when the time in the
forest was over and the Pāṇḍavas were not given back their kingdom (1144*)?
146 Draupadī, the Dark Woman.
446 chapter fifteen
then?147 Again, Karṇa, covetous of kingship, you summoned the
Pāṇḍava, relying on the Gāndhāra king.148 Where did your dharma
go then?”149
6–11. When Rādheya was addressed this way by Vāsudeva, his sharp
anger fixed on the Pāṇḍava, remembering things about Dhanaṃjaya.
At his anger, rays of luminous energy150 appeared from every pore,
O Mahārāja. That was like a wonder. Having perceived him then,
Karṇa again showered a Brahmā weapon on Dhanaṃjaya, and made
an attempt to abandon his chariot.151 Covering that weapon with his
own weapon, the Pāṇḍava attacked. Kaunteya then, having aimed at
Karṇa, released another arrow that was dear to Jātavedas.152 It blazed
forth harshly. Karṇa then appeased the fire with a Varuṇa weapon,153
and with clouds he made all the regions shrouded with darkness. But
the unfazed energetic Pāṇḍaveya, within Rādheya’s sight, then dis-
pelled the clouds with a Vāyu weapon,154
and with arrows, the best of elephant girth-cords155 adorned with
gold, pearls, gems, and diamonds, very beautiful, highly exempt from
the quality of darkness, made with care by the best craftsmen with
time and effort,
147 At 8.1145* Krṣ ṇ ạ adds: And when you insulted Draupadī, saying, “Your husbands
are in Hell; choose another”?
148 Śakuni, to do the dicing.
149 Other additions: or when Abhimanyu was encircled? (8.1146*); Why go on with
false words? You now speak for virtue, but it won’t save your life. The Pāṇḍavas will
regain their kingdom like Nala, and the Kurus will meet destruction (1147*); Karṇa
hangs his head in shame, his lips quiver with rage, but he continues to fight. Kṛsṇ ̣a
tells Arjuna to dispatch him (1148*).
150 Tejas.
151 At 8.1150*, Arjuna also uses a showery Brahmā weapon on Karṇa.
152 Agni.
153 A watery weapon, Varuṇa being god of waters.
154 A windy weapon of the wind god. App. 1, no. 42, now adds, beginning with four
ślokas, the rest in trisṭụ bhs: Karṇa aims a fiery arrow making the gods weep and the
Pāṇḍavas despair. It hits Arjuna’s chest like a mighty snake penetrating an anthill. He
reels. His grip loosens on Gāṇḍīva; “Obtaining that interval, the great chariot warrior
Vṛsạ , wishing to extricate his chariot’s wheel that had been swallowed by the earth,
leapt from his chariot and seized it with his two hands. But by fate he did not succeed,
even with his great strength. Then Kirītịn, the high-souled radiant Arjuna, recovering
his senses, took up the Prāñjalika, an arrow like the rod of Yama. Then Vāsudeva said
to Pārtha, ‘Sever the head of this enemy under refuge before Vṛsạ climbs back onto his
chariot.’ Just so, having honored that lord’s word, he took up that blazing razor-pointed
arrow and struck the elephant girth-cord bright as the spotless sun (on Karnạ ’s flagstaff)
while the great chariot warrior’s chariot-wheel was still sunk.” (ll. 17–30)
155 The emblem on Karṇa’s chariot flag, as in the passage in the previous note.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 447
always bringing strength to your army, which terrorized enemies, of
adorable form, as celebrated in the world as the sun, its light equal to
the sun, moon, and fire.
Then the high-souled Kirītịn, engrossed with the keen, gold-
feathered, razor-sharp arrow of Ādhiratha, cut off the great chariot
warrior Ādhiratha’s flagstaff that was radiant with prosperity.156
15. O worthy friend,157 the Kurus’ fame, dharma, victory, hearts,
and all things dear then fell with that banner; and there was a great
sigh, “Alas.”158
Thereupon the Pāṇḍava, to kill Karṇa quickly, took out from his
quiver an Añjalika159 that was like a rod of fire and the thunderbolt
of the great Indra, its fine ray like the thousand-rayed sun’s, able
to pierce the vital points, smeared with flesh and blood, resembling
Vaisṿ ānara,160 very precious, a destroyer of the lives of men, horses,
and elephants, measuring three cubits and six feet, of straight course
and fierce speed,
its radiance equal to the thousand-eyed god’s161 thunderbolt, exceed-
ingly unbearable like the one who eats whole corpses,162 resembling
the Pināka bow and Nārāyaṇa’s discus, frightful, destructive of those
bearing life.163
156 Or royal splendor, śrī.
157 Mārisạ . Saṃjaya addresses Dhṛtarāsṭṛa with a certain intimacy from time to
time.
158 At 8.1152* it adds, “The Kurus lost hope of victory at the sight of the flagstaff ’s
fall.”
159 An unusual weapon for the coup de grâce, named after “the añjali, the gesture of
salutation with semi-closed hands raised to the bowed forehead . . . that denotes rever-
ence, benediction, and friendship, as when . . . Arjuna joins his hands in the añjali at
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s bedside (5.7.7) in the scene where he secures Kṛsṇ ̣a’s friendship (sakhyam; 10)
and his service as charioteer” (Hiltebeitel, 1982a, 108). Its use is mentioned four other
times in the Mahābhārata: the Pāṇḍavas shoot añjalikas against the Magadha elephant
forces (6.58.31); Bhīsṃ a likewise against the Pāṇḍavas (104.30); and Ghatọ tkaca uses
one twice, first against Aśvatthāman (7.31.93) and then against Karṇa (50.78). Accord-
ing to Ganguli, Bhishma Parva (1970, 5:173), they are “arrows with crescent-shaped
heads.” See further note 165 here, and, in the background, Karṇa’s welcoming and
farewell “salutes” to Kuntī, discussed in section D.
160 Agni, as “belonging to all men.”
161 Indra’s.
162 Agni.
163 Southern and a few Northern texts continue with ten trisṭụ bh lines (8.1154*):
Seeing this weapon able to defeat the gods and Asuras, the Ṛsịs cried out: “May it be
for the well-being of the universe [svasti jagat syād]” (1. 7).
448 chapter fifteen
Having joined Gāṇḍīva with this supreme great weapon, knowing
mantras, having drawn, he said aloud, “If I have performed austerities,
satisfied my gurus, and heard what is desired from friends,
20. “by that truth164 may this great weapon, an arrow of incompa-
rable firmness, destroying bodies, taking away lives, and hard-hearted,
may this well-bitten arrow be invincible upon my foe Karṇa.”
So uttering, Dhanaṃjaya released that terrible arrow for the death
of Karṇa, as fierce as a sorceress of the Atharva-Aṅgirasas,165 blazing,
irresistible in battle even by death.
Highly thrilled, Kirītịn said, “May this arrow of mine be the bearer
of victory. Vengeful,166 splendid as the sun and moon, reaching Karṇa,
may it lead him to Yama.”
With that choicest of victory-bearing arrows whose radiance was
equal to the sun and moon, the diadem-crowned one, of thrilled
aspect, vengeful,167 his bow drawn, halted his foe.168
Of radiance like the risen sun, like the sun moving midway in the
autumn sky, that marshal’s169 head fell on the earth like the red-disked
sun from Asta Mountain.170
164 As Arjuna’s “act of truth,” or satyakriyā, ends on the note that he has “heard what
is desired from friends (mayā yadisṭạ ṃ suhrḍ āṃ tathā śrutam)” (67.20ab), it “brings its
final focus onto the theme of friendship . . . [and] especially his friendship with Kṛsṇ ̣a.”
But with the choice of the añjalika weapon (see note 160 here), it is also “as if the
implicit theme of fratricide is resolved symbolically into a death which affirms that
the final salutation is that of brothers who are inherently friends” (Hiltebeitel, 1982a,
108). See further Hiltebeitel (1988, 411 and n. 23); Biardeau and Péterfalvi (1986,
214): “la geste des deux mains jointes du suppliant . . . sans doute en manifestant son
respect intérieur pour Karṇa”; and Biardeau (2002, 2:384): “un ultime salut respecteux
et suppliant à la victim! Sans doute Arjuna a-t-il l’obscur pressentiment qu’il a tué un
ennemi qui ne devrai pas être un.”
165 The sorceress is a kṛtyā, a type of female personification of black magic that the
epic invokes and evokes at various points; see note 30 here. In the same vein, Atharva-
Aṅgirasas probably suggests practitioners of Atharva Vedic black magic abhicāra rites.
See Türstig (1985).
166 See Monier-Williams ([1899] 1964, 420), on jighāṃsur: desirous of destroying
or killing; revengeful.
167 He is like his arrow (see previous note).
168 At 8.1159* it adds that Arjuna struck off Karnạ ’s head, like Indra removing Vrṭra’s,
with the mantra-inspired Añjalika weapon, making Karṇa’s trunk fall on the earth.
169 Karṇa has for two days, days 16 and 17 of the eighteen-day war, been marshal
(senāpati) of the Kaurava army.
170 Karṇa’s sun-like head falls in three phases, collapsing a year into a day by the
mention of autumn.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 449
25. The embodied soul of that one of lofty deeds abandoned the
handsome body, ever raised in happiness, with exceedingly great diffi-
culty, like a lord of great wealth the house to which he was attached.
Cut with arrows, the tall lifeless body of Karṇa, who was deprived of
armor, fell with its wound streaming like a lightning-struck mountain
peak flowing with red chalky water.
Then from Karṇa’s overthrown body a blazing luminosity171 soon
entered the sky. All the men and warriors saw this wonder, O king,
after Karṇa was slain.
The delighted Somakas, seeing him slain and lying down, bellowed
with the troops. Exceedingly thrilled, they beat their musical instru-
ments and waved their arms and garments. Others, endowed with
strength, danced. Embracing one another, they shouted, roaring,
having seen Karṇa cut down from the chariot, slain by darts, like a
fire scattered by a great wind when it is at rest in the morning at the
termination of a sacrifice.172
30–34. Karṇa’s body shone like the sun with its rays, its every limb
filled with arrows and bathed in streams of blood. Having scorched
the hostile army with burning rays of arrows, Karṇa was a sun led to
the Asta Mountain by Arjuna as powerful time. When going to Asta
Mountain, the sun thereupon departs, having taken away its luster;
just so did the arrow go,173 taking away Karṇa’s life. In the late after-
noon, O worthy friend, the sūta’s son’s head, cut off in battle by the
Añjalika, fell with the body. Higher and higher, rising straightly, that
arrow quickly snatched away the head and body of Karṇa, that enemy
of warriors.
35. Having seen the fallen hero Karṇa lying on the earth filled with
arrows, his limbs smeared with blood, the Madra king went away with
the chariot, its flagstaff cut.
When Karṇa was slain, the Kurus fled, overcome with fear and
gravely wounded in battle, repeatedly glancing at Arjuna’s great flag-
staff shining with beauty.
171 Tejo dīptam; numerous texts say “his blazing tejas entered Sūrya [sūryam . . .
viveśa].”
172 A complex image, if Karṇa is like a fire dispersed after a night sacrifice. Shulman
(1985, 386) argues for “a coherent semantics of sacrificial fate” in Karṇa’s portrayal.
Note the shift now to ślokas.
173 Suggesting an “arrow of time.”
450 chapter fifteen
That one whose acts equaled those of the god of a thousand eyes,174
whose face was beautiful like a thousand-petaled lotus, like the thou-
sand-rayed sun at the close of day, so his head fell to the earth.
68.1. Seeing the troops crushed with arrows in the struggle between
Karṇa and Arjuna, Śalya, glancing at the approaching Duryodhana,
beheld the Bhārata battlefield.
Duryodhana, having seen his army with its elephants, horses, and
chariots beaten down and the sūta’s son slain, his eyes full of tears,
repeatedly sighed, a picture of woe.
Then they stood surrounding Karṇa, desirous of seeing the hero
fallen on the earth filled with arrows, his limbs smeared with blood,
as if Sūrya had happened to drop.
Among the enemy and among your own were those who became
thrilled, terrified, despondent, or forgetful; so also others gave way to
grief, each according to their respective natures.
5. Seeing Karṇa slain by Dhanaṃjaya, his energy175 destroyed, his
armor, ornaments, garments, and weapons in disarray, the Kurus fled
like a confused herd of cows whose bull is slain.
Having seen Karṇa lying on the earth harshly slain by Arjuna like
an elephant by a lion, the Madra king, terrified, slid away quickly with
the chariot.
And the Madra lord, his mind stupefied, having gone quickly to
Duryodhana’s side with the chariot whose banner was removed,
addressing that one beset with woe, said this word,
“The foremost chariot warriors, horses, and elephants are shattered.
Slain, your army is like the realm of Yama, with its men, horses, and
elephants like mountain peaks after having attacked one another.
There has never been such a battle, Bhārata, as was the one now
between Karṇa and Arjuna. The two Kṛsṇ ̣as176 together were surely
swallowed by Karṇa, and all the others who are your enemies.
10. But what is the fate brought forth from its own sway that pro-
tects the Pāṇḍavas and kills us? Surely all the heroes who promoted
your success and purpose are forcibly.slain by the enemy.
174 Indra.
175 Ojas, not tejas, here.
176 Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 451
Heroes mighty as the Lord of Waters, Kubera, Vaivasvata and
Vāsava177 with their manliness, heroism, and strength, and endowed
with all manner of abundant great merits,
fit to be unslayable, Indras among men desirous of your purpose,
were slain by the Pāṇḍaveyas. Don’t grieve over it Bhārata. It is settled.
Success takes its course. There is not always success.”
Hearing this word of the Madra lord and reflecting on his own mis-
conduct, Duryodhana, wretched at heart, at wit’s end, sighed again
and again, a picture of woe.178
To him who was silent in thought, miserable, and severely afflicted,
„
Ārtāyani179 said this wretched sad word: “Hero, behold this terrible
battlefield arrayed with slain elephants, horses, and men;
15–16. with fallen elephants, huge as mountains, suddenly wounded,
their vital spots pierced with arrows, agitated and lifeless, garlanded
with gold, bathed with their armor, weapons, and reins in streams of
blood, their standards, lances, hooks, and bells in disarray, like lordly
mountains whose herbs, trees, deer, and rocks are scattered, riven with
thunderbolts;
and arrayed with fallen horses pierced with arrows, others breath-
ing hard and vomiting blood, with wretched moans, their eyes rolling,
biting the earth and neighing pitifully;
arrayed also with pierced horse- and elephant-warriors—some with
little life left, some with their life departed—and with crushed chariot
warriors, elephants, horses, and men; the earth is hard to look at like
the great Vaitarāṇi;180
with elephants whose limbs, trunks, and hind feet are cut, trem-
bling, fallen on the earth; with famous elephant-, chariot-, and horse-
warriors; and with foot-soldiers slain fighting their enemies face to
face, their weapons, garments, ornaments, and armor shattered, as if
the earth was covered with tranquil fires;
20. with the great armies seen fallen by thousands, afflicted by the
attacks of arrows, their wits lost, panting again, it is as if the earth
177 Varuṇa, Kubera, Yama, and Indra, the gods of the four directions.
178 Here App. 1, no. 43, follows—a long adhyāya in the Vulgate: How did the armies
fare, crushed and scorched during, after, and while fleeing the fight between Karnạ and
Arjuna? Twice Duryodhana rallies his troops like the Asura Bali against the gods, the
second time saying that as there is no place to flee, they should fight like warriors.
179 Śalya, he whose course is orderly, truthful!
180 The foul, corpse-strewn underworld river of the dead.
452 chapter fifteen
came to have its fires extinguished; with its waters fallen from the sky,
the stainless earth is like the night sky with its planets ablaze.
The arrows released from the arms of Karṇa and Arjuna, having
riven the bodies of men; horses, and elephants, quickly taking away
their breaths, entered the earth everywhere like great snakes with
weapons181 toward their dwelling.
With the elephants, horses, and men slain in battle, with chariot
warriors killed by Dhanaṃjaya and Ādhiratha’s arrows on the way, the
earth became very hard to traverse.
With chariots shattered by weapons, bent and separated, their
traces, yokes, axles, and wheels cut, their warriors and flagstaffs, choice
weapons, horses, and inseparably connected charioteers crushed by
choice shafts,
with iron-made devices that were released and knocked down, their
joins struck, bent, and disconnected, their broken seats adorned with
gold and jewels, the earth was strewn like a sky with autumn clouds.
25. With speedy, ornate, and well-equipped battle chariots drawn
by fleet steeds, their lords slain, fleeing quickly with masses of men,
elephants, chariots, and horses your forces are smashed on every side.
Golden tiaras fell, as did bludgeons, axes, sharp pikes,182 clubs,
sharp-edged spears, spotless unsheathed swords, maces bound with
golden cloth,
bows ornamented with golden rings and arrows with beautiful
golden feathers, and spotless unsheathed tempered lances, darts, and
swords with golden luster,
umbrellas, fans, and conches and garlands beautiful with flowers
and the finest gold, variegated elephant cloths, emblems, and cloth
turbans, diadem-crowns and beautiful tiaras,
and cloths scattered and dispersed, and necklaces chiefly of rubies
and pearls, tight upper-armbands, the finest bracelets, collars for the
neck with strings of gold,
30. the best of gems, pearls, gold, and diamonds and auspicious
jewels high and low, and bodies accustomed to unending happiness,
their heads and faces like the moon—
181 What astraiḥ, “with weapons,” is doing here is not clear.
182 I revert to the Vulgate’s śitāś ca śūlā here; the Critical Edition reads kadanġ arāyo,
for which there does not seem to be a sound explanation.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 453
having abandoned their bodies, enjoyments, and retinues and even
the happiness known to the mind, and acquiring great steadiness in
their own dharma, they together went with glory to the celebrated
worlds.”
Having thus spoken, Śalya stopped. Duryodhana, his mind seized
with grief, saying “Oh Karṇa! Oh Karṇa!” was distressed, senseless, his
eyes filled with tears.
Then the lords of men, the son of Droṇa183 first among them, hav-
ing all comforted him, went on, glancing back repeatedly at the great
banner of Arjuna ablaze with glory.
The earth sprinkled with red blood born from the bodies of men,
horses, and elephants, from union with the gold, garlands, and red
cloths, was like a radiant woman accessible to all.184
35. Perceiving her highly illustrious form covered with blood at
that terrible hour, O King, the Kurus did not even stand. All pledged
to the world of the gods,
they were very miserable about Karṇa’s death, saying, “Oh Karṇa!
Oh Karṇa!” Beholding the sun reddened, O King, they set forth quickly
to their camps.
But Karṇa, his horses smeared with blood from the sharp gold-
feathered arrows sped from Gāṇḍīva, his body covered with arrows,
shone on earth even though he was slain like Sūrya himself with his
wreath of rays.
Having touched with his hands185 the blood-besprinkled body of
Karṇa, the lord Vivasvat,186 his form blood-red, compassionate toward
his devotee, went to the other ocean desiring to bathe.
As if so reflecting, the universally celebrated hosts of gods and Ṛsịs
went each to his home. And the folk,187 having reflected, flowed away
as they wished to heaven and the surface of the earth.
40. Having seen that wonder causing fear to all bearers of breath,
that battle between the two foremost Kuru heroes Dhanaṃjaya and
Ādhiratha, those amazed folk then left applauding.
183 Aśvatthāman.
184 On the battlefield-earth as a seductive, beautiful, and ultimately triumphant
woman and redeemed goddess, see Hiltebeitel (1980a, 106–109).
185 Sūrya’s hands are his rays.
186 Sūrya.
187 See note 84.
454 chapter fifteen
41–46. Though his armor was cut through with arrows, though the
hero was slain in battle, Fortune188 did not leave Rādheya even though
his life was gone. Adorned with various ornaments, O King, his brace-
lets made of polished gold, the slain Vaikartana lay like a tree pos-
sessing sprouts. Resembling the finest gold, aflame like the Purifier,189
having burnt the Pāṇḍavas and Pāñcālas, O King, with the energy of
his weapons, that tiger among men together with his sons was quieted
by Pārtha’s energy. The one who also said “I give,” and not “It is not
so,” when sought by seekers, a good man always with the good,190 that
Vṛsạ was slain in the chariot duel. The high-souled one whose entire
wealth of self belonged to brahmins; he for whom there was nothing,
even his own life, he would not give to brahmins; always dear to men,191
a giver whose gift was dear—he has gone to heaven having taken away
from your sons their armor, protection, and hope for victory.
When Karṇa was slain, the streams did not flow, and the sun went
soiled to the Asta mountain; and a slantwise planet, Yama’s son,192 had
the color of burning fire for its rising, O King.
Thereupon the sky split, the earth roared, and violent high-velocity
winds blew; the regions blazed forth violently with smoke and the
great noisy oceans trembled.
Multitudes of mountains shook with their forests, and hosts of
beings shuddered, O worthy friend. The planet Bṛhaspati,193 oppress-
ing the constellation Rohiṇī, took on the same color as the sun or
moon.
50. When Karṇa was slain, the regions did not disclose themselves;
the sky was covered in darkness, the earth roamed about, meteors of
blazing light fell, and night-stalkers194 too were thrilled.
188 Laksṃ ī.
189 Pāvaka, Agni.
190 Sadbhiḥ sadā satpurusạ ḥ. See section D, at note 43: Karṇa “persevere[d] in the
conduct of noncruelty that befits a good man.”
191 The Vulgate and some other texts have instead strīṇām, “always dear to women.”
192 This planetary “son of Yama” eludes me. The Vulgate has instead somasya putra,
“son of Soma,” which Ganguli, Karna Parva ([1884–96] 1970, 7290) names as Mercury.
Monier-Williams ([1899] 1964, 846), gives Saturn as a name for Yama himself in the
Harivaṃśa.
193 Jupiter.
194 Niśācaras, most typical of whom are Rāksạ sas. The term is not used for Ghatọ tkaca,
but he is one, and it would be fitting for his kind to take vengeful delight in Karnạ ’s
death.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 455
When Arjuna with his razor-sharp arrow toppled Karṇa’s head, its
face radiant as the moon, folk in the atmosphere, heaven, and here
repeatedly cried, “Alas!”
Having slain the foe Karṇa in battle, who was honored by gods,
men, and Gandharvas, Arjuna Pārtha shone with utmost energy like
the thousand-eyed one after slaying Vṛtra.195
Then with the chariot that roared like a bank of clouds, that glittered
like the sun at midday in the autumn sky, whose emblemed banner
had a terrible roar,196 that shone like snow, the moon, a conch, or
crystal, that was adorned with coral, diamond, pearls, and gold and
was fast beyond measure,
the two best of Men,197 the Pāṇḍava and the crusher of Keśī,198 lofty
like the sun or fire, fearless and quick in battle, shone like Visṇ ̣u and
Vāsava mounted on the same vehicle.
55. With the sounds of their wheels, palms, and bowstring, hav-
ing forcibly destroyed their enemies’ lusters, having extinguished the
Kurus with showers of arrows, the one with the monkey on his banner
and the one with the best of birds199 on his banner then took up with
their hands their fine-sounding conches that were covered with webs
of gold
and dazzling as snow, and, forcibly blowing them loudly, sank the
hearts of their foes. The two best of men200 with the two best of faces
kissed the two best of conches and blew them jointly,
57. and from both, from Devadatta and the blare of Pañcajanya,201
it filled the earth, atmosphere, and heaven, and even the waters.
Those two heroes, making the forests, mountains, streams, and
regions resound with the sound of their conches, terrified your son’s
army and gladdened Yudhisṭḥ ira.
195 The Critical Edition regards this line about Vṛtra as uncertain, but all texts cited
refer here in some way to Indra’s slaying of Vṛtra. On this and further allusions to
Indra’s conquest of the demons Vṛtra and Namuci, see note 211 here.
196 The monkey Hanumān roars from Arjuna’s banner.
197 Narottamau. Nara being a name for Arjuna’s ancient Ṛsị-identity that links him
with Kṛsṇ ̣a’s form Nārāyaṇa, and nara being equivalent to purusạ as “man,” the title
“two best of men” evokes Kṛsṇ ̣a’s identity as Purusọ ttama (see note 90 here) as well as
Arjuna’s identity with Kṛsṇ ̣a that makes them “the two Kṛsṇ ̣as on one chariot.”
198 The name recalls Kṛsṇ ̣a’s killing of the horse-demon Keśī when he was a child
in Vṛndavana.
199 Garuḍa appears on Kṛsṇ ̣a’s banner, Hanumān on Arjuna’s (See note 197 here).
200 Nrṇ āṃ varau now! The poets are clearly having fun in this verse. See note 198 here.
201 The conches of Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a, respectively.
456 chapter fifteen
Then, having heard the conches’ agitating blare, the Kurus departed
with speed, having deserted the Madra lord and also the lord of the
Bhāratas, Duryodhana, O Bhārata.
60. Hosts of beings together applauded Dhanaṃjaya of many
splendors in the great battle, and Janārdana too, as if the two were
risen suns.
Covered with Karṇa’s arrows, the two foe-tamers Acyuta202 and
Arjuna both shone forth in battle like the sun or the rabbit-marked
moon with its wreath of rays, risen spotless, having destroyed the
darkness.
Removing those bunches of arrows, the two lords203 of unrivaled
prowess, flushed with happiness, came surrounded by friends to their
camp like Vāsava and Acyuta invoked by the attendees of a sacrifice.
Then they were honored by Cāraṇas,204 men, and Gandharvas with
the gods, and even the great snakes, Yaksạ s,205 and the great Ṛsịs for
their supreme strengthening of victory, having slain Karṇa in that
peerless battle.206
69.1–5.207 Saṃjaya said, After Karṇa had thus fallen and your army had
fled, joyfully embracing Pārtha, Dāśārha208 said this word, “Vṛtra was
slain by the destroyer of Bala;209 Karṇa by you, Dhanaṃjaya. People
will tell the death of Vṛtra and Karṇa as a doublet.210 Vṛtra was slain
202 The “Unfallen,” a name of both Kṛsṇ ̣a (see note 89 here) and Visṇ ̣u (as implied
in what follows by the connection with Indra). Note the building allusions to the Vedic
sacrifice that begin here.
203 Īśvarau.
204 Celestial singers.
205 Unpredictable cousins of Rāksạ sas, given alternately to menacing, protective,
and fructifying behaviors.
206 At 8.1197*, one trisṭụ bh is added in closing: they were lauded like Indra and Visṇ ụ ,
after the overthrow of Bali. Then follows app. 1, no. 44: the Kauravas broke, fled, in
despair. Duryodhana took Śalya’s advice and withdrew the army. Various heroes and
forces are described returning to the Kaurava camp. No Kaurava warrior wished to
continue the fight. Duryodhana lets them rest for the night.
207 This adhyāya has a variant text in its entirety (8.1224*), mostly in the Southern
recension, and is thus wavy-lined, as the preferred text of the editor. The variant
has nothing of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s mysterious words to Arjuna., is much thicker in Yudhisṭịra’s
“bhakti” paean to Kṛsṇ ̣a-“Govinda’s” grace, and lacks the ironies of the Northern
passage (ll. 23–33).
208 Kṛsṇ ̣a, “worthy of respect” (see Biardeau, 2002, 1:105 11. 23).
209 Indra. See note 128 here.
210 Kṛsṇ ̣a’s mysterious evocation of an identity between these combats, and thus
between Karṇa and not only Vrṭra but Namuci (see nn. 72, 132, 169), provides a
Vedic “deepening” of Karṇa’s demonic rapport with the Asura Naraka by possession
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 457
in battle by the many-splendored possessor of the thunderbolt. Karṇa
was slain by you with the bow and sharp arrows. Let the two of us,
Kaunteya, report this prowess spread in the world and bearing your
fame to the intelligent Dharmarāja. Having reported to Dharmarāja
the death of Karṇa in battle that was so long intended, you will dis-
charge your debt.”211
6–11. When Pārtha said “Yes,” the bull of the Yadus, deliberate212
Keśava, turned around the chariot of that best of chariot warriors.
And Govinda213 said this word to Dhṛsṭadyumna, Yudhamanyu, the
two sons of Mādrī, Wolfbelly, and Yuyudhāna,214 “Bless you! May you
stand watchful facing the foe until the king is informed that Karṇa is
slain by Arjuna.” Given leave by those heroes, he went to the king’s
encampment. And having taken Pārtha, Govinda saw Yudhisṭḥ ira,
that tiger among kings, lying down on the finest of gold beds. The
delighted pair then touched the king’s feet. Beholding their joy and
their superhuman blows, thinking that Rādheya was slain, Yudhisṭḥ ira
rose up.215
12–18. Then the sweet-speeched Vāsudeva, delighter of the Yadus,
narrated the death of Karṇa to him just as it happened. Slightly smil-
ing then, Kṛsṇ ̣a Acyuta, palms folded, addressed King Yudhisṭḥ ira
whose foe was slain. “Luckily the wielder of the Gāṇḍīva bow and the
Pāṇḍava Wolfbelly and you too and the two Pāṇḍava sons of Mādrī are
well, O King, freed from this hair-raising battle that has been destruc-
tive of heroes. Quickly do the things that are yet to be done, king.
Harsh Vaikartana, the sūta’s son of great might, is slain. Luckily you
triumph, Indra among kings. Luckily you increase, Pāṇḍava. He who
(see section C). The Vedic Indra conquers Vṛtra and Namuci thanks to his “friend”
Visṇ ̣u and, in Namuci’s case, by a violation of friendship. The epic seems to reemplot
this thematic set into the web of true and false friendships surrounding Karṇa (see
Hiltebeitel [1976] 1990, 255–266; 1982a, 93–107). With the exceptions of the initial
reference to Namuci and 68.52d on Vṛtra, these Vedic allusions are found only in the
Northern recension.
211 At 8.1198* two ślokas are added on how Yudhisṭḥ ira was turned back in battle
by Karṇa.
212 Avyagra: unconcerned, unconfused, steady, deliberate.
213 Govinda is probably the epic’s most affectionate and salvific name for Kṛsṇ ̣a
(Hiltebeitel, 2001a, 67, 251–253, 256, 259 n. 54, 276; Biardeau, 2002, 2:273 n. 4, 317:
probably from gopa-indra, “king of cowboys”), as it is in the cult of Draupadī (Hilte-
beitel, 1988, 236, 275–81).
214 Two of Draupadī’s brothers, the Pāṇḍava twins, Bhīma, and Kṛsṇ ̣a’s kinsman
Sātyaki, respectively.
215 Samuttasthau. One could say he “altogether rises.”
458 chapter fifteen
announced Kṛsṇ ̣ā won by dice, the vilest of good men216—today the
earth drinks that sūta’s son’s blood. Kuru bull, that enemy of yours lies
on the earth with his limbs torn by arrows. Look at him, tiger among
men, broken by many arrows.”
19–25. The thrilled Yudhisṭḥ ira paid homage to Dāśārha; he said,
“Luckily luckily,” Indra among kings,217 and he gladly said this: “It is
not strange in you, great-armed son of Devakī,218 that, with you as
his charioteer, Pārtha would now do what is manly.” And the law-
supporting Pārtha, best of Kurus, having grasped his braceleted right
arm, spoke to both Keśava and Arjuna, “Nārada has told that you are
the two gods Nara and Nārāyaṇa, the two ancient best of men219 joined
in the establishment of dharma.220 The wise great-armed lord Kṛsṇ ̣a
Dvaipāyana221 has also told me this divine story repeatedly. By your
power,222 Kṛsṇ ̣a, Dhanaṃjaya with Gāṇḍīva conquered the foes who
faced him and never faced away. Our victory was firm. Defeat was not
to be ours when you undertook Pārtha’s charioteering in battle.”
26–34. Having thus spoken, Mahārāja, that great chariot-warrior,
a tiger among men, having mounted that gold-decked chariot yoked
with ivory-white black-tailed horses, surrounded by troops, pleasantly
assenting to the heroic Kṛsṇ ̣a and Arjuna, then came to see the battle-
field of many tidings. Conversing with the two heroes Mādhava and
Phālguna, he saw the bull among men Karṇa lying on the battlefield
broken in pieces everywhere by arrows sped from Gāṇḍīva. Having seen
Karṇa and his sons slain,223 King Yudhisṭḥ ira praised both Mādhava
and the Pāṇḍava, those tigers among men, saying, “Today, Govinda,
with my brothers I am king of the earth, protected on every side by
you, our lord, hero, and sage. Having seen the death of the proud tiger
among men Rādheya,224 that wicked-souled son of Dhṛtarāsṭṛa225 will
216 Cited at the beginning of section D. See also note 191 here.
217 Saṃjaya.to Dhṛtarāsṭṛa.
218 On the resonances of this epithet, see note 54 here.
219 Purusạ uttamaḥ; see notes 34 and 90 here.
220 Echoing Bhagavad Gītā 4.8.
221 Vyāsa as “the island-born Kṛsṇ ̣a”; the author.
222 Prabhāva probably implying mysterious divine power. Yudhisṭḥ ira is consistent
in praising Kṛsṇ ̣a rather than Arjuna.
223 Effectively eliminating Karnạ ’s sons as heirs whom Yudhisṭḥ ira might see himself
obliged to enthrone in his own stead.
224 Again, the irony of the naming of Karṇa Rādheya, Yudhisṭḥ ira having yet to
know that he is a son of Kuntī.
225 Duryodhana.
kṛsṇ ̣a in the mahābhārata: the death of karṇa 459
be hopeless about life and kingdom now that the great chariot-warrior
Karṇa is slain. By your grace, bull among men, our goals are met.
Delighter of the Yadus, you and the wielder of the Gāṇḍīva bow are
victorious. Luckily you triumph, Govinda. Luckily Karṇa is fallen.” So,
O Indra among kings, the much-delighted Dharmarāja Yudhisṭḥ ira
praised Janārdana and Arjuna.226
35–40. Then the great chariot-warriors, filled with joy, magnified
the king surrounded by all his brothers, beginning with Bhīma. And
the Pāṇḍavas Nakula, Sahadeva, and Wolfbelly, and Sātyaki the fore-
most chariot-warrior of the Vṛsṇ ̣is, O Mahārāja, and Dhṛsṭạ dyumna
and Śikhaṇḍin, and the Pāṇḍus, Pāñcālas, and Sṛñjayas227 honored
Kaunteya at the sūta’s son’s fall. Behaving like conquerors, devoted
to war, those tested champions, having magnified King Yudhisṭḥ ira,
lauded the two foe-taming Kṛsṇ ̣as with words joined with songs of
praise. Thus filled with joy, the great chariot-warriors went to their
own camp. Thus this destruction, a very great hair-raising occurrence,
came about on account of your evil policy, O King. Why do you grieve
excessively now?
41–43. Vaiśampāyana said, “Having heard this unpleasantness, the
much-pained Kauravya lord of earth Dhṛtarāsṭṛa fell helpless on the
earth, as did Gāndhārī, the true-vowed lady who saw dharma. Then
Vidura and also Saṃjaya took hold of the lord of men, and the two
also undertook to comfort the lord of the earth. So too the royal ladies
raised Gāndhārī. The king, taking heart for the two of them, became
silent, discerning.”228
226 Various Northern texts, including the Vulgate, have Saṃjaya add: “Having seen
Karṇa slain, together with his sons by the arrows of Pārtha, the son of the Kuru clan
thought himself born as it were again [punar jātamiva ātmānaṃ mene]! (8.1212*).
There is a ‘Fisher King’ quality to Yudhisṭḥ ira’s recovery. See the translation at note
216 here.
227 Like the Somakas, a branch of the Pāñcālas.
228 The Vulgate and other manuscripts have for this last line, “The king considered
fate and necessity to be paramount” (8.1217*). A phalaśruti (a passage on “the fruits of
hearing” the Karnạ parvan) follows in many Northern texts, and includes these rewards:
“Whoever recites this great sacrifice of battle of Dhanaṃjaya and Karṇa obtains the
fruit from hearing a desired sacrifice rightly performed” (1219* ll. 1–4)—adding that
“Visṇ ̣u is the sacrifice [makho hi visṇ ̣ur]” (1. 6); “And since it is God, the eternal lord
Visṇ ̣u, who is glorified everywhere [in this parvan], the happy man [who recites it]
acquires his desires, as the word of the great Muni [Vyāsa] is respected” (1222*).

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
BROTHERS, FRIENDS, AND CHARIOTEERS:
PARALLEL EPISODES IN THE IRISH AND INDIAN EPICS
For over thirty years, since the early publications of Stig Wikander
(1947) and Georges Dumézil (1948) on the Mahābhārata, it has been
widely recognized that India’s ‘Great Epic’ is a repository of certain
kinds of Indo-European tradition. But the significance of this insight
has not been sufficiently explored, either in terms of its implications for
understanding the nature of the epic vis-à-vis other Indian texts, or in
terms of clarifying precisely what its Indo-European heritage is. With
regard to the first point, this essay holds room for only the following
remarks. It is a distinctive feature of the Mahābhārata that it regards
itself as a Fifth Veda, self-consciously perpetuating the Vedic tradi-
tion and recasting the Vedic ‘revelation’ in heroic terms. The epic thus
appears to have a unique place in classical Indian literature as a carrier
and repository of India’s early heritage of Ārya narrative lore, probably
including much of the akhyāna, itihāsa, and purāṇa material so fre-
quently alluded to, but rarely told, in the Brāhmaṇas and Upaniṣads.
As we have it in its present form, the epic draws all such material into
a great synthesis, motivated chiefly by the concern to articulate themes
of bhakti and dharma. But one may still identify some of the older
strains that have been worked into this synthesis. Some of these are
demonstrably Vedic (that is, related to themes found from the Vedas
to the Upaniṣads). Others might also be described tentatively as ‘non-
Ārya’ (see Hiltebeitel 1980b, 1980c). But there is a significant body
of concepts, topoi, and narrative skeins that clarify themselves only
through the hypothesis that the Mahābhārata somehow situates itself
very strongly in a para-Vedic continuum that draws from the Indo-
European heritage. The distinctiveness of the Mahābhārata among
post-Upaniṣadic texts should be emphasized here, for such an assess-
ment could not be made of the Rāmāyaṇa, for which efforts to find
similar Indo-European continuities have been unconvincing (Dubuis-
son 1979; Gehrts 1975:182–183; Molé 1960), and certainly not of the
Purāṇas.
Regarding the second point, if some fair sample of the various claims
and suggestions made about it can be trusted, the Mahābhārata’s
462 chapter sixteen
Indo-European heritage would seem to be multifaceted. While the list
is not exhaustive, five major features of the epic narrative have been
traced to Indo-European sources. The first, and the widely accepted1
starting point for further inquiry, was the recognition of mythic traits
concerning tri-functional groups of Indo-European deities transposed
onto the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī (Wikander 1947; Dumézil 1948;
1974: 53–124). Second, varying arguments have been presented that
the central drama of the epic involves the transposition of an Indo-
European eschatological myth into heroic terms (Wikander 1960a;
1960b; Dumézil 1973: 49–65; Hiltebeitel 1976: 299–356; O’Brien 1976).
Third, the main narrative of the epic itself has been shown to have
striking correspondences with other Indo-European epic (as distinct
from mythic) traditions, most notably with the Norse Battle of Brável-
lir (Wikander 1960a; 1960b; see also Wikander 1950). Fourth, the
epic includes independent tales outside its main narrative that seem
to be the Indian variants (Yayāti, Vasu Uparicara, Mādhavī) of Indo-
European prototypes; these mini-epics are concerned primarily with
royalty, and more particularly with ‘primal kings’ (Dumézil 1973). And
fifth, certain singular episodes within the larger main narrative seem
to be the Indian variants of heroic gestes, here involving not primal
kings but warriors and champions. The arrow-bed deaths of Bhīṣma
and Ubbo Frescius (Wikander 1960a; 1960b) and the annihilations of
Śiśupāla, Starkadr, and Heracles after their sins against the three func-
tions (Dumézil 1971:17–132) are cases of this latter type. And it may be
that the father-son combat between Arjuna and Babhruvāhana should
be considered in comparisons of the Irish (Cúchulainn and Connla),
Germanic, Iranian, and Russian variants of the same theme (Hatto
1973; Stuart 1977). This essay will examine one more case of this fifth
sort, and will concern the parallels between two episodes which are
about as renowned and popular as any in the two epic traditions in
which they are found: the Irish story of Cúchulainn’s combat with Fer
Diad in the Táin Bó Cuailnge, and the combat between Arjuna and
Karṇa in the Mahābhārata.
1 The trifunctional interpretation of the Pāṇḍavas withstands its critiques, the most
relentless being that of Gonda (1971) on the paternity of Yudhiṣṭhira by Dharma.
Whether or not Dharma is a ‘rejuvenated Mitra’ as Wikander (in Dumézil 1948:49)
and Dumézil (1948:60, 77) claimed, Yudhiṣṭhira and Dharma maintain in the epic
important rapports with what may be called first function themes (sovereignty, truth,
dharma, vows, riddles, and the brahmin position in the caste hierarchy).
brothers, friends, and charioteers 463
It has been observed that in terms of textual features, each of these
episodes has a singular character in its respective epic. Based on analy-
sis of language and style, it has been claimed that the Fer Diad episode
in its present form is not older than the eleventh century (Thurney-
sen 1921: 219), that it is doubtful whether it formed part of the first
recension of the Táin (O’Rahilly 1970: xv, n. 2), and even that it was
invented either in part or whole cloth out of elements used in earlier
episodes and conjured up by the imagination. Thus Cúchulainn has
another opponent in the Táin who is his foster brother (Fer Baeth),
and another who has a ‘horn-skin’ (Loch) (Thumeysen 1921:220); and
the rare fight from chariots could be ‘a late invention of the compiler’
(O’Rahilly 1970: xi, n. 5; cf. Kinsella 1970:275, n. to p. 168).
At first sight, the textual situation of the Karṇaparvan looks to be
just the opposite. The Mahābhārata is composed primarily (about
90%) in the śloka metre, with most of its remainder in triṣṭubhs, 70%
of which are hypermetric or ‘irregular’ in that they ‘cannot be classified
as classical metres’ whose metrical patterns were set about 350 A.D.
(M.C. Smith 1972:3–4). Mary Carroll Smith has argued that the
triṣṭubhs form the ‘core’ of the Mahābhārata, and the irregular triṣṭubhs
the ‘nucleus’ (ibid. 65). She points out that whereas most of the epic
duels at the battle of Kurukṣetra make use of classical triṣṭubhs, the
Karṇaparvan ‘retains a distinguishable layer of irregular verses. . . .
It is the last book of the Mahābhārata to give sustained evidence of
once having had a narrative core of irregular triṣṭubh verses at its
center. . . . In chapter 67, the death of Karṇa, it is necessary to separate
at least three layers of metre before the irregular verses appear (ibid.
56). There is good reason to suspect that Smith is right that the irregu-
lar triṣṭubhs preserve archaic epic material, although there is no rea-
son to think that śloka verses are necessarily more recent (see Horsch
1966:250–284, 360–365), or that certain passages in śloka may not also
be more archaic than others. It is thus not convincing to speak of an
‘irregular’ triṣṭubh ‘nucleus’ or a triṣṭubh ‘core.’ But it is convincing
to think of the layered texture of the Karṇaparvan as building upon
some of the Mahābhārata’s most archaic material. And if this is true,
and if significant parallels can be shown between the Comrac Fir Dia
and the Karṇavadha, it should reopen some of the questions about the
former episodes’ place in the Táin. It may well have been rewritten,
and originally an independent tale within the Ulster cycle. But it may
be seriously questioned whether it was a late invention composed from
bits and pieces.
464 chapter sixteen
The parallels can best be set forth by first offering a brief statement
of the main common elements, and then a more thorough analysis
of them. The main convergence concerns the relative prominence in
the two episodes of the war chariot. This would seem a promising
setting for the conservation of archaic themes, for although the Celtic-
Irish (Harbison 1971) and Indian (Hopkins 1972: 179–206; Singh 1965:
23–52) chariots underwent their own late modifications, there is evi-
dence to suggest that the battle chariot was adopted ‘by the Indo-Eu-
ropeans on the northerly fringes of Sumer and Akkad soon after 2000
B.C., given added speed and lightness by the use of horses and the
invention of the spiked wheel, and spread by them in their expansion
to east and west’ (Piggott 1950: 276; cf. Polomé 1978–79: 50). Indeed,
Stuart Piggott insists that the early Vedic war chariot ‘was essentially
the same vehicles as that known from other areas of Indo-European
colonization,’ and remarks on the nearly identical features of chariots
‘in the two peripheral areas of Britain and India’ (Piggott 1950: 281).
It is noteworthy that the impressions of an eight-spiked wheel indicate
a Kurgan chariot burial from no later than 1500 B.C. at Sintashta on
the South Trans-Ural Steppe, probably belonging to an Indo-Iranian
ethnic group (Genning 1979: 9 and fig. 3).
The chariots themselves are of varying importance in the two epic
accounts, but in each case the combatants come to battle in chariots,
and in each case their relations with their charioteers play a strongly
determinative role in the outcome. Moreover, the warriors’ rapport
with their charioteers is in each case part of a wider network of com-
plicated social relationships centered on the themes of partial or sym-
bolic brotherhood and ‘friendship.’ Let us now look at each of these
matters more closely. Citations of the Táin will be made from Cecile
O’Rahilly’s editions and translations of the two main recensions: from
the ‘First Recension’ (I), most of which can be found in the Book of the
Dun Cow (ca 1100), but of which the Yellow Book of Lecan yields
the oldest account (late fourteenth century) of the Fer Diad episode
(O’Rahilly 1976: vii); and the more regularized, recent, and elaborated
‘Second Recension’ (II) of the Book of Leinster (O’Rahilly 1970). It
should be noted that there is nothing basic to our discussion that is
not found in the older recension, but that both will be considered on
equal terms as retaining variants of themes deriving from a presum-
ably fluid oral tradition. Citations from the Mahābhārata will be from
the Poona Critical Edition. Here too everything basic can be found in
triṣṭubhs, but the śloka material deserves equal attention.
brothers, friends, and charioteers 465
1. Setting and Contestants. Each combat comes about after what
appears to be considerable postponement and anticipation. Fer Diad
has the reputation of being Connacht’s foremost champion, and Medb
(Connacht’s queen) calls upon him to be the last of the opponents to
take on the suicidal task of fighting Cúchulainn in single combat at
the ford. Moreover, he alone is regarded as Cúchulainn’s match: ‘For
similar and equal was their (power of) fighting and combat’ (Dáig
ba cosmail ocus ba comadas a comlond a comrac; II 2610–2611). The
duel between Arjuna and Karṇa has been postponed since the first
meeting of their youth. At a tournament designed to exhibit Arjuna’s
skills at weapons Karṇa appeared unexpectedly and displayed equally
impressive feats, but Arjuna refused to fight him because of Karṇa’s
reputed mixed-caste origins (Mbh 1.126–27). And during the battle
of Kurukṣetra, their confrontation is postponed for sixteen days, the
final six of which preoccupy Arjuna against a suicide squad called
the Saṃśaptakas, those ‘sworn together’ to fight him to their doom.
Arjuna and Karṇa’s parity in battle is also elaborately developed. On
the morning of their duel, Karṇa tells king Duryodhana that their skills
and weapons nearly balance each other out, but that Arjuna comes to
battle with certain advantages which must be neutralized, most nota-
bly his two inexhaustible quivers, his horses of the speed of mind,
his indestructible chariot, and his charioteer Kṛṣṇa whom Karṇa has
no trouble recognizing as the ‘creator of the universe’ (sraṣṭo jagatas;
8.22.49). Karṇa says the balance can be restored, however, if the fol-
lowing conditions are met:
But this one like a hero, Śalya, the ornament of assemblies—if he should
do my chariot driving, victory will certainly be yours. Let Śalya, therefore,
arduous with foes, be my charioteer. Let carts (śakatạ̄ ni) bear my vulture-
feathered arrows. And let the foremost chariots (rathāśca mukhyā), O
king, yoked with the best horses, always follow behind me, O bull of
the Bhāratas. Thus I will be superior to Pārtha [Arjuna] by these quali-
ties (guṇaiḥ). Śalya is surely superior to Kṛṣṇa. Surely I am superior to
Arjuna. As Dāśārha [Kṛṣṇa], slayer of heroic foes, knows the heart of
horsemanship (aśvahṛdayam), so does the great chariot-warrior Śalya
know about horses. (8.22.50–54)
In matters of arrows, horses and chariots, Karṇa thus seeks to make up
for quality with quantity, but in matters of personal prowess he sees
the four principals as equal, with the advantage even on his side.
Beyond such general similarities in matters of setting and parity,
there are more specific coincidences regarding the primary combatants.
466 chapter sixteen
According to the Táin, ‘neither of them had any advantage over the other
save that Cú Chulainn possessed the feat of the ga bulga. However, to
counterbalance this Fer Diad had a horn-skin (coṅganchnessach) when
fighting with a warrior at the ford’ (II 2613–2116). The Táin thus sets
its ultimate weapon against what seems to be a natural born armor, or
at least a means of natural self-defense that activates itself in the course
of battle: ‘for he has a horn-skin when he fights with an opponent, and
neither weapons nor sharp points can pierce it’ (I 2747–2748). Now it
is one of the more intriguing parallels between the two episodes that
Karṇa has been dispossessed prior to the battle of Kurukṣetra of a
natural born suit of golden armor. Indeed, when Arjuna first saw him
at the tournament, Karṇa’s ‘natural born armor’ (sahajaṃ kavacam;
1.126.2) made his body ‘hard as a lion’s’ (siṃhasaṃhanano; 5). Yet
it is still part of the series of tradeoffs that concern the eventual duel
with Arjuna, for it was Indra (Arjuna’s father) who, to protect Arjuna,
had disguised himself as a brahmin and begged the armor along with
Karṇa’s natural-born golden earrings from the proverbially generous
Karṇa, and it was Sūrya (the Sun god, Karṇa’s father) who had insisted
that Karṇa at least demand in return a dart (śakti) capable of killing
Arjuna (3.284–94). It would thus seem that the Mahābhārata also pits
two foes who, at least from the start of their antagonism, have traits
parallel to those of Fer Diad and Cúchulainn: a natural-born armor
versus the ultimate weapon. For Arjuna, even prior to the tournament
where he and Karṇa first encounter each other, has learned from his
guru Droṇa to use the Pāśupata weapon, the epic’s doomsday weapon
ultimately belonging to Śiva Paśupati.
2. Ties of Friendship. One can identify in each of these two epic
episodes an elaborate skein of relationships bound up with the under-
lying theme of ‘friendship.’ It is, however, in each case a skein that
unfolds from a similar set of central ambiguities. At the heart of the
matter is the fact that in each case the duel itself is between figures
whose relationship to each other includes the implications not only of
friendship but of brotherhood.
As Fergus tells Cúchulainn in the Táin, you will fight ‘your own
friend and companion and foster brother, the man who is your equal
in feats of arms and prowess and great deeds’ (II 2727–2728; cf. II
2620). Cúchulainn had become Fer Diad’s foster brother (comalta)
when the two underwent training in arms by the warrior women
Scáthach, Úathach, and Aife; and during this time, as Fer Diad recalls,
brothers, friends, and charioteers 467
Cúchulainn was Fer Diad’s ‘serving man’ (forbfer) and used to prepare
his spears and couch (II 2938–2940). One thus has an indication that
Fer Diad is the senior of the two foster brothers. Their friendship,
combined with this sense of kinship, is also a sworn fact, which each
acknowledges freely in their dialogues. Thus, for instance, Cúchulainn
laments: ‘You were my loved comrade (chochne cride), my kin and
kindred (tú m’aiccme, tú m’fine). Never found I one dearer. Sad will
be your death’ (II 3006–3009; I 3071–3074). And before fighting ‘they
renounced their friendship’ (n-athcharatraid ráraile; II 2944–2945).
In the Mahābhārata, Karṇa is Arjuna’s older brother, or half-
brother. Their mother Kuntī bore Karṇa to Sūrya before her marriage,
and thus out of shame abandoned him at birth, whence forth he was
raised by mix-caste sūtas (Mbh. 1.104; 3.287–293). Arjuna was born to
her, sired by Indra, after her marriage to king Pāṇḍu. This situation is
unknown to Arjuna before their duel, but it is known to Karṇa who
insists it be a secret shared between himself, his mother, and Kṛṣṇa.
Yet as Kṛṣṇa reminds Karṇa just before the war, Karṇa is legally (dhar-
matas; 5.138.9) a Pāṇḍava and thus Arjuna’s brother, and could, if
he chose, claim recognition as king since he is the senior of all the
Pāṇḍava brothers. Kṛṣṇa predicts further that the Pāṇḍavas would be
willing to serve Karṇa in various ways, Arjuna by driving his chariot
(5.7.34–35), a role which holds implications concerning the theme of
friendship, as we shall see, and reminds one that Kṛṣṇa has at this
point already agreed to serve as Arjuna’s charioteer.
One can thus summarize so far by saying that in each episode the
duel between friends (potential or actual) disguises, in one way or
another, the problematic of fratricide, and more particularly the killing
of a senior brother.
Moving out from this center, we now come to the relationships
between the warriors and their charioteers. Speaking first in general
terms, it must be supposed that the chariot warrior and his chario-
teer should have a finely tuned rapport with each other. In fact, their
intimate relation on the chariot was destined to become a subject of
metaphysical speculations. Thus Kaṭha Upaniṣad 1.3.3. and 9: ‘Know
the Self as the lord of the chariot (ātmānaṃ rathinaṃ viddhi) and
the body as, verily, the chariot, know the intellect as the charioteer
(buddhiṃ tu sārathiṃ viddhi) and the mind as, verily, the reins. . . . He
who has understanding for the driver of the chariot (vijñānasārathir)
and controls the rein of his mind, he reaches the end of the journey,
468 chapter sixteen
the supreme abode of the all-pervading’ (Radhakrishnan 1953:
623–624).2 Together on the chariot, the warrior and charioteer put
themselves into a situation of ultimate mutual trust, where the life of
each is in the other’s hands. The warrior must protect his charioteer,
who was probably unarmed (Hopkins 1972: 196; Singh 1965: 33). In
the roughly nine hundred and sixty-six combat scenes at the battle
of Kurukṣetra, there is individual reference to the killing of one hun-
dred and fifty-five sūtas, or a 16% ratio of charioteers killed per duel.
Thus Sarva Daman Singh can speak of the ‘slaughtered heap of his [the
sūta’s] kind’ (Singh 1965: 49). Yet the charioteer must also protect the
warrior (see Mbh. 8.23.5–6 and 17) by skillfully guiding the horses.
It is thus not surprising that the rapport between driver and warrior
should serve to bring into focus a variety of narrative reflections on
the theme of friendship. Indeed, the relationship between them is pre-
cisely one which relies on friendship because it is based on an inherent
inequality. The warrior, of course, has the higher rank. In India the
main classificatory term for charioteer, along with more descriptive
terms like sārathi, yantṛ, niyantṛ, and saṃgrahitṛ, is sūta, which holds
the stigma of mixed-caste birth supposedly from the original union of
a Kṣatriya father and a Brahmin mother (e.g. Mānava Dharmaśāstra;
10.11). In Ireland there are also indications that the skills are a fam-
ily trait, as Laeg mac Riangabra—Cúchulainn’s charioteer—shares his
trade with two brothers (Cross and Slover 1969: 258; each drives for
one of the three champions in ‘Bricriu’s Feast’). It is common for the
warrior to call his charioteer (arae) gilla, ‘lad,’ which—along with other
features of their interactions in the tales—implies inferiority. And one
can infer some notion of crookedness, if not exactly social stigma, in
the promptings of an early Christian metrical rule: ‘If thou should take
the path of repentance, advance step by step every day, practice not the
way of the charioteer’ (ni dernae bésu arad) (Strachan 1904: 200). One
may thus be on the watch for ramifications of this theme of ‘friendship’
as mutual trust based on implied inequality,3 which may be taken itself
2 Cf. Plato’s Phaedrus 246 and Mahābhārata 3.202.21–28, where in each case the
soul is itself the charioteer. There may also be Irish ‘metaphysics’ involved when Saint
Patrick calls Cúchulainn and Laeg back from the dead to convert king Loegaire by
allowing him to see their fantastic feats together on the chariot (Cross and Slover
1969:847–354; ‘The Phantom Chariot of Cu Chulainn’).
3 Mahābhārata 1.122, concerning the broken friendship between Drupada and
Droṇa, declares the opposite doctrine, that friendship is possible only between those
brothers, friends, and charioteers 469
as a further adumbration of the conflict between older and younger
brothers and would-be friends.
Turning to specifics, then, in the Táin, as elsewhere in the Ulster
Cycle, there is an ideal ‘friend’ relation between Cúchulainn and Laeg.
It is characterized by an easy and intuitive naturalness, and Cúchulainn
frequently calls Laeg popa, usually translated ‘friend’ although liter-
ally meaning ‘father’—a term usually addressed to an elder or supe-
rior but occasionally familiarly to an inferior (Marstrander and Quin
1913–1975: s.v.). The repeated use of this appelative thus suggests that
in essential matters their friendship overturns distinctions of seniority
or rank. Fer Diad’s relations with his unnamed charioteer are, on the
contrary, strained and bitter. He never calls him popa but only gilla.
And after listening to his charioteer’s repeated praise of Cúchulainn,
Fer Diad rebukes him, saying ‘This is no deed of friendship’ (daig ní
gním ar codail; I 2883; cf. II 2892).
In the Mahābhārata one finds the same pattern, but vastly more
elaborated and ‘deepened.’ The Karṇaparvan refers repeatedly, and
with an air of mystery, to Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa as ‘the two Kṛṣṇas,’ and
when Karṇa speaks of ‘having seen the two Kṛṣṇas together on one
chariot’ (dṛṣṭvā kṛṣṇāvekarathe sametau; 8.57.48; cf. 31.54), his words
would seem to evoke such Upaniṣadic images as the one cited earlier
of the ātman and the buddhi united in the chariot-body, or the two
birds who as ‘friends’ (sakhayaḥ) occupy the same tree, one detached
representing the ātman, the other active representing the transmigra-
tory soul (Svetāśvatara Upaniṣad 4.6–7; Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.1.1.–2;
see Sukthankar 1957: 112). Indeed, the latter image seems even more
clearly evoked in the references to Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa as the two eternal
and inseparable friends Nara and Nārāyaṇa (Sukthankar 1957: 100),
figures who must represent the soul of ‘man’ (nara) and the god Viṣṇu
in his cosmic form: ‘stationed on one chariot like Brahmā and Śiva,
these two heroes are invincible, foremost among creatures, the heroes
Nara and Nārāyaṇa’ (8.12.16). Throughout the battle, and particularly
in the Karṇaparvan, Kṛṣṇa’s charioteering and Arjuna’s fighting are
thus in near-perfect harmony. Most notably, Kṛṣṇa saves Arjuna’s life
by stepping down on the chariot so hard that it sinks into the earth
enough that a deadly snake arrow hits and pulverizes Arjuna’s diadem
of like status. Here, however, the issue is the impossibility of friendship between king
and Brahmin, neither of whom can willingly subordinate himself to the other.
470 chapter sixteen
rather than his head (8.66.10–19). Yet here one also finds some of the
most interesting inversions of the theme of unequal friendship. On
the one hand Kṛṣṇa subordinates himself to act as Arjuna’s charioteer
(as Pārthasārathi), and though the epic never refers to Kṛṣṇa as a sūta
the implication is certainly there. Yet Kṛṣṇa is actually God, to whom
Arjuna must subordinate himself in the Bhagavad Gītā with apolo-
gies for having always called him ‘friend’ (sakhi; Gītā 11.41). One may
thus say that in essential matters their friendship overturns normal
matters of seniority and rank to affirm the eternal friendship of God
and man.
In contrast to this perfect attunement between Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa, the
relation between Karṇa and his charioteer Śalya are, like that between
Fer Diad and his charioteer, filled with tension. Śalya is insulted that
Duryodhana should request him to drive Karṇa’s chariot, a situation
which presents the anomaly of a Ksạ triya (Śalya) serving as sūta for
a sūta (Karṇa) who is really a Ksạ triya (see 8.23.19–36). Rather than
the mutual self-subordination of the friends Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa, the
two thus engage in several rounds of insults. And when Śalya praises
Arjuna, Karṇa’s reply is similar to Fer Diad’s rebuke to his charioteer:
‘An enemy with the face of a friend (mitramukhaḥ śatrur), surely you
desire to frighten me’ (8.27.28). Karṇa further calls Śalya an ‘injurer
of friends’ (mitradrohī; 29.21), ‘an enemy having become a friend’
(suhṛdbhutvā ripuḥ; 27.68), and cites a proverb gāthā) about the people
of Madra, of whom Śalya is king: ‘The Madraka is always an injurer of
friends . . .’ (mitradhrun̄madrako; 27.73). Śalya’s charioteering also suf-
fers in this atmosphere of distrust. When the two finally set forth with
Śalya at the reins, Karṇa’s horses ‘fell down on the ground’ (nipetus
taragā bhuvi; 26.36). And one must assume that when Karṇa’s chariot
wheel gets stuck in the earth leading to his death, it has something
to do with his driver. Whereas Kṛṣṇa saves Arjuna by pressing their
chariot down, Śalya is of no use to Karṇa during the latter’s efforts to
lift his chariot up from its rut. Yet when Karṇa is slain, Śalya has no
trouble driving off the flagless ratha to tell Duryodhana of Karṇa’s
defeat (67.35).
From these central relations of friendship between combatants and
charioteers, each episode elaborates further to a widened net of friend-
ships that takes in many of the essential motivations of the two epics.
In the Táin, Fer Diad is prompted to fight Cúchulainn by a number of
threats and cajolements, the last among the latter being Medb’s offer
to him of her own ‘intimate friendship’ or ‘friendly thighs’ (comaid
brothers, friends, and charioteers 471
doṃ sl̇iasaidsea; I 2601; latter translation by Kinsella 1970:169. Yet
it seems that Medb is lying to Fer Diad when she taunts him into
fighting by telling him that Cúchulainn had boasted that he would
kill him (I 2609–2610). Then Cúchulainn’s ‘friend’ (popa) Fergus, who
has sided with Connacht against his own native Ulster, comes to give
his countryman Cúchulainn a ‘friendly warning’ (co rrobad ocus co
n-airchisecht; I 2721–2723) that he will face a formidable foe in Fer
Diad. And more particularly, he alerts Cúchulainn to the underlying
issue by stringing together a number of terms that reflect different
aspects of the theme at hand: Cúchulainn must fight his friend (carae),
companion (coicle), and foster brother (comalta; II 2727). Indeed, it
would seem that throughout the Fer Diad episode the terminology of
friendship (caratrad, cairddine, cairdes) is persistently developed and
illustrated in relation to such other themes as fosterage, kinship, and
loyalty to province, king, or queen.
As I have argued elsewhere (Hiltebeitel 1976:254–266), the Mahāb-
hārata offers a similar anatomy of the theme of friendship in the
Karṇaparvan. By reputation, according to Yudhiṣṭhira, Karṇa is the
‘enhancer of the joy of his friends, like the destroyer to his foes’
(suhṛdānandavardhanam antakābhamitrāṇām; 8.46.9); and Kṛṣṇa
describes him as ‘destroyer of the fear of his friends’ (mitrāṇā-
mabhayaṃkaraḥ 51.61). And it is Karṇa who speaks authoritatively on
the proverbial theme of ‘seven-paced friendship’ (29.21–24) when he
denounces Śalya as an apparent false friend. Yet the Mahābhārata also
provides a behind-the-scenes intrigue from which the audience knows
that Karṇa’s distrust (see 8.2 7.95) is well-founded. Śalya is a disloyal
charioteer. In a scene which follows directly upon Kṛṣṇa’s agreement
to drive for Arjuna, Śalya makes an ‘improper’ (akartavya) pact with
Yudhiṣṭhira to drive for Karṇa when the latter fights against Arjuna,
and, while doing so, to destroy Karṇa’s splendor or energy (tejovadha;
5.8.25–27).
Thus Karṇa, the model of friendship, is caught in a situation where
his charioteer is a false friend loyal to Yudhiṣṭhira, to whom Śalya
stands in the relation of maternal uncle. Moreover, Yudhiṣṭhira has
prompted an improper breach of friendship in a situation where it is
recognized to be essential: in the rapport between warrior and chari-
oteer, exemplified in the indissoluble friendship of Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa,
Karṇa and Śalya’s opponents. Further, opposite Yudhiṣṭhira as a dhar-
mic (‘just’) king who prompts a violation of friendship is Duryod-
hana, the adharmic (‘unjust’) king whose friendship with Karṇa,
472 chapter sixteen
frequently stressed in the Karṇaparvan (e.g. 6.18; 27.94), is never
violated by either party. It is also Duryodhana who seeks valiantly to
bring about a ‘friendly’ relation between Karṇa and Śalya prior to their
setting off for combat. Indeed, according to a passage which the Criti-
cal Edition rejects but which is widely found in both the Northern and
Southern recensions, Duryodhana appeals to them form ‘the condi-
tion of friendship’ (sakhibhav̄ena; 8.40,* apud 8.30.86). Add to this
that Kṛṣṇa speaks as a ‘friend’ (suhṛd; 8.49.1. and ff.) when he saves
Arjuna and Yudhiṣṭhira from a seemingly hopeless impasse: enraged
that Arjuna should delay in fighting Karṇa, Yudhiṣṭhira tells him to
give his bow Gāṇḍīva to someone else; but Arjuna had vowed to kill
anyone who spoke such an insult. Kṛṣṇa manages to defuse this situ-
ation by telling Arjuna to ‘kill’ Yudhiṣṭhira by addressing him in the
familiar (tvam), and then to ‘kill’ himself for this sin by praising his
own merit. This episode thus not only extends the issues of friendship
and the rapport between champion and king, but also the themes of
symbolic fratricide and—as will be discussed further—of praise and
reproach. Furthermore, as the Táin does with the Fer Diad episode,
the Mahābhārata uses the Karṇaparvan to diversify the vocabulary of
friendship. Suhṛd (6.18; 27.68; 28.2; 46.9; 49.1; 64.26 and 29; 67.19),
mitra (27.73 and 102; 29.21–23; 46.9; 64.27), and sakhi (27.94; 637
64.29) are used over and over again, and in telling contexts, sometimes
interchangeably and sometimes with differentiations implied, as with
the following words of Karṇa to Śalya: ‘Because you are a sakhi, a
suhṛd, and also a mitra (sakhibhāvena sauhardānmitrabhāvena caiva
hi), for these three reasons, O Śalya, you now live’ (8.386* apud 306,
found in all Southern and most Northern manuscripts). For what it
is worth, the commentator Nīlakaṇṭha relates mitra to Śalya’s desire
for the success of Duryodhana, suhṛd to Karṇa’s own indulgence of
Śalya, and, most interestingly, sakhi to Śalya’s service as charioteer
(sārathyenopakārakatvam; comm. to 8.43.7 in Kinjawadekar 1931:
Karṇaparvan, p. 78).
Finally, as if in confirmation of the importance of the ‘friendship’
theme in the Karṇaparvan, there is the connection made by the text
itself between the slaying of Karṇa by Arjuna and that of the demon
Vṛtra by Indra. As argued elsewhere (Hiltebeitel 1976: 216–265), the
connection is probably made on the basis of the mythic theme, ana-
lyzed by Dumézil in connection with the ‘second function sin of the
warrior’ (Dumézil 1970: 20, 72–81), of Indra’s breaking of ‘friendship’
(sakhyam) with Vṛtra at the encouragement of his ‘intimate friend’
(yújyaḥ sákhā; Ṛg Veda 1.22.19) Viṣṇu.
brothers, friends, and charioteers 473
3. Praise and Reproach. The duties of the charioteer are not limited
to skills of horsemanship. As A. L. Basham summarizes for the Indian
material, the sūta ‘combined the functions of royal charioteer, herald,
and bard, and was often the friend and confidant of the king’ (Basham
1959: 90). The Irish arae was also charioteer, herald, friend, and confi-
dant. Unlike the Indian figure, however, the arae does not, at least in
his name, cover the role of ‘bard’ (see Horsch 1966: 423–424), which
is of course an Old Irish word. Yet some of the ‘bardic’ functions and
skills of the Indian sūta are also performed by the arae.
For one thing, it would seem that the charioteer has in both tradi-
tions a unique revelatory function. The warrior sees the true nature of
what he encounters through what he hears from his charioteer. Thus
Fer Diad’s charioteer describes the awesome arrival of Cúchulainn
(I 2943–2974). With Cúchulainn and Laeg the pattern is somewhat
muted. Laeg will elaborately describe mysterious arrivals such as those
of Lug mac Ethlend, Cúchulainn’s divine father (I 2092–2104), or Fer-
gus (I 2702–2723), but it is each time Cúchulainn who knows who
it is from Laeg’s description. There is, however, one passage which
hints that the charioteer might be expected to have a remarkable skill
in intuitively assessing the foe and the terrain of battle. Cúchulainn
directs Laeg’s attention to the tracks left by Medb’s entire army in the
snow, and says: ‘Make an estimate of the host for us . . . that we may
know their number.’ When Laeg is confused, however, it is Cúchu-
lainn who applies his ‘gift of reckoning’4 to inform Laeg: ‘There are
here in number eighteen divisions, but the eighteenth division, that is,
the division of the Gailióin [Leinstermen] has been distributed among
the whole host so that it is confusing to count them’ (I 315–329).
One may be reminded here that Arjuna has his charioteer Kṛṣṇa
drive him between the two armies of the Kauravas and Pāndavas
before the battle of Kurukṣetra. There Arjuna ‘surveys’ (nir-ikṣ-, paś-;
Bhagavad Gītā 1.2 2–26) the hosts and hears Kṛṣṇa deliver the Bhaga-
vad Gītā amidst the eighteen army divisions assembled for the bat-
tle.5 And in the Karṇaparvan Kṛṣṇa delivers a long extended simile
4 See now Hiltebeitel 2001a, 233–34 on the “counting ‘magic’ (vidyā)” or “heart of
the dice” that Nala as charioteer gets from King Rtuparṇa in exchange for the “heart
of horsemanship”(Mahābhārata 3.69.33–70.26).
5 There may be a significant connection between Irish and Indian usages of the num-
ber eighteen. In both the Táin and Mahābhārata, eighteen divisions seems to connote
an entire army. Medb’s dispersal of the Gailióin and the alignment of the seven Pānḍ ạ va
and eleven Kaurava divisions are both images of the destruction of that totality. The
Mahābhārata’s seven-eleven opposition has a remarkable Irish parallel in the myth of
474 chapter sixteen
describing the battlefield to Arjuna, revealing in mystery-laden terms
that the terrible scene of carnage is nonetheless a scene of beauty like
the heavens strewn with stars (8.14.26–59; repeated in the Northern
recension preceding 8.41; see 8, App. I, No. 16, and cf. 7.123.30–41;
see also Hiltebeitel 1980a: 108). The Mahābhārata reserves a similar
all-seeing role for the sūta Saṃjaya, who describes the battle to the
blind Dhṛtarāṣṭra.6
The most striking analogies, however, emerge from an examination
of the charioteer’s role in arousing the martial ardor of the warrior by
sensing the appropriate moments for utterances of praise and reproach.
It is the Táin which gives the clearest expression of the theory behind
such a function. Says Cúchulainn to Laeg on the morning of the final
day of fighting with Fer Diad: ‘Therefore if it is I who am defeated this
day you must incite me and revile me and speak evil of me so that my
ire and anger shall rise thereby (ara nderna-su mo grísad ocus mo glá-
mad ocus olc do ráda rim gorop móite eir m’fir ocus m’fergg foromm).
But if it be I who inflict defeat, you must exhort me and praise me and
speak well of me that thereby my courage rise higher’ (are nderna-su
mo monod ocus mo molod ocus maithius do rád frim gorop móti lim
no menma; II 3271–3275). In its more condensed version, Recension I
limits the contrast to two of the verbs just used: gressaid, ‘incites, urges,
stimulates, provokes (used in egging on a warrior)’ (Marstrander and
Quin 1913–1975: s.v.) and molaid, ‘praise’ (I 3082–3084).
It is clear that in the most general terms the charioteer serves the
warrior by making judicious use of the arts of eulogy and satire that
have such a major place in Indo-European value systems with their
emphasis on shame, disgrace, honor, and fame (Ward 1973; Friedrich
1973; Redfield 1975). But in more particular terms, the similarities in
the ways that the Fer Diad and Karṇa episodes employ this theme
provide strong evidence that we are working with narrative traditions
that bear some significant relation to each other. Let us now look at
the uses of praise and rebuke by the two pairs of warrior and chari-
oteer ‘friends’ as they prepare for battle.
the First Battle of Moytura, where there are seven Túatha Dé Danann divisions and
eleven Fir Bolg divisions (Fraser 1915: 27; cf. Stein 1936).
6 Compare the revelatory role of Bruno as charioteer for the blind king Haraldus
Hyldetan in Saxo Grammaticus account of the Battle of Brávellir (Wikander 1960a:184,
189).
brothers, friends, and charioteers 475
The Táin launches its development of this theme on the night
before combat. Laeg tells Cúchulainn that Fer Diad will arrive next
morning well adored for battle; thus Cúchulainn should go ‘where
you will get the same adoring,’ to spend the night with his wife Emer
(1 2808–28 12; II omits this exchange). By moving directly to the con-
trastingly unsolicitous dialogue between Fer Diad and his charioteer,
the text hints that Laeg’s advice was beneficial and the night with Emer
relaxing.
Fer Diad, however, starts his night carousing with his dispirited
friends, who fear his death, and then either sleeps fitfully, filled with
‘anxiety’ (ceist; II 2797 and 2833), or not at all, a prey to ‘great anxiet-
ies’ (insṅ íma móra; I 2821 and 2822). Wrought with tension, he rises
early and orders his charioteer to harness the horses, but the charioteer
begins their dialogue on the discouraging note that it would be better
for Fer Diad if he stayed where he was (II 2802–2803; I 2831–2832).
After Fer Diad urges their departure so that he might kill Cúchulainn
and is told it is likelier he will fall, he castigates his charioteer for
his ‘diffidence’ (náire; I 2852; II 2822) and summons up his own
bravery.
The two then set off amidst inauspicious signs and reach the ford.
There (only in Recension I) Fer Diad asks twice if his charioteer can
yet see Cúchulainn. To the second query the charioteer replies sarcas-
tically, “Cú Chulainn is no small hidden trifle, whatever he might be’
(2828). After further exchange, Fer Diad asks his charioteer to prepare
the chariot so that he can catch up on his sleep before the fight. “Alas,”
said the charioteer, “such a sleep is the sleep of a doomed one faced by
stag and hounds.” “Why then, driver, are you not capable of keeping
watch for me?” ‘I am,” said the driver, “and unless they come out of the
clouds and air to attack you, none shall come from east or from west
to fight with you without due warning” (I 2901–2908). Fer Diad is of
course unable to sleep, or does so only fitfully, his anxiety increased by
these satirical and rather telling metaphors for his situation. He is like
‘a doomed one faced by stag and hounds,’ Cúchulainn being by name
the ‘Hound of Culann.’ And he is safe unless his opponents ‘come out
of the clouds,” most likely an allusion to the Túatha Dé Danann, the
gods who come down from ‘clouds of mist’ when they first appear in
Ireland (Cross and Slover 1969: 28; ‘Second Battle of Mag Tured’), and
with whom Cúchulainn is associated (as noted above, he is the son of
Lug; see also II 2844–2849; 3602–3604). The texts then turn briefly to
Cúchulainn’s preparations, Laeg complying in all matters and driving
476 chapter sixteen
Cúchulainn to the ford. Here Recension I has Fer Diad’s charioteer
awaken him from his restless slumber and describe Laeg and Cúchu-
lainn’s awesome arrival in extolling terms.
Both recensions now converge with interesting variants. In Recen-
sion I, Fer Diad says twice that his charioteer praises Cúchulainn too
highly, the second time adding ‘for he has not given you a reward for
his praise’ (I 2975–2980). In the Book of Leinster he says the constant
praise of Cúchulainn ‘is almost a cause of strife’ (II 2884–2886). Both
these complaints are in prose. Then in verse Fer Diad continues: ‘It
is time now for help. Be silent, do not praise him (nach ṁbladaig).
It was no deed of friendship, for he is not doom over the brink’ (II
2890–2893; I 2982–2985 with minor variations). The charioteer replies
that Cúchulainn heads toward them rushing ‘like the swift thunder-
bolt’ (thorund tricc; I 2998; II 2905), and in Recension I adds that he
praises him for his ‘excellence’ (is ar maith romalam; 2996). Fer Diad
replies: ‘So much have you praised him that it is almost cause of a
quarrel (súail nach fotha [conais] a romét ras molaiss). Why have you
chosen him since you came forth from your house?’ (II 2906–2909;
I 2999–3003 with minor variations). One sees how thoroughly the
themes of praise and reproach are linked with the anatomy of friend-
ship. At this point, Fer Diad and Cúchulainn meet and exchange their
own boasts, reproaches, and evocation of their own friendship. And
then they fight.
Recension I provides only a capsule version of the fighting, but
retains the essentials. In the words already cited, Cúchulainn tells
Laeg before the dual to praise him and rebuke him at the appropriate
moments. In the Book of Leinster Cúchulainn makes this request on
the fourth and decisive day of combat. It is most instructive to exam-
ine how Laeg fulfills this duty. In Recension I he leaps immediately to
the insults: ‘Your opponent goes over you as a tail goes over a cat. He
belabours you as flax heads (?) are beaten in a pond. He chastises you
as a fond woman chastises her son’ (I 3085–3087). And the attenuated
description of Fer Diad’s death follows. In the Book of Leinster, which
surely preserves the context in which these words were appropriate,
Laeg speaks similarly at a point when Fer Diad has gained a momen-
tary advantage, again mentioning the comparisons to a mother chas-
tening her child and flax beaten in a pond, and adding: ‘He has ground
you as a mill grinds malt. He has pierced you as a tool pierces an oak.
He has bound you as a twining plant binds trees. He has attacked you
as a hawk attacks little birds, so that never again will you have a claim
brothers, friends, and charioteers 477
or right or title to valour or feats of arms, you distorted little sprite’
(si̇riti síabarthi bic; II 3303–3310). Upon which Cúchulainn goes into
his ‘distortions’ (riastrad) and kills Fer Diad.
One must appreciate that both Cúchulainn and Fer Diad have been
addressed by their charioteers in terms of praise and rebuke that draw
upon such metaphoric comparisons. In both cases the most significant
comparisons are unflattering. But whereas Fer Diad is addressed before
the combat in images that unnerve him, Cúchulainn is addressed in
the very midst of fighting, as he had requested, in terms that incite
‘my ire and anger.’
Turning to the Karṇaparvan, the ingredients are identical. The
Mahābhārata does, however, provide greater narrative depth in setting
a background for the episode. As already indicated, Śalya has made an
‘improper’ agreement with Yudhiṣṭhira to destroy Karṇa’s tejas, his
‘energy’ or ‘splendor.’ The text never makes it precise how he does
this, but it would seem that his efforts are threefold: first, his rather
haphazard driving; second, his duplicity as a ‘false friend’; and third,
as with Fer Diad’s charioteer, his misuse of the charioteer’s skills in the
arts of praise and rebuke.
When Duryodhana finally gets Śalya to agree to drive for Karṇa,
Śalya insists on one condition: ‘But there will be a certain agree-
ment (samaya) between me and Vaikartana [Karṇa], that I may utter
words as I wish (or ‘according to faith, confidence’: yathāśraddham)
in his presence’ (8.23.53). After further words from Duryodhana, he
reiterates, but with more precision and greater duplicity: ‘May you
(Duryodhana) and Karṇa pardon wholly all that which I may say to
Karṇa out of desire for (his) welfare, whether agreeable or disagree-
able’ (hitakāmaṃ priyāpriyam; 25.6). When Karṇa accepts, Śalya then
sets the terms in which their exchange will follow: ‘self-censure and
self-adoration, censure of others and praise of others, are four kinds
of conduct improper for āryas’ (ātmanindātmapūjā ca paranindā
parastavaḥ/ anācaritamāryāṇāṃ vṛttametaccaturvidham; 25.8). His
restrictions would seem to apply to āryas praising or rebuking them-
selves or others of their own status or kind, and not to sūtas for whom
censure and praise of others are clearly part of the job. What is notable
about Śalya is that he immediately violates not only his own tenet but
his role as a sūta by launching into self-praise, supposedly to bolster
Karṇa’s confidence in him (25.8).
After various preparations, Karṇa tells Śalya to proceed so that
he can slay Arjuna and the other Pāṇḍavas (26.24). Thus begins the
478 chapter sixteen
tejovadha, at least in its praise-and-blame aspect. Śalya tells Karṇa
he should not ‘disregard’ (ava-man) the Pāṇḍavas (26.27), and says
repeatedly that he should cease his boasting (katthana). He reminds
Karṇa of Arjuna’s past deeds, including Karṇa’s earlier defeat at his
hands, and concludes: ‘This good fight (suyuddham) is, moreover, now
presented again for your destruction (tava nidhanāya). If you do not
flee from fear of the foe, gone to battle now, O sūta’s son, you are slain’
(26.69). Undaunted by this very harsh speech (bahuparuṣam; 26.70
and repeatedly), however, Karṇa continues to boast, saying over and
over that he will give untold wealth to whoever locates Arjuna and
Kṛṣṇa for him so he can kill them. To this, Śalya replies with a smile
that Karṇa will have no trouble finding his opponents (27.18). These
exchanges, of course, duplicate those in which Fer Diad’s charioteer
tells him he would be better off not fighting, and that Cúchulainn is
‘no small hidden trifle’ that cannot be seen.
The insults then begin to fly, and in a form that holds further
reminders of exchanges in the Táin. ‘We surely have not heard of two
lions felled in battle by a jackal’ (27.27), taunts Śalya. And when Karṇa
says that Śalya cannot frighten him, Śalya, ‘wishing to anger Karṇa
exceedingly’ (cukopayiṣuratyarthaṃ karṇam; 30), launches a string of
satirical, uncomplimentary comparisons (upamā) reminiscent of those
spoken by the charioteers in the Táin. As Smith (1972: 60) has noticed,
the passage seems to have developed from a triṣṭubh core. Thus Śalya
begins with four ‘satires’ in triṣṭubhs: Karṇa is like a little boy in his
mother’s lap seeking to seize the moon; proceeding against Arjuna is
like rubbing up against a triśūla, the weapon of Śiva; he is like a foolish
little deer challenging a huge wrathful lion; and like a satiated jackal
against a lion (26.33–36). The first comparison reminds us of one of
the two spoken by Laeg in both recensions of the Táin: ‘he chastises
you as a fond woman chastises her son.’ Śalya then continues with six-
teen more such unflattering comparisons in ślokas (26.3.7–52). Karṇa
then takes up the gauntlet and roundly denounces Śalya’s homeland
of Madra. And Śalya answers by returning to the satiric similes, this
time recounting at length the marvelous and pointed ‘simile of the
crow’ (kākopamā) who lives, like Karṇa, on others’ leftovers (ucchiṣṭa)
yet thinks so highly of himself that he seeks to out-fly a swan (haṃsa;
8.28). After this long and elaborate insult, Śalya then concludes
abruptly: ‘Those two are lions among men, you are a dog among men’
(nṛsiṃhau tau naraśvā tvam; 28.66).
brothers, friends, and charioteers 479
Once the confrontation in the Karṇaparvan begins, Śalya’s perfor-
mance as charioteer is more ambiguous. Twice he speaks words of
encouragement (8.57.14–32) in describing Arjuna’s approach; 62.945,
after Karṇa is horrified by the death of Duḥśāsana). But he also con-
tinues with occasional taunts (e.g. 34.14, comparing the approach of
Bhīma to the ‘fire of time’ about to destroy the three worlds); and he
returns to treachery when he disturbs Karṇa’s aim of one of his choicest
arrows by saying: ‘This arrow will not reach [Arjuna’s] neck, O Karṇa.
Having aimed it, fix another arrow that can strike the head’ (66.7). To
which the enraged Karṇa replies that he is not the type of ‘crooked’
warrior to aim the same arrow twice (8). As to Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, there
is no such extended development of the theme of praise-and-reproach
through similes as there is in the speeches of Śalya. Kṛṣṇa uses them
only intermittently, and in stock phrases (43.25, telling Arjuna that
Karṇa destroys the Pāṇḍavas as an elephant crushes lotuses; 43.42, he
rushes toward Arjuna to his death like a moth into a lamp; 51.99, he
destroys the Pāṇḍava forces as a fire does insects, or (106) as a disease
ravages the body). But when Arjuna finally proceeds against Karṇa
for their final duel, Kṛṣṇa does praise Arjuna extensively to still his
anxiety, though warning him not to take Karṇa lightly (50.49–65 and
51). And the Northern Recension concludes his speech with words
that recall the similes used by Śalya to Karṇa: ‘He whose tongue is a
sword, whose mouth is a bow, whose teeth are arrows, bold, proud,
a tiger among men—slay Karṇa, O Dhanaṃjaya. I know you by your
energy and power. Slay the hero Karṇa in battle like a lion an elephant’
(8.754,* lines 1–4, apud 50.65).
In contriving such similes, the poetic or ‘bardic’ role of the charioteer
is evident. Upamā is classified as one of the four original alaṃkāras,
or poetic figures of speech, and as a rhetorical device it has from its
earliest descriptions a distinction of similes of praise (praśaṃsa) and
blame (nindā) (Gerow 1971: 140–145). Such contrivance of similes, of
course, also stands out as the most prominent of the bardic functions
we have seen performed by the arae, the Irish charioteer.
4. Deaths and Concluding Remarks. The number and variety of
specific convergences observed between these episodes from the Irish
and Indian epics requires, I think, serious consideration of the likeli-
hood of a significant relationship between them. Minimally, it might
be assumed that the two traditions developed their narratives inde-
pendently, based on their experiences with similar artifacts, social
480 chapter sixteen
relations, and values. But this underestimates the narrative consisten-
cies of these two stories. As the episodes are presented, they are more
than just two sets of common elements. They are stories which weave
their common threads into recognizably similar wholes. It would thus
seem that we are dealing with related tales. Since borrowing in either
direction is most unlikely, it is not unreasonable to propose that the
two traditions have each preserved and further developed on their
own an archaic epic theme.
Indo-Irish parallels have, of course, been observed before, espe-
cially in connection with themes of kingship (Dillon 1963: 214–215,
1969, 1973; Dumézil 1971; Dubuisson 1978b, 1978c; Krappe 1942).
Here, however, the two scenes center on the figures of the champion
and the charioteer. Yet rapports with royal figures are not absent. It
is intriguing that in both epics it is only after the champions Cúchu-
lainn and Arjuna defeat these two last hopes of the opposition that
the kings whom they represent—Conchobor and Yudhiṣṭhira—finally
gear themselves up for their only serious participation in the respec-
tive battles. Thus Conchobor leads the Ulstermen, lifted from their
pangs, into the final battle; and on the last day of battle Yudhiṣṭhira,
recovered from the wounds that had bedridden him on the previous
day of Karṇa’s fall, sallies forth to claim his own battle-’share’ or vic-
tim, none other than Śalya (see Hiltebeitel 1976: 266–286). Recalling
that our two main episodes are preceded by the combats of Arjuna and
Cúchulainn with a group or series of suicidal foes, one might propose
that the two epics preserve the themes found in the Karṇa and Fer
Diad episodes in similar epic contexts. This, of course, cuts against the
grain of several scholarly views, such as those which see the epics as
relatively recent fantasies, or as embellishments of historical traditions.
But it is to be seriously doubted whether the promoters of either view
could effectively argue for two such similar independent inventions, or
historical prototypes in separate national traditions. More particularly,
as regards Mahābhārata scholarship, one must be cautioned against
views which assume that the epic is made intelligible as the product of
just one cultural context, or as a transposition of the mythology known
to one particular period. Dumézil is certainly right that when the earth
swallows Karṇa’s chariot wheel, the epic poets are evoking a Vedic
theme (Dumézil 1974: 135–138); there is also some significance of the
opposition of Karṇa and Arjuna as sons of the Sun god and the god
of storms (ibid. 130–133). And Madeleine Biardeau (1978: 173–174)
has added considerable depth to our understanding of Karṇa as repre-
brothers, friends, and charioteers 481
senting the errant sun of the pralaya (the ‘dissolution’ of the worlds).
But neither approach does more than scratch the surface of the themes
that dominate the Karṇaparvan, which are best understood by assum-
ing that the story is fundamentally an archaic piece of epic enriched
through its long life by correlations with themes ‘old’ and ‘new.’
Building upon this premise, one can propose certain hypotheses
about the archaic features of the episodes in the two epics. The Indian
epic clearly enriches its account with multileveled mythic associations
(not only with Indra and Sūrya, but as already indicated with Indra,
Viṣṇu, and Vṛtra, with Nara and Nārāyaṇa, and also with the myth of
Śiva’s destruction of Tripura where Brahmā serves as Śiva’s charioteer
[8.24]). It also gives depth to the story by drawing it into connec-
tion with other incidents and fatalities in the epic (not only Śalya’s
agreement to destroy Karṇa’s tejas, but the curse by Karṇa’s guru
Bhārgava Rāma that Karṇa will forget his weapon at the time of his
death [8.29.3–7], the curse of a brahmin, whose homa cow Karṇa shot,
that Karṇa’s chariot wheel would get stuck [29.27–29]; and others).
The Táin, on the contrary, yields little in the way of mythic associa-
tions except for allusions, already cited, to the Túatha Dé Danann who
back Cúchulainn. And it draws the Fer Diad episode into rapport with
the rest of the Táin only minimally, leaving us in the dark on several
crucial points such as the identity of Fer Diad’s charioteer and the
reason(s) for his ‘unfriendly’ behaviour. In dealing with different treat-
ments such as these, one must steer a careful course. It is likely that
the Hinduized Indian tradition has in most of these cases continually
remythologized the episode and rewoven it into the larger epic; but
it is also likely that the Christianized Irish tradition has demytholo-
gized the episode and detached it, in its present form as a stylistically
‘late’ piece, from the larger Táin or the Ulster Cycle. In any case, one
mythological correlation seems archaic. Just as the Túatha Dé Danann
appear around Cúchulainn along with shrieking goblins, sprites, fiends
of the glen, and demons of the air to raise a cry about Cúchulainn ‘so
that the fear and terror and horror and fright that he inspired might be
all the greater’ (II 2845–2849), so the Devas choose the duel between
Arjuna and Karṇa to declare their favoritism for Arjuna, appearing
in the sky along with the Asuras and every imaginable class of spirits,
goblins, and mythological beings, all also deciding for one hero or
the other.
There is, however, one difference between the two episodes that
cannot be explained in terms of either Indian amplifications or Irish
482 chapter sixteen
retractions. It concerns the deaths of Karṇa and Fer Diad. If the epi-
sodes are related, this is the one point where we must assume that at
least one tradition has changed the story. Here I can only propose the
most likely hypothesis. As noted earlier, both Fer Diad and Karṇa are
protected by some kind of natural self-defense or armor. As the Táin
puts it, it is this protection—in Fer Diad’s case his ‘horn skin’—that
counterbalances his opponent’s possession of the most destructive of
all weapons, the ga bolga, and leaves the two warriors thus fundamen-
tally equal. Now it is only in the Táin that these two devices—armor
versus weapon—figure in the death scene of the combat. It is thus
natural to assume that the Táin has preserved the older form of the
story. In a passage that leaves some matters quite uncertain, Cúchu-
lainn hurls a spear that makes Fer Diad raise his shield ‘over the breast
plate of the horn skin,’ and then hurls the ga bulga so that it ‘entered
Fer Diad’s body through the anus and filled every joint and limb of
him with its barbs’ (II 3348–3359; c.f. I 3091–3100).
It seems quite likely that such a crude demise, perhaps with over-
tones of homosexuality that might, in a Lévi-Straussian sense, be taken
as the result of an ‘overvaluation’ of friendship, have lost its way amidst
changing Indian tastes. In any event, one can propose a quite plausible
account of what the Indian poets could have done in altering such an
ending. As already indicated, thanks to Indra, Karṇa loses his natural
coat of mail just prior to the war. It thus cannot figure in his death.
Moreover, Arjuna’s advantage is undercut, for not only does he have
the Pāśupata weapon, but so—at least according to the Karṇaparvan—
does Karṇa (8.43.21). Thus when it comes to the final scene where
Karṇa’s chariot wheel gets stuck, Arjuna will use a different weapon.
He seems to get the Pāśupata ready to shoot, if that is what is meant
when he unites one of his arrows with the raudra weapon (66.59). But
if he discharges this arrow, it takes no toll.7 It is instead a different
and rather unusual weapon called the añjalika that Arjuna selects for
the coup de grace. As he aims, he utters the following ‘act of truth’
(satyakriyā) (see Dillon 1947, 1963:215–217; Brown 1972; Hiltebeitel
1976:207–213; 350): ‘This great weapon is unequalled, a firm arrow,
body-piercing, breath-stealing, hardhearted. My austerity is gener-
ated, my gurus are satisfied, and what I desire from friends is also
7 It is said here that they do this for him in every battle, but it is significant that
this is where it is mentioned.
brothers, friends, and charioteers 483
heard: by that truth let this arrow, very sharp, invincible, slay my foe
Karṇa’ (ayaṃ mahāstro ‘pratimo dhṛtaḥ śaraḥ/śarīrabhiccāsuharaśca
durhṛdaḥ//tapo ‘sti taptaṃ guravaśca toṣitā/mayā yadiṣṭaṃ [var.
yadīṣṭaṃ] suhṛdāṃ tathā śrutam//anena satyena nihantvayaṃ śaraḥ/
sudaṃśitaḥ karṇa-mariṃ mamājitaḥ; 67.19cd–20). One must appre-
ciate that Arjuna’s satyakriyā brings its final focus onto the theme of
friendship. What he has desired of his friends has always been heard;
this holds especially for his friendship with Kṛṣṇa.8 But the return to
this theme also holds a likely key to Arjuna’s choice of the añjalika
weapon to kill Karṇa. This weapon’s name is derived from the añjali,
the gesture of salutation with semi-closed hands raised to the bowed
forehead. It is, of course, a gesture that denotes reverence, benediction,
and friendship, as when Duryodhana forms the añjali to Śalya when
he appeals to him, out of friendship, to drive for Karṇa (8.401,* found
widely in both Northern and Southern Recensions), and most notably
when Arjuna joins his hands in the añjali at Kṛṣṇa’s bedside (5.7.7) in
the scene where he secures Kṛṣṇa’s friendship (sakhyam; 10) and his
service as charioteer (see Hiltebeitel 1976: 102–109).
It would thus seem that the Mahābhārata has given this culminat-
ing scene its own twist, but one still oriented around the theme of
friendship. It is as if the implicit theme of fratricide is resolved sym-
bolically into a death which affirms that the final salutation is that of
brothers who are inherently friends.
8 There is a frequent variant yadīṣṭam for yadiṣṭam, making Arjuna say that ‘what
is desired by [his] friends is heard [by him].’ This is even more pointed in its refer-
ence to Kṛṣṇa.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
THE TWO KṚSṆ ̣AS ON ONE CHARIOT:
UPANISẠ DIC IMAGERY AND EPIC MYTHOLOGY
Classical bhakti Hinduism, the nonsectarian Hinduism whose social
theory, cosmology, and theology are first fully articulated in the two
Hindu epics and the Harivaṃśa, developed in these mythological texts a
theological language of images that has ever since retained its power in
mainstream devotional Hinduism. This essay is an exploration of such
imagery as it is worked out through the narrative of the Mahābhārata,
the most fundamental of these texts, “le monument principal, et sans
doute le plus ancien, de la bhakti.”1 The point of departure for this study
is thus an assumption not widely shared but, nonetheless, compelling in
its widening application, that the Mahābhārata in its classical form is a
work of bhakti through and through. In other words, no matter what one
hypothesizes by way of sources for the story in earlier mythology, heroic
legend (I am still of the view that it presupposes an Indo-European
and āryan heritage that distinguishes it from its companion texts)2 or
possible history, there are no passages or incidents which on their own
permit the reconstruction of either pre-bhakti stages of mythologiza-
tion3 or a historical pre-“divinized” or premythological core. Indeed,
it is more pointless to look for original human-historical figures and
1 Madeleine Biardeau, L’Hindouisme: Anthropologie d’une civilisation (Paris: Flam-
marion, 1981), p. 78, n. 1.
2 See Alf Hiltebeitel, “Brothers, Friends, and Charioteers: Parallel Episodes in the
Irish and Indian Epics,” in Homage to Georges Dumézil, ed. Edgar Polomé, Journal of
Indo-European Studies Monograph no. 3 (1982), pp. 85–87.
3 I must thus revise my argument that the “sacrifice of battle” theme in the
Mahābhārata was first contoured by the sacrificial ideology of the Brāhmaṇas, and
then, only secondarily, by bhakti. This may be true, if (as I suspect) there are earlier
forms of the story. But in the text as we have it, the epic’s understanding of sacrifice
is no longer simply that of the Brahmāṇas and is unintelligible without reference to
its place in what Biardeau has called “the universe of bhakti.” For further discussion,
see esp. Madeleine Biardeau and Charles Malamoud, Le Sacrifice dans l’Inde ancienne
(Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1976), passim and esp. p. 83, n. 1, criticizing
my The Ritual of Battle: Krishna in the Mahābhārata (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University
Press, 1976) on this point, a criticism which in principle I accept. See also my review of
Biardeau’s works, “Toward a Coherent Study of Hinduism,” Religious Studies Review 9,
no. 3 (1983): 206–12.
486 chapter seventeen
elements than earlier forms of the story since in the latter case there is
at least something comparative to go on. Rather than being a patchwork
of myths, legends, and historical reminiscences overlaid with bhakti,
what the narrative builds up to and works around are a series of what
I would call “bhakti tableaux,” scenes which present images that hold
themselves before the hearer’s mind. Ultimately, they present ways of
seeing the divine through the stories that are akin to the contempora-
neous development of temple iconography, and it is no accident that
many of these epic bhakti tableaux continue to find their places on mass
market oleographs in India today. The most obvious such tableau in the
Mahābhārata is, of course, the scene of the Bhagavad Gītā, which will
enter into the discussion later.
This epic language of images is not, however, simply visual (or
visional). It is also highly intellectual.4 In the hands of the brahman
composers of the Mahābhārata, the narrative served as a tool for a
bhakti rereading of śruti, of the Vedic Revelation.5 In its totality, this
of course includes the “transpositions” from Ṛg Vedic mythology
that Wikander and Dumézil have exposed so brilliantly.6 And it also
incorporates a transformed prolongation of the Brahmānic ideology
of sacrifice.7 But this essay will concern itself primarily with the com-
ponent of śruti that has the most immediate historical bearing on the
epic: the Upanisạ ds. For although up to now it has been the natural
tendency to interpret epic mythology in relation to other mytholo-
gies (Vedic, Indo-European, para-Vedic, Brahmāṇic, Purāṇic) or ritual
systems (Indo-European and Brāhmaṇic), it is becoming clear that the
epic’s bhakti handling of the śruti corpus (and of “para-Vedic” bardic
material which it would also seem to incorporate) presupposes the
Upanisạ ds.
The matter may thus be formulated as follows: the epic’s theologi-
cal language of narrative images serves its authors as a tool to work
4 See Madeleine Biardeau, Études de mythologie hindoue, vol. 1, Cosmogonies
purāṇiques (Paris: École Française d’Extrême Orient, 1981), p. 27.
5 See Biardeau and Malamoud, p. 141.
6 Stig Wikander, “Pāṇḍava-sagen och Mahābhāratas mytiska forutsattningar,”
Religion och Bibel 6 (1947): 27–39; Georges Dumézil, Jupiter Mars Quirinus, vol. 4,
Explication de textes indiens et latins (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1948),
including a translation of Wikander’s article, pp. 37–53, and Mythe et épopée, vol. 1,
L’Ideologie des trois fonctions dans les épopées des peuples indo-européens, 2d ed. (Paris:
Gallimard, 1974).
7 See n. 3 above.
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 487
out in bhakti terms a number of theological and soteriological issues
raised in the Upanisạ ds and resolved in them for the most part differ-
ently than in the epic (which of course includes the Gītā). It is not the
intention of this essay to inventory all of these issues. But the ones
that will be central to the discussion can be summarized as follows.
The first is theological. As is well known, the Upanisạ ds have a ten-
dency to demythologize the Vedic pantheon, to reduce all the gods to
one (see Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upanisạ d 3.9): to the impersonal brahman or
its personified form Prajāpati or Brahmā. But in the so-called theistic
Upanisạ ds, which introduce some fundamentals of bhakti, the ulti-
mate gods are two, or more exactly they are either Visṇ ̣u (as in the
Katḥ a Upanisạ d) or Śiva (in the Svetāśvatara Upanisạ d). These same
Upanisạ ds, however, also introduce the preclassical forms of Yoga and
Sāṃkhya, and the Śvetāśvatara in particular develops its doctrine of
the “three unborns”: the Lord (Śiva), the soul (ātman or purusạ ), and
the feminine pradhāna or prakṛti (Śvet. Up. 1.9–10, 4.5). This latter
abstraction can probably be regarded (at least from the perspective
of the epic poets) as an “impersonal” way of talking about the God-
dess. The theological problem which the epic poets thus inherit from
this late development of the śruti, which was probably closer to them
and their views than the rest of the corpus both conceptually and
historically,8 is one they handle mythologically in terms of two triads.
The first of these is the relation between the three gods who emerge in
classical Hinduism as what we may call the bhakti triad: Visṇ ̣u, Śiva,
and the Goddess. And the second is the triad which Hinduism labels
the trimūrti: Visṇ ̣u, Śiva, and Brahmā. As we will see, even though
the epic does not condense these triads into the formulae popularized
in later bhakti Hinduism, it is deeply concerned with the integrity of
these interrelated theological configurations and handles the interplay
of the deities concerned in terms of theologically charged symbol-
isms: not only the well-known ones of incarnation and descent but
also equally important principles of hierarchy, subordination, kinship,
complementarity, and equality.
The second issue is essentially soteriological. As Biardeau has
shown, the Upanisạ ds as a corpus present classical Hinduism with two
8 See Biardeau, L’Hindouisme, p. 100 and n. 1, arguing for a connection between the
Taittirīya school of the Black Yajur Veda, which produced the Katḥ a and Śvetāśvatara
Upanisạ ds and the bhakti rereading of śruti that gave shape to the Mahābhārata (see
n. 5 above).
488 chapter seventeen
definitions of the absolute, each with its own correlative definition of
the “soul” and the spiritual itinerary to deliverance: in the “Vedāntic,”
“gnostic,” or “saṃnyāsic” Upanisạ ds (principally the Bṛhadāraṇyaka
and the Chāndogya) the ātman-brahman identity, and in the “yogic”
Upanisạ ds (especially the “theistic” Katḥ a and Śvetāśvatara) the rela-
tion between the supreme divinity (Purusạ , heir of the Purusạ of Ṛg
Veda 10.90) and the individual soul or purusạ . Whereas the ātman-
brahman realization is opened primarily for twice-born males who
adopt saṃnyāsa, the purusạ -Purusạ itinerary is—as an expression of
the universalization of bhakti—open to all.9 It is this double but never
mutually exclusive soteriological vocabulary that is taken up by the
epic poets. And their primary means of presenting it is in terms of
the relations between epic characters and, in particular, the characters
who represent the two theological triads mentioned above.
As regards the particular epic images that I will discuss, it should
be noted that one of them, the chariot, is the basis of an allegory in
the Katḥ a Upanisạ d itself, an allegory which concludes on the sote-
riological note that the chariot warrior who has the “intellect” (bud-
dhi) for his charioteer and all else in tune will reach “the end of the
journey, that supreme abode of the all pervading,” which is further
characterized as the ultimate attainment of the supreme Purusạ identi-
fied as Visṇ ̣u (Katḥ . Up. 1.3.9–11). The main focus of this essay, how-
ever, will be on the two figures who represent that attunement in the
Mahābhārata: Kṛsṇ ̣a and Arjuna on their “single chariot.” But this
topic cannot be developed without attending to the curious terms in
which it is presented. On their single chariot, Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a are
repeatedly referred to as “the two Kṛsṇ ̣as.” This requires me to take up
afresh a larger issue concerning the multiple usages of the name Kṛsṇ ̣a
in the Mahābhārata.
When I first discussed this matter in The Ritual of Battle,10 I focused
on the meaning of the name (kṛsṇ ̣a = black or dark) as it bears on
three of the epic’s leading figures. It was noted that “black” and “dark-
ness” resonate associations with the dark Kali Yuga, with the earth,
9 See Biardeau, Études, pp. 24–32, and L’Hindouisme, pp. 33–34; Biardeau and
Malamoud, pp. 79–80.
10 Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle, pp. 60–76. Vishnu S. Sukthankar and S. K. Bel-
valkar, eds., The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, 19 vols. (Poona:
Bhandarkar Oriental: Research Institute, 1933–66); all citations in parentheses in the
text not otherwise marked are to the Mahābhārata, in this edition.
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 489
with Śūdras; and with themes of contrast and mediation with other
color-related figures (principally associated with white, yellow, red,
and blue). The “three Kṛsṇ ̣as” discussed were Kṛsṇ ̣a Vāsudeva (“son
of Vasudeva,” i.e., Kṛsṇ ̣a the incarnation of Visṇ ̣u), Kṛsṇ ̣ā Draupadī
(“daughter of Drupada,” the heroine, incarnation of Śrī), and Kṛsṇ ̣a
Dvaipāyana (“the island-born Kṛsṇ ̣a,” the alleged author of the epic,
grandfather of the Pāṇḍavas and Kauravas, and also an incarnation
of a “portion” of Visṇ ̣u). A comparison of this threesome with the
triad of Rāmas—a term also meaning “black”—who are each regarded
as incarnations of Visṇ ̣u (Rāma Dāśarathi, Bhārgava Rāma, and
Balarāma), showed that both were in effect “Vaisṇ ̣ava” triads. In the
Mahābhārata threesome, however, instead of three males there are
two dark incarnations of Visṇ ̣u and one of his wife (Śrī-Laksṃ ī). Such
a perspective yielded a number of insights. But as more recent stud-
ies have made clear, it is far from exhaustive and, particularly on the
theological side, quite incomplete.
Draupadī is the incarnation of Śrī-Laksṃ ī, but her dark aspect is
linked with themes of impurity, inauspiciousness, and destruction
evocative of darker forms of the Goddess.11 Kṛsṇ ̣a, too, like most
avatāras of Visṇ ̣u, reveals “rudraic” dimensions.12 But most important,
the theme of the “three Kṛsṇ ̣as” hinges on the rapport of these two not
with Vyāsa (Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana) but with Arjuna, who has important
affinities with Śiva.13 For Arjuna is also a Kṛsṇ ̣a. Unaware in my earlier
discussion of his rapport with Śiva, however, I treated his name Kṛsṇ ̣a
too lightly: “A fourth Kṛsṇ ̣a, Arjuna, receives this name only through
his connection with Kṛsṇ ̣a Vāsudeva in instances where, recalling their
mystical identity as Nara-Nārāyaṇa, the dual case is used to refer to
them as ‘the two Kṛsṇ ̣as’ (Kṛsṇ ̣au).”14 Such a formulation, though cor-
rect in this one correlation, is inadequate as regards others. This essay
will thus focus on one aspect of Arjuna’s identity as a “Kṛsṇ ̣a” that
bears directly on his affinity with Śiva. The obvious mistake that we are
beginning to rectify is the tendency to look for one-to-one correlations
11 See Alf Hiltebeitel, “Draupadī’s Hair,” in Purusạ̄ rtha (Autour de la déesse hindoue,
ed. Madeleine Biardeau) 5 (1981): 179–211.
12 For instance, in the eleventh chapter of the Bhagavad Gītā. See esp. Madeleine
Biardeau, “Études de mythologie hindoue (IV), II: Bhakti et avatāra,” Bulletin de l’École
Française d’Extrême Orient 63 (1976): 182–85 and passim (henceforth EMH IV).
13 See Alf Hiltebeitel, “Śiva, the Goddess and the Disguises of the Pāṇḍavas and
Draupadī,” History of Religions 20 (1980): 153–68, 174.
14 Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle (n. 3 above), p. 61.
490 chapter seventeen
in Hindu mythology. In the background of this discussion, however,
it should also be kept in mind that one group of three Kṛsṇ ̣as—Kṛsṇ ̣a,
Arjuna, and Draupadī—represents the bhakti triad of Visṇ ̣u, Śiva, and
the Goddess, and that another—Kṛsṇ ̣a Arjuna, and Vyāsa—may more
remotely evoke the three gods of the trimūrti. For Vyāsa, as Bruce Sul-
livan has perceived,15 has certain affinities with Brahmā, But my main
focus will be on Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a.
The Two Kṛsṇ ̣as
It has long been observed that Arjuna and Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s identity as the “two
Krṣ ṇ ̣as” is related to other paired, and sometimes dual, identities of the
two figures. They are thus incarnations of the divine “friends” Indra and
Visṇ ̣u16 and reincarnations of the inseparable rṣ ịs Nara and Nārāyaṇa;17
they are referred to with such paired names as Guḍakeśa (Arjuna) and
Hrṣ ị̄keśa (Krṣ ṇ ̣a), Visṇ ̣u and Jisṇ ̣u, and even Krṣ ṇ ̣a (black) and Arjuna
(white); and they are referred to by other names in the dual, such as the
“two Acyutas” (1.218.39). One finds their complementarity also evoked
in the formulas long ago noted by Sylvain Lévi and correctly identified
by him as encapsulating a central epic message: “Where Krṣ ṇ ̣a is, there
is victory”18—“victory” (Jaya, Vijaya) being a name of Arjuna.
A heavy stacking and texturing of overlapping, and to some extent
hierarchalized, themes and formulae is thus evident. In the case of
the rapport between Visṇ ̣u and Indra, many of the connections with
Kṛsṇ ̣a and Arjuna have already been discussed elsewhere.19 The Nara-
Nārāyaṇa identity, evoking the relation of the soul (nara = purusạ )
and Visṇ ̣u in his form as the supreme Purusạ or Nārāyaṇa, has been
treated decisively by Biardeau.20 And the yatas/tatas formulae obvi-
15 Bruce Sullivan (Ph.D. diss. University of Chicago, in progress). See now Sullivan
1990.
16 See Jan Gonda, Aspects of Early Visṇ ̣uism (1954; reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsi-
dass, 1969): pp. 159–61.
17 See Madeleine Biardeau, “Études de mythelogie hindoue (V), II: Bhakti et avatāra,”
Bulletin de l’Eeole Française d’Extrême Orient 65 (1978): 89–93 (henceforth EMH V).
See also the earlier bibliography in Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle, pp. 61, n. 6, 257,
n. 23.
18 Sylvain Lévi, “Tato Jayam Udirayet,” trans. L. G. Khare, Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 1 (1918–19): 13–20.
19 See Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle, passim.
20 See n. 17 above.
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 491
ously relate to epic themes concerning dharma and the inevitability of
victory for the side led by Kṛsṇ ̣a and Arjuna. But these identities are
not as immediately linked to the specifics of the epic narrative as is the
double identity of the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as.”
Statistics provide an accurate orientation to the fundamental issues.
Of the eighty-one references to Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a as “the two Kṛsṇ ̣as”
cited in Sörensen’s Index, sixty-nine (or 85 percent) are found in the
four war books.21 The remaining twelve references, found only in the
prewar books, are all equally connected with combat scenes and themes:
the burning of the Khāṇḍava Forest, the killing of Jarāsaṃdha, and the
anticipation of the war itself. As to references to the two Kṛsṇ ̣as within
the war books, thirty appear in the Droṇaparvan and twenty-eight in
the Karṇaparvan, these fifty-eight thus constituting 72 percent of the
total number of appearances. Considering that the Karṇaparvan is lit-
tle more than half the length of the Droṇaparvan, it thus has the great-
est concentration of references per verse in the epic. It should thus be
no surprise if the theme of the two Kṛsṇ ̣as has a special connection
with Arjuna’s combat against Karṇa. On the way to substantiating this,
however, it will be helpful to look more closely at some of the more
instructive of the early references.
As just noted, citations of the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as” in the prewar books
are concerned with combat no less than those in the war books. The
theme is introduced with five references in the episode of the burn-
ing of the Khāṇḍava Forest, a grisly scene which finds the two heroes
helping Agni (Fire) devour the forest and its creatures in a great con-
flagration. The most vivid of the five citations is the concluding one:
“The blessed lord of the prickly rays [Agni] blazingly burned down the
Khāṇḍava Forest with the aid of the two Kṛsṇ ̣as, bringing terror to the
world” (1.225.5). As Biardeau has demonstrated, this episode abounds
in pralaya images. Moreover, the two heroes are introduced not
only to some of their most destructive and indestructible weapons—
including, as we shall note, Arjuna’s chariot (1.216.3–15)—but to their
very roles as agents of pralaya-like destruction.22 It is also this episode
21 I will not cite these references except where they are quoted, as they are easily
checked in S. Sörensen, An Index to the Names in the Mahābhārata (1904; reprint,
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1963), p. 425.
22 See Madeleine Biardeau, “Conferences de Mlle. Madeleine Biardeau,” Annuare
de l’Ecole pratique des hautes études, Section des sciences religieuses, 79 (1971–72):
140–41; Alf Hiltebeitel “The Burning of the Forest Myth,” in Hinduism: New Essays
in the History of Religions, ed. Bardwell L. Smith (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1976), pp. 208–24.
492 chapter seventeen
that i ntroduces Kṛsṇ ̣a and Arjuna dramatically as the incarnations of
Nara and Nārāyaṇa23 and establishes the pair henceforth—thanks to
a boon from Indra that concludes the forest-burning narrative—as
bound by “eternal friendship” (1.225.19). But most important for my
present purposes, I should note that in this episode Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a,
however united in purpose and concerted in action, lend their assis-
tance to Agni from separate chariots.
The Single Chariot
The only other cluster of references in the prewar books occurs in
the Udyogaparvan. Between these two clusters, however, there are
two occurrences that reinforce themes brought out at the Khāṇḍava
Forest and anticipate themes to come. There is a double occurrence in
the Sabhāparvan, where Krṣ ṇ ̣a acts with Arjuna and Bhīma to bring
about the death of Jarāsaṃdha. There Yudhisṭḥ ira reflects that “the
two Kṛsṇ ̣as yoked together to a single task are invincible in battle”
(ekakāryasamudyuktau krṣ ṇ ̣au yuddhe ‘parājitau, 2.18.24; cf. just earlier,
2.18.14). Thus even though it is Bhīma who will kill Jarāsaṃdha, victory
is assured by the uniting together—indeed the “yoking” together—of
Krṣ ṇ ̣a and Arjuna. And a lone reference in the Āraṇyakaparvan has
Yudhisṭ ḥ ira describe the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as” as identical with Nara and
Nārāyaṇa, enemy slayers, the two lotus-eyed ones of the three [sic]
yugas (3.84.4).
The cluster of references in the Udyogaparvan occurs after an impor-
tant change has occurred in the rapport between Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a.
The latter has agreed to serve as Arjuna’s charioteer. It is this new situ-
ation that is anticipated at Khāṇḍava Forest where the two are united
in everything but their chariots and, more particularly, in the language
of Yudhisṭḥ ira’s musings about “the two Kṛsṇ ̣as yoked together to a
single task.” For the Udyogaparvan references make it clear that it is
the uniting of the two heroes on the one chariot that brings the theme
into its eventual focus.
I would now agree with Biardeau that my argument for an older initiation scenario
behind the pralaya themes is too vague to be of much use. The “initiation” scenario
is certainly there, but it is the pralaya themes that shape the episode; see Biardeau,
EMH V, p. 127, n. 1.
23 See again Sörensen, pp. 504, 508–12, on Nara and Nārāyaṇa; cf. Biardeau, EMH
V, p. 140.
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 493
First, Dhṛtarāsṭṛa speaks to Saṃjaya, his own charioteer, before send-
ing him as an ambassador to the Pāṇḍavas: “My heart shudders with
fear, having heard that the two Kṛsṇ ̣as are stationed in a single chariot”
(srutvā kṛsṇ ̣avekarathe sthitau, 5.22.30). Then, having heard Saṃjaya’s
report on his embassy, Bhīsṃ a warns Duryodhana (5.48.20–24) that
Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a are Nara and Nārāyaṇa once again born into
the world to give battle, “one being divided in two” (sattvamekaṃ
dvidhākṛtam), “the two eternal great-souled Kṛsṇ ̣as stationed in a sin-
gle chariot” (sanātanau mahātmānau kṛsṇ ̣avekarathe sthitau).24 And
third, Dhṛtarāsṭṛa says to Duryodhana in further counsel: “To him
whose charioteer is Hṛsị̄keśa, his equal in character and conduct, his
victory is assured, O son, as is victory for Indra. The two Kṛsṇ ̣as in
one chariot [kṛsṇ ̣avekarathe], the bow Gāṇḍiva strung—we have heard
that these three splendors [tejāṃsi] are united together. We have no
such bow, no such warrior, and no such charioteer, but the fools under
Duryodhana’s sway do not understand this” (5.51.10–12).
One will note how the poets correlate the theme of the “two
Kṛsṇ ̣as” with the other formulary pairs discussed earlier: not only
Nara-Nārāyaṇa, but Indra-Visṇ ̣u and the yatas-tatas theme. But as
Dhṛtarāsṭṛa says, it is the convergence of all such “splendors” on the
chariot that makes Duryodhana’s prospects so hopeless. Furthermore,
it is this specific connection with the ekaratha or “single chariot”
theme that places the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as” identity of Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a at
the center of narrative developments.
It might be said of the war books, where the references to the “two
Kṛsṇ ̣as” predominate, that the ekaratha theme is implied throughout.
The poets never lose sight of Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a’s cooperation on the
chariot when they describe their part in the war. But allusions to the
two Kṛsṇ ̣as in the first two war books (Bhīsṃ a- and Droṇaparvans) do
not refer explicitly to the ekaratha image. I will return to some promi-
nent themes connected with the two Kṛsṇ ̣as in the first two war books.
But first let us examine the context in which the ekaratha references
resurface. This brings us to the Karṇaparvan, whose concentration of
“two Kṛsṇ ̣as” references has already been noted.
Let us begin by recalling the words of Dhṛtarāsṭṛa: “The two
Kṛsṇ ̣as in one chariot, the bow Gāṇḍīva strung. . . . We have no such
bow, no such warrior, and no such charioteer, but the fools under
24 On this passage, see Biardeau, EMH V. p. 92.
494 chapter seventeen
D uryodhana’s sway do not understand this.” Quite clearly, the “fools”
whom Dhṛtarāsṭṛa has in mind are Duryodhana’s principal cronies:
Karṇa, Duḥśāsana, and Śakuni. It is these three who consistently back
Duryodhana whenever the wiser and nobler members of his court
counsel against his designs. Now the point where such ignorance
becomes crucial is the chariot duel between Karṇa and Arjuna: the
true culmination of Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a’s participation in the war and
their only sustained single chariot versus single chariot combat.25
In his preparations for this duel, Karṇa reveals his “foolhardiness”
in terms that recall Dhṛtarāsṭṛa’s warnings about the two Kṛsṇ ̣as. On
the morning of their duel, Karṇa tells Duryodhana that in skill and
weapons he and Arjuna are near equals, but that Arjuna comes to
battle with certain advantages that must be neutralized, most notably
his two inexhaustible quivers, his horses of the speed of mind, his
indestructible chariot, and his charioteer Kṛsṇ ̣a whom Karṇa has no
trouble in recognizing as the “creator of the universe” (srasṭ ọ jagatas,
8.22.49). Karṇa says the balance can be restored, however, if the fol-
lowing conditions are met:
But this one like a hero, Śalya, the ornament of assemblies—if he should
do my chariot driving, victory will certainly by yours. Let Śalya, therefore,
arduous with foes, be my charioteer. Let carts bear my vulture-feathered
arrows. And let the foremost chariots, O king, yoked with the best horses,
always follow behind me, O bull of the Bhāratas. Thus will I be superior
to Pārtha [Arjuna] by these qualities. Śalya is surely superior to Kṛsṇ ̣a.
Surely I am superior to Arjuna. As Dāśarha [Krṣ ṇ ̣a], slayer of heroic foes,
knows the heart of horsemanship so does the great chariot-warrior Śalya
know about horses. [8.22.50–54]
In matters of arrows, horses, and chariots, Karṇa thus seeks foolishly
to make up for quality with quantity. But most recklessly, he negates
whatever claim he has to parity with or superiority over Arjuna by
insisting on the superiority of his charioteer Śalya over Krṣ ṇ ̣a.
It is precisely when Karṇa obtains Śalya as his charioteer that the
“two Kṛsṇ ̣as” theme resurfaces most forcefully. And here one must
bear in mind that the rapport between Karṇa and Śalya turns out
to be precisely the opposite of that between Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a. As I
have discussed elsewhere, Śalya drives haphazardly and stings Karṇa
25 For fuller discussion of this episode, see my “Brothers, Friends, and Charioteers”
(n. 2 above), pp. 85–101; now chapter 15.
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 495
with insults, all to “undermine his confidence” or “dim his splendor”
( tejovadha) to fulfill a prewar pact with Yudhisṭḥ ira, whereas through-
out the duel Kṛsṇ ̣a and Arjuna cooperate implicitly and intuitively at
every turn.26 It is in response to Śalya’s insults that Karṇa begins his
parvan’s sustained treatment of the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as on one chariot” theme.
He says he will give untold wealth to whoever locates the two Kṛsṇ ̣as
for him (8.27.12). Śalya replies with a string of unflattering compari-
sons (upamā)27 between Karṇa and his opponents, including: “You
think yourself a tiger until you see the two Kṛsṇ ̣as, like the sun and
moon, stationed in a single chariot” (samāsthitāvekarathe, 8.27.47).
As the Karṇaparvan develops, it is some time before the duel occurs.
Here one finds repeated references to the two Kṛsṇ ̣as, but in other
contexts and without specific reference to the ekaratha. But when the
duel begins, it is with a strong reminder. First Śalya (8.57.25) and then
Karṇa (57.35) agree that Karṇa will have to slay the two Kṛsṇ ̣as alone,
Karṇa insisting that he will do so single-handedly. But Karṇa finally
acknowledges the awesomeness of his task: “He whose qualities the
whole world cannot count in a thousand years, of that great-souled
one with conch, discus, and sword in hand, of Visṇ ̣u, of Jisṇ ̣u, of the
son of Vasudeva, fear and alarm are born in me, having seen the two
Kṛsṇ ̣as together in one chariot” (8.57.48).28 One will note that Karṇa
includes Jisṇ ̣u in this verse among a string of genitives that grammati-
cally apply to Kṛsṇ ̣a. But the contextual connection of the pair Visṇ ̣u-
Jisṇ ̣u with the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as” implies that Jisṇ ̣u is Arjuna. I shall return
shortly to this seemingly multivalent name. But for the moment let us
note that the verse just cited was resonant enough to attract further
elaborations of the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as” theme. The Critical Edition text has
Karṇa continuing to boast that on this day Śalya will see either Karṇa
or the two Kṛsṇ ̣as fall (8.57.50). And between these verses one finds
Karṇa adding in certain manuscripts the following “interpolation”:
“Of all the Vṛsṇ ̣i heroes, Laksṃ ī is established in Kṛsṇ ̣a. Of all the
sons of Pāṇḍu, victory [jayaḥ] is established in Pārtha. These two lions
26 See Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle (n. 3 above), pp. 254–66, and “Brothers,
Friends, and Charioteers,” pp. 92–95.
27 See Hiltebeitel, “Brothers, Friends, and Charioteers” pp. 103–4.
28 Varsạ̄ yutairyasya guṇā na śakyā/vaktuṃ sametairapi sarvalokaiḥ//mahātmanaḥ
śaṅkhacakrāsipāṇer/visṇ ̣orjisṇ ̣orvasudevātmajasya//bhayaṃ me vai jāyate sādhvasaṃ
ca/dṛsṭṿ ā kṛsṇ ̣āvekarathe sametau.
496 chapter seventeen
among men stationed in the same chariot [samāne syandane sthitau]
are attacking me, well-born, alone. Alas for me, O Śalya” (8.883*).
Recalling that the duel between Arjuna and Karṇa contrasts the
miraculous charioteering of Kṛsṇ ̣a with the seemingly untidy work-
manship of Śalya,29 it is now time to look more closely at the symbol-
ism connected with this ekaratha theme.30 It is here that we move
from the narrative implications of the theme to the theological and
soteriological.
As we have seen, the divisive relationship between Karṇa and Śalya
on their chariot contrasts with the unitive rapport of Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a,
“the two Kṛsṇ ̣as.” As Karṇa and Śalya agree, Karṇa must withstand
the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as” alone. Moreover, he must face these two inseparable
friends with a charioteer who is, as Karṇa recognizes, an enemy deter-
mined to undermine his efforts. As Karṇa puts it most pointedly, Śalya
is “an enemy with the face of a friend” (mitramukhaḥ śatrur, 8.27.28).
Thus he asks: “An enemy having become a friend, why do you frighten
me with the two Kṛsṇ ̣as?” (27.73; cf. 27.72, 29.21).
These oppositions take on clear proportions when examined in con-
nection with certain archaic and often-repeated themes connected with
the imagery of the chariot. Probably adopted by the Indo-E uropeans
in northern Mesopotamia soon after 2000 B.C. to serve them in their
movements east and west,31 the battle chariot, already in the Ṛg Veda
a subject of hymns of praise,32 was destined to become in India as in
Greece the subject of a unique allegory.33 For the Buddhists, clearly
inverting Hindu themes, the composite nature of the chariot and its
disjunctive and assembled parts served as an argument for the teaching
29 Kṛsṇ ̣a saves Arjuna’s life by stepping down on their chariot so hard that it sinks
into the earth enough that a deadly snake-arrow pulverizes Arjuna’s diadem rather
than his head (8.66. 10–19). On the contrary, Karṇa’s death is caused when his chariot
wheel gets stuck (thanks to Śalya, one must assume) in the earth. Also, when Śalya
begins to drive, the horses fall (8.26.36).
30 There is one other reference to the ekaratha associated with the Karṇavadha at
the beginning of the Śalyaparvan, where Śalya flaunts his prowess over that of the
“two Kṛsṇ ̣as stationed on the chariot” (kṛsṇ ̣au rathasthau; 9.6.2). But Śalya merely
car ries forward the symbolism of the previous duel; cf. Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle,
pp. 265–66. See also 8.12.15–16, not mentioning the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as” outright but clearly
implying them.
31 Stuart Piggott, Prehistoric India (Harmondsworth: Pelican Books, 1950), p. 276.
32 See Jeanine Miller, The Vedas: Harmony, Meditation, Fulfillment (Bombay: B. I.
Publications, 1974), pp. 52–57, 59.
33 Thus Plato in the Phaedrus; see The Works of Plato, trans. B. Jowett (New York:
Dial Press, n.d.), pp. 404–6.
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 497
of anātman, “not self.”34 For the Hindus, as with Plato, the dynamic
interaction of persons, horses, and parts “yoked,” “reined,” and “bound”
together, served as an allegory for the soul or “self” and its relationship
to the senses and the body. Thus Katḥ a Upanisạ d 1.3.3–4, 9: “Know
the Self as the lord of the chariot [ātmānaṃ rathinaṃ viddhi] and
the body as, verily, the chariot, know the intellect as the charioteer
[buddhiṃ tu sārathiṃ viddhi] and the mind [manas] as, verily, the
reins. The senses, they say, are the horses. . . . He who has understand-
ing for the driver of the chariot [vijñānasārathir] and controls the rein
of his mind, he reaches the end of the journey, the supreme abode of
the all-pervading.”35
Clearly, the epic poets are aware of this Upanisạ dic passage or are at
least conversant with variants of it, for such chariot imagery, and much
the same vocabulary, are called on frequently in the Mahābhārata.
One of the most instructive instances occurs in the Strīparvan. Amid
the laments for the war dead, Vidura includes the following among a
series of parables meant to illustrate for Dhṛtarāsṭṛa the “understand-
ing” (buddhi) by which the “forest of saṃsāra” (saṃsāragahanam)
may be comprehended (11.4.1, 5.1).
The body of creatures is a chariot; sattva, they call the charioteer; the
senses they call horses; the mental organ of action [karmabuddhi] is the
reins. Whoever follows after the rush of those running steeds, he turns
about like a wheel in the cycle of saṃsāra. Whoever restrains them with
understanding [buddhi], that restrainer/charioteer [yantr]̣ does not return.
This chariot, by which the unwise are bewildered, must be controlled. . . .36
Restraint, renunciation, and vigilance [damastyāgo ʾpramādaśca], these
three are the horses of brahman. Whoever is firm in this spiritual chariot
[mānase rathi], and yoked [to those steeds] with the reins of morality,
having renounced the fear of death, O king, he attains to the world of
brahman. [11.7.13–15, 19cd-20]
Here buddhi as the restrainer-charioteer (yantṛ) is identifiable with
sattva, “goodness,” the guṇa which characterizes the buddhi or under-
standing at its most lucid. On this “mental” or “spiritual” chariot, the
buddhi, by restraining the horses of the senses and transforming them
34 In the Milindapañha; see W. Theodore de Bary, ed., Sources of Indian Tradition
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1958). pp. 103–5.
35 S. Radhakrishnan, ed. and trans., The Principal Upanisạ ds (London: George Allen
& Unwin, 1953), pp. 623–24; cf. Śvetāśvatara Upanisạ d 2.9, Maitrī Upanisạ d 4.4, and
Kausị̄takī Upanisạ d 3.8.
36 See critical edition (n. 10 above) notes to this passage.
498 chapter seventeen
into yogic restraints identified as the “horses of brahman,” enables the
ātman to attain the world of brahman. Actually, the passage makes no
mention of the ātman and suggests that the “self” is both restrainer/
charioteer and that which attains union with brahman. From that
perspective, buddhi and ātman have a reciprocity that implies a unity,
which may help explain why certain epic passages make the soul itself
the charioteer.37
One finds no such ambiguity, however, in a passage from the
Āśvamedhika Parvan: “Having mounted the chariot that is yoked to
the great elements and restrained by the buddhi, the soul of beings
[bhūtātman] drives about everywhere. Yoked to the assemblage of
senses [as to steeds], with the manas indeed as the charioteer, ever
restrained by the buddhi, is the great chariot made of brahman
[mahānbrahmamayo rathaḥ]. Thus whatever wise one knows con-
stantly the chariot made of brahman, that resolute person does not
become bewildered in any worlds” (14.50.4–6; cf. also 1–3). Here the
ātman is clearly differentiated from the charioteer, which is identified
as the manas, though functioning conjointly with the buddhi. And
when all is known and their rapport tuned, the ātman rides every-
where unbewildered in the “great chariot made of brahman,” having
renounced, as the other passage puts it, the fear of death. Perhaps
curiously, these verses occur at the beginning of the last adhyāya of
the Anugītā, in which Kṛsṇ ̣a is helping Arjuna remember what he has
forgotten from the Bhagavad Gītā.
We shall return to these passages, but for the moment they are suffi-
cient to indicate that the epic poets were familiar with the Upanisạ dic
chariot imagery. The various identifications of the charioteer as sattva,
manas, buddhi and vijñāna are most likely no more than reflections of
the composite nature of the Hindu psyche vis-à-vis the ātman rather
than significant doctrinal divergences. This imagery, however, should
not be relegated to the backwater of so-called didactic interpolations.
As Vishnu S. Sukthankar insightfully remarked, this Upanisạ dic image
of the soul as rider and the charioteer as buddhi “has been improved
upon by the Gītā, where the individual’s soul [Arjuna-Nara] is still the
rider, but the role of the charioteer has been taken over by . . . Kṛsṇ ̣a.”38
37 As does Plato. See Mahābhārata 3.202.21–23, 5.34.57–62, and also the vaguer
12.231.11 and 12.280.1.
38 Vishnu S. Sukthankar, Meaning of the Mahābhārata (Bombay: Asiatic Society of
Bombay, 1957), p. 112.
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 499
It is quite certain that the epic poets have drawn this connection, and
not only for their depiction of Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a in the Gītā, the basic
premise of which is that the charioteer reveals to the self the nature of
the self in which they are united. It also applies in what follows from
the Gītā: the participation of the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as” in the Mahābhārata
war. For it is there, as we have seen, that they appear above all as “the
two Kṛsṇ ̣as in one chariot”—an image which evokes over and over the
pair’s invincibility,39 the invincibility of the self which, once in tune
with the buddhi, is “beyond the fear of death.” Moreover, as one of
the epic passages describing the self as charioteer adds: “One should
seek the self by the self, with manas, buddhi, and senses restrained. For
the self is the self’s only friend, and the self is the self’s only enemy”
[ātmaiva hyātmano bandhur ātmaiva ripurātmanaḥ, 5.34.62]. This
maxim (cf. 11.11*, line 3, which has mitra rather than bandhu for
“friend”) is beautifully extended in the Gītā:
One should lift up the self by the self,
And should not let the self down.
For the self is the self’s only friend,
And the self is the self’s only enemy.
The self is a friend to that self
By which self the very self is subdued;
But to him that does not possess the self [anātmanas], in enmity
Will abide his very self, like an enemy.40
These words of charioteer to rider confirm the contextual implications
of the passage: the self’s “friend” is like a charioteer, who may lift up
or let down. Insofar as the rider and the sense-”subduing” charioteer
39 Most of the contexts in which the two Kṛsṇ ̣as are cited evoke their association
with the ātman, as the latter is represented in the Bhagavad Gītā. Generally, they are
over and over said to be unslayable (7.86.32; 122.40; 8.12.17; 28.62; 9.3.26). Resisting
them is always a marvel, usually restricted to Śiva’s protégé Aśvatthāman (6.69.11;
8.12.17; 40.116; 45.4, 17; 9.1·3.6), thus reinforcing the epic’s repeated insistence on the
complementarity of Visṇ ̣u and Śiva. Duryodhana also miraculously resists them once
with the help of magic armor from Droṇa (7.76.40). Like Rāma and Laksṃ aṇa in the
Rāmāyaṇa (Rām 6.35–40, G. H. Bhatt and U. P. Shah, eds., The Vālmīki-Rāmāyaṇa
Critically Edited for the First Time, 7 vols. [Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1960–75]), they
repeatedly survive being mangled with arrows (6.55.61; 77.39; 7.18.19; 28.3; 76.25;
8.12.51; 40.116; 45.4; 9.18.57), thus—in both epics—evoking the indestructibility of
the ātman, especially as “yoked” to the divine. They cannot be overcome with illusions
(7.29.15); they dive unharmed into a fire weapon (7.171.12, 46); and to oppose them
is like rivers rushing into the sea (7.63.3).
40 Franklin Edgerton, trans., The Bhagavad Gītā, Harvard Oriental Series, vol. 38
(Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1952), p. 61.
500 chapter seventeen
have an intuitive rapport, they may ride the chariot of brahman. This
possibility calls us back to the contrast between Arjuna and Karṇa,
for the latter’s dilemma is to have a charioteer who is his foe. Thus his
bravery and ultimate despair in challenging “alone” the “two Kṛsṇ ̣as
united in one chariot.”
The Chariot of Brahman/ Brahmā and the Burning of Tripura
There is, however, an additional theme that is subtly worked into the
fabric of the Karṇaparvan, and one with which the ekaratha theme is
still further intertwined. As just recalled, the chariot in which the rider
and charioteer are fully in tune is referred to in one passage (actually
spoken by Brahmā) as “the chariot made of the great brahman,” and
in another passage one hears of brahman’s horses. This is an archaic
imagery, for though it is not made explicit in the Upanisạ dic passages,
it can be found in the Ṛg Veda. As Jeanine Miller remarks, the Vedic
chariot imagery seems to serve as “a way of describing that which helps
to find, perform, or frame the brahman . . . for the rṣ ịs themselves fash-
ion, even as chariots [rathān iva], those prayers [brahmāṇi] that yield
fulfillment” (RṾ 5.73.10).41 It can thus be no coincidence that in the
carefully textured Karṇaparvan, the parvan’s background myth42—Śiva’s
destruction of the three cities of the demons (the Tripuradahana)—
also involves, in a special sense, a “great chariot of brahman.” For on
this chariot, Brahmā—personification of the brahman—is Śiva’s chari-
oteer. Moreover, the construction of the chariot by the divine architect
Viśvakarman is tantamount to a cosmogony. The chariot has the syllable
oṃ at its van (mukhe); the sound vasạ t ̣is the whip;43 it is protected by
the sacred Hindu scriptures; and it is composed, along with the attendant
41 Miller (n. 32 above). pp. 52, 54–55, on yoking by the brahman, and the brahman
as the horses of the chariot.
42 On “background myths” in the Mahābhārata, in particular correlated with different
parvans, see Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle (n. 3 above), pp. 120–40 (Vāmana myth
and Udyogaparvan) and pp. 312–35 (myth of Daksạ ’s sacrifice and Sauptikaparvan).
43 In pūraṇic versions it is frequently the syllabic “oṃ’ that is the whip: Śiva Purāṇa
Rudra Saṃhitā 5.8.124 (citations from J. L. Shastri, ed., The Śiva-Purāna, pt. 2, Ancient
Indian Tradition and Mythology Series, vol. 2 [Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1970],
pp. 802–58); Liṅga Purāṇa 1.72.20 (citations from J. L. Shastri, ed., The Liṅga Purāṇa,
pt. 1. Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology Series, vol. 5 [Delhi: Motilal Banar-
sidass, 1973], pp. 333–64; Matsya Purāṇa 133.36 (citations from Jamna Das Akhtar,
ed. The Matsya Purāṇam [Delhi: Oriental Publishers, 1972], pp. 1–32 [second series
of page numbers]).
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 501
weaponry, of the psychological, elemental, spatio-temporal, and divine
forces of the Hindu cosmos. Thus Fortitude, Memory, Steadfastness, and
Humility become the yoke pins, the Goddess Earth forms the chari-
oteer’s seat, Mount Mandara is the axle, sun and moon form the two
chief wheels, the planets, constellations, and stars become the cover-
ing skins, the year forms the bow, Kālarātri (the Goddess as “Night of
Time”) becomes the bowstring, the arrow is made up of Visṇ ̣u, Soma,
and Agni, and so on (8.24.68–84).44 Śiva’s destruction of the three cities
thus brings two cosmological images into confrontation: the demonic
three cities of heaven, atmosphere, and earth versus a chariot composed
of the reintegrated forces of the Hindu universe. The chariot is thus more
than a “cosmic” chariot. It is a vehicle of revelation. This is not surpris-
ing, for all the Indian cosmologies should be understood as revelations,
descriptions of the universe through which the validity of each particular
religion’s traditions and values is disclosed.45 Here the chariot presents
the combined action of the Creator(s) (Brahmā/Viśvakarma) and the
Destroyer (Śiva) turned to a particular use of cosmogonic and pralayic
imagery. The universe, as chariot, is recreated, while a counteruniverse,
Tripura, is destroyed.46 In this one chariot are thus concentrated the
very powers of creation and destruction through which the Hindu uni-
verse is maintained and through which, on another level, victory over
44 This Northern Recension material occurs with slight variation in the Southern
Recension, where the formation of the chariot is preceded by a prologue in which Śiva
secures the title of Pāśupati before agreeing to the gods’ request. Such a “Pāśupata”
prologue also occurs in some of the purāṇas: e.g., Liṅga Purāṇa 1.72.34–42; Śiva
Purāṇa Rudra Saṃhita 5.9.13–19. The Southern Recension and these purāṇas seem
to embellish. The Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata (n. 10 above), representing the
Northern Recension, has Śiva obtain the title Mahādeva (8.24.63) rather than Pāśupati
this episode.
45 See Randy Kloetzli, Buddhist Cosmology (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983), pas-
sim, arguing in particular that the Indian cosmologies—and in particular Buddhist
cosmologies—represent critiques of each other, and provide expressions of central
distinguishing concepts of the different traditions.
46 In fact, one may speculate that the association of the demons of Tripura with
heretical/heterodox (Jain, Buddhist) traditions, made explicit in many post-epic ver-
sions of the Tripuradahana, is evoked here as well; see Marie-Louise Reiniche, Les
dieux et les hommes: Études de cultes d’un village du Tirunelveli Inde du Sud (Paris:
Mouton, 1979), pp. 83–111, esp. 104–10; Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty, The Origins of
Evil in Hindu Mythology (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976), pp. 180–87,
198–204. The “three cities” would thus represent not just a counteruniverse but an
alternative cosmology. Thus, see Reiniche, p. 107: “A l’instant du pralaya, on a dans
une même vision l’image double du monde: celle de celui qui est irrémédiablement
anéanti, celle de celui qui represente la synthèse divine du char.”
502 chapter seventeen
demonic (heterodox?) forces is achieved.47 In short, the chariot driven
by Brahmā is, again, a chariot of the brahman, a vehicle by which the
Hindu experience of reality is revealed and confirmed or, as Jeanine
Miller puts it, found, performed, and framed.
The epic poets would seem to have expended considerable energy
to weave this background myth together with the other themes I have
identified in the Karṇaparvan. First of all, toward the beginning of the
parvan’s two days of fighting, well before Karṇa and Arjuna meet, a
heavenly voice (heard by warriors from both sides) proclaims: “These
two, Keśava and Arjuna, are heroes who always bear the splendor,
power, radiance, and beauty of fire, wind, sun, and moon. Like unto
the invincible Brahmā and Īśāna [Śiva], these two heroes stationed
on one chariot are the foremost heroes among all beings, the pair
Nara and Nārāyaṇa [brahmeśānāvivājayyau vīrāvekarathe sthitau/
sarvabhūtavarau vīrau naranārāyaṇavubhauu]” (8.12.15–16). The
analogy with Brahmā and Śiva is thus drawn into the same texture
with the other themes we have discussed, including the image of the
ekaratha.48 Most important, they are linked through their chariots.
Karṇa reminds us that it is the same divine impenetrable chariot which
Arjuna obtained from Agni at the Khāṇḍava Forest (agnidattaśca vai
divyo rathaḥ . . . acchedyaḥ, 8.28.48). But more revealing is Bhīsṃ a’s
identification of the chariot at one point in the Droṇaparvan: “The two
Kṛsṇ ̣as having mounted that chariot which formerly bore Brahmā and
Īśāna, and Indra and Varuṇa, are gone [to battle]. One should have
no fear for them” (brahmeśānendravaruṇānavahad yaḥ purā rathaḥ/
tamāsthaya gatau kṛsṇ ̣au na tayorvidyate bhayam, 7.102.43).49 Thus,
47 The chariot is thus like the Hindu temple, a convergence appreciated with special
distinctiveness, in the South Indian ratha (chariot) festival studied by Reiniche, where
the Tripuradahana serves as a background myth (which includes the humiliation of
the Jains) for the festival; see Reiniche, pp. 83–111.
48 Here without specific reference to the two Kṛsṇ ̣as, but with no doubt that they
are implied.
49 A Northern “interpolation” in the Karṇaparvan makes the same identification
at the point where Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a set off for the duel with Karṇa (8.410*, after
8.31.36: it is the “primeval chariot” [ādyaṃ ratham] which successively bore Brahmā
and Īśāna, Indra and Varuṇa”). Curiously, the Khāṇḍava Forest passage gives a differ-
ent background, it having been the chariot of Soma (1.216.3). The fate of this chariot
in the Mahābhārata is also noteworthy. After the death of Duryodhana, Kṛsṇ ̣a orders
Arjuna to leave his divine weapons on it and step down. As soon as he does, the
chariot self-combusts and burns immediately to ashes. Kṛsṇ ̣a explains that it was only
because he was stationed on it in battle that it did not shatter sooner, “burned by the
energy of brahma-weapons” (dagdho brahmāstratejasā, 9.61.18–19). Once Kṛsṇ ̣a (or
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 503
no matter how outrageous it may seem if one seeks for literalistic or
“historical” explanations, Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a ride the same ekaratha
that Śiva and Brahmā rode of yore. Let us now look more closely at the
Tripuradahana’s place as a “background myth” in the Karṇaparvan
and the narrative unfolding of its thematic significance.
First of all, and rather ironically, it is Duryodhana who introduces
the background myth into the parvan. When Karṇa says he needs
Śalya as his charioteer to obtain parity with Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a, Duryo-
dhana invites Śalya to protect Karṇa on his chariot as Brahmā pro-
tected Maheśvara (8.23.5). Śalya objects. He refuses to drive for one
like Karṇa who is lowborn (by reputation a sūta) and inferior (nyūna);
sūtas serve Ksạ triyas, not the reverse. Actually, of course, unknown to
Śalya, Karṇa is a Ksạ triyas. This fact is known to Karṇa and suspected
by Duryodhana (1.127.10–16; 8.24.159), but the latter must assuage
Śalya’s vanity. So he tells Śalya he is a better charioteer than Kṛsṇ ̣a,
and finally Śalya agrees to drive for Karṇa, but on the condition that
he can say whatever he likes to him, whether it be agreeable or dis-
agreeable. This fateful pact concluded, Duryodhana then launches into
his account of Brahmā’s service as charioteer for Śiva at the battle of
Tripura.
Duryodhana’s version of this myth is arguably the oldest we have,
assuming purāṇic accounts to be later.50 But the story in its basic out-
line differs little from epic to purāṇic sources: the Gods always need
Śiva to defeat the three cities; Śiva requires the “cosmic” chariot, and
Brahmā ends up the charioteer. Thus, although there are some spe-
cific features of the epic account which can be identified as sources
for details of later purāṇic versions,51 it is still unlikely that the epic
poets conceived the myth themselves, that is, fabricated it to provide a
Kṛsṇ ̣a and Arjuna: the two Kṛsṇ ̣as step down, all tasks complete, the chariot and other
implements of war (and sacrifice) are thus deprived of their animating, unifying, and
sustaining principle(s).
50 One can identify pre-epic sources for aspects of the myth—particularly the theme
of the three demonic cities conquered by the gods (see, e.g., Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa
3.4.4.3–5)—but it is the Mahābhārata which provides the first integrated account
and the one which first incorporates most of the major themes found in the purāṇic
versions.
51 Thus the theme of Visṇ ̣u emerging from the arrow to lift up the chariot when the
wheel gets stuck makes sense only in the Mahābhārata, where Kṛsṇ ̣a will soon rescue
Arjuna by pressing down and then lifting up his chariot (see n. 17 above). An echo
lingers in Liṅga Purāṇa 1.72.28–32, but with a different message: Visṇ ̣u cannot right
the chariot, presumably because of the weight of Śiva within it.
504 chapter seventeen
mythic exemplar for the heroic story. Rather, one can assume that the
myth was already well known when it was correlated with the epic. It
is thus in details where the epic version differs from purāṇic accounts
that we can identify the sutures made by the epic poets to draw the
two stories together. Let us now look at some of these connectives,
first those which occur in Duryodhana’s account of the Tripuradahana
myth itself, and then those which occur later in the parvan but refer
back to the myth.
The first connective within the myth occurs when Brahmā tells the
gods why he cannot defeat the demons himself and why they need Śiva:
“Surely I am impartial [tulyaḥ] toward all creatures, no doubt on that.
But the adharmic must be slain, so I say to you. You Ādityas, choose
Sthānu, Īśāna, Jisṇ ̣u of unstained acts as your warrior. He will slay
those asuras” (8.24.34–35). If we suppose that Duryodhana’s account
is directed at an audience attuned to epic nuances and familiar with
the Tripuradahana myth in its general outlines, several of Brahmā’s
words are striking. Brahmā’s impartiality between gods and demons is
a stock theme in epic and purāṇic mythology. But in the context where
he is about to serve as Śiva’s charioteer, it evokes a number of themes.
First of all, unlike Brahmā, Śalya is not impartial. He actually favors
his rider Karṇa’s foe. Second, one is brought back to the scene where
Kṛsṇ ̣a, out of his supposed “impartiality,” agrees to serve as Arjuna’s
charioteer while his forces, the Nārāyaṇa Gōpas, will fight for Duryo-
dhana (5.7.10–20). As I argued in The Ritual of Battle, Kṛsṇ ̣a in that
scene evokes the stock figure of the impartial Brahmā.52 Here, how-
ever, Brahmā’s impartiality as charioteer-to-be harks back in reverse to
the figure of Kṛsṇ ̣a. And we sense this all the more strongly because of
a most astonishing detail. Śiva is called Jisṇ ̣u—here, and nowhere else.53
Normally Jisṇ ̣u, “the Triumphant,” is a name for Arjuna, evocative of
his rapport with Visṇ ̣u-Kṛsṇ ̣a and his further name Vijaya. The refer-
ence to Śiva’s “unstained acts” also relates his description to Arjuna,
as it is frequently one of Arjuna’s epithets, evoking the manner in
which Arjuna—like Śiva—performs acts of sacrificial killing that leave
him “unstained.”54 Thus Duryodhana’s account, ostensibly meant to
hearten his allies, hints rather at the odds against them: Brahmā is less
52 Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle (n. 3 above), pp. 103–4.
53 Sörensen (n. 21 above), p. 364.
54 Hiltebeitel, “Śiva the Goddess, and Disguises” (n. 13 above), p. 171.
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 505
like Śalya than like Kṛsṇ ̣a. And Śiva is less like Karṇa than like Arjuna.
But I must reserve fuller discussion of these points for later.
The epic account now continues to describe the courting of Śiva’s
aid and the construction of the chariot, much as one hears the tale
in the Purāṇas. Then one comes to a second interior connective. Śiva
mounts the chariot and says with a smile (one always has to watch
these smiles) that he requires a charioteer superior to himself (mattaḥ
śresṭ ḥ ataro, 8.24.96). The gods then tell Brahmā they see no one suitable
but him, for he alone is “superior to the gods” (devatābhyo ‘dhikaḥ,
105). Such requirements are unknown in purāṇic versions of the tale,
whose customary exaltation of Śiva would seem sufficient reason for
their omission.55 I will return to their significance in the Mahābhārata
later, but it should be noted that the epic passage allows for no sectar-
ian or “favoritistic” implications (as the purāṇic passages do) and that
its theology is well integrated in the larger epic narrative. For here
again, the rapport between Brahmā and Śiva evokes issues at the heart
of the rapports between the two pairs of heroic combatants. On one
side is the supposedly direct parallel, made by Duryodhana: Śalya can
drive for an inferior just as Brahmā did for Śiva (24.126–128). But
in each of these cases the warrior—Śiva and Karṇa—is actually the
superior figure. On the other side, however, Kṛsṇ ̣a is the truly superior
charioteer who nonetheless willingly subordinates himself to Arjuna,
duplicating a pattern acted out so frequently by their prototypes in the
mythology: Visṇ ̣u as Upendra, the younger brother of Indra, subordi-
nating himself to Indra.56 But Duryodhana, concluding his appeal to
Śalya, recognizes only one of these correlations, and that with consid-
erable misguided exaggeration: “Just like lord Brahmā, creator of the
worlds, the Grandfather, yoke the steeds of the high-souled son of
Rādhā [Karṇa]. Surely you are distinctly superior [viśesạ taḥ viśisṭ ạ ḥ]
to Kṛsṇ ̣a, Karṇa, and Arjuna, O tiger among men. There is no doubt.
Surely this one [Karṇa] is like Rudra in battle. And you, O sinless
one, are equal to Brahmā [brahmasamo]. Therefore you are able to
55 Liṅga Purāṇa 1.72.19, 26–27 and Śiva Purāṇa Rudra Saṃhitā 5:8.24 provide no
explanation for Brahmā’s service. In Matsya Purāṇa 133.46–56, all Śiva asks for is a
charioteer “worthy” of him—a difficult enough requirement that puzzles the gods, who
can think only of Visṇ ̣u, until Brahmā volunteers for the role.
56 The self-subordination of Visṇ ̣u to Indra is a theme common to many myths,
including several avatāra accounts. On its function in the Karṇaparvan duel with Karṇa,
see further Hiltebeitel, “Brothers, Friends, and Charioteers,” (n. 2 above), pp. 93–94.
506 chapter seventeen
conquer my foes, who are even like the asuras” (8.24.125–27; see also
25.2), Clearly, the poets have fashioned these words with consider-
able irony; not only the incongruous comparisons, but the allusions
to Śalya— whom Karṇa will soon berate for his sinfulness57—as “sin-
less” (anagha) and “equal to Brahmā/brahman” (brahmasama). But of
course every one is “equal to brahman.”
The mythic model of Śiva and Brahmā on the chariot is thus nar-
rated in immediate connection with Karṇa and Śalya, but actually with
an eye to its reverse application. For before Duryodhana has begun,
we have already heard the heavenly voice announce that it is Arjuna
and Kṛsṇ ̣a who are like Śiva and Brahmā. And their chariot is the
very one formerly ridden by those two divinities. On the conclusion
of Duryodhana’s narrative, such connectives are extended. First, in
an interesting Northern Recension passage which surely extends an
imp licit theme, Śalya rather impertinently tells Duryodhana that he
already knows the story of the destruction of Tripura, “and so does
Kṛsṇ ̣a” (8, app. 1, no. 5, lines 10–11). And he continues: “Kṛsṇ ̣a knows
truly both past and future. Knowing this very matter [the eventual-
ity of this duel], Kṛsṇ ̣a has come to be a charioteer for Pārtha, O
Bhārata, as Svayaṃbhū [Brahmā] did for Rudra [utadarthaṃ viditvāpi
sārathyamupajagmivān/svayaṃbhūriva rudrasya kṛsṇ ̣aḥ pārthasya
bhārata]” (ibid., lines 13–14). And just before the final encounter,
when divine, demonic, and other beings gather in the heavens to pick
either Arjuna or Karṇa as their favorites, it is Brahmā and Śiva them-
selves who intervene to determine the outcome. When Indra urges
Brahmā to favor Arjuna, he gets the following response: “Thereupon
Brahmā and Īśāna replied to the lord of the thirty [Indra], ‘Let victory
[vijaya] be certain for the high-souled Vijaya [Arjuna]’” (63.50); and
they continue to identify Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a as the invincible pair Nara
and Nārāyaṇa (54), and twice as the indomitable “two Kṛsṇ ̣as” (53,
55). The passage thus crystallizes nearly all of the formulaic themes
connected with Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a (including the allusion to Arjuna as
Vijaya/Jaya: “Victory”).
The fact that this is the only instance in the Mahābhārata where the
gods directly intervene in the battle is testimony to the pivotal charac-
57 See Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle, pp. 272–79, and “Brothers, Friends, and
Charioteers,” pp. 102–4.
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 507
ter of the Arjuna-Karṇa duel.58 Moreover, the decisive favoritism of
Brahmā and Śiva for Kṛsṇ ̣a and Arjuna is an indication of the mutu-
ally supportive interests of the three gods who, in classical Hinduism,
come to be regarded as the trimūrti. For Kṛsṇ ̣a is, of course, the incar-
nation of Visṇ ̣u. Whatever the date may be for the first articulat ion of
the trimūrti concept, this interaction is indicative of an already sig-
nificant interplay.59 As Indra says, Brahmā and Śiva’s decision will be
for the welfare of the universe (jagaddhitam, 63.58). And in a further
development, when Arjuna finally resolves to kill Karṇa, he invokes
the permission of Kṛsṇ ̣a, Bhava (Śiva), and Brahmā (65.23). Such for-
mulae certainly point in the direction of the trimūrti.
Questions and Conclusions
The Tripuradahana is thus significantly integrated as a “background
myth” within the Mahābhārata and, particularly, within the Karṇaparvan.
But the correlation just analyzed, and the juxtaposition of mythic and
epic themes, raises some intriguing further issues. For one thing, one
is struck by the coincidence of chariot-related themes in the war and
in the Bhagavad Gītā. Are we to assume that the authors of the Gītā
were aware that, when Arjuna has Krṣ ṇ ̣a halt between the two drawn
up armies, the pair are stationed on the very chariot formerly ridden
by Brahmā and Śiva? A definite answer is probably not possible. Krṣ ṇ ̣a
speaks frequently in the Gītā in Vedic and Upanisạ dic images, but the
chariot image is reserved only for the descriptive setting. But one must
remember that the terminology of “yoking” and “reining” is present
throughout the Gītā and that the setting itself is not insignificant. It has
been recognized as a kind of double allegory. In the chariot of the body,
the jīva (Arjuna) learns from God (Krṣ ṇ ̣a Paramātman) the nature of
the self (ātman) amid the converging forces of daivic (Pāṇḍava) and
asuric (Kaurava) realms.60 Or, in the chariot of the body, Krṣ ṇ ̣a as buddhi
58 It should also not be passed off as a supposed “theological” interpolation. The
Irish epic has a contextually significant parallel; see Hiltebeitel, “Brothers, Friends,
and Charioteers,” p. 106.
59 See Jan Gonda, “The Hindu Trinity,” Anthropos 63 (1968): 212–25, esp. 212, n. 2,
citing the consensus that the formula itself is “comparatively late,” apparently meaning
post-epic. But cf. also Mahābhārata 9.52: it is the three trimūrti gods who sanction,
at Kuruksẹ tra, sending straight to heaven warriors who die in battle and yogis who
practice tapas.
60 Sukthankar, pp. 92–98.
508 chapter seventeen
restrains the lower self (senses/horses, etc.) to enable Arjuna to realize
the higher self.61 Quite significantly this dual perspective involves the
same reciprocity we have observed elsewhere in connection with the
two Krṣ ṇ ̣as: the mutual self-subordination of their “eternal friendship.”62
Krṣ ṇ ̣a subordinates himself to Arjuna as buddhi to ātman; and Arjuna
subordinates himself to Krṣ ṇ ̣a as jīva to Paramātman. Moreover, the
chariot which bears the two Krṣ ṇ ̣as is not simply the body but also
the universe, the vehicle through which the self knows the brahman,
the All. But these correlations require further refinement and do not
exhaust the theological or soteriological vocab ulary. For as Kṛsṇ ̣a
identifies himself in the Bhagavad Gītā, he is, in the double theological
language mentioned earlier, both Uttamapurusạ (Supreme Purusạ ) and
Paramātman (Gītā 15.16–17). Furthermore, we must not isolate the
Gītā’s use of such terms from the rest of the epic. But we shall return
to these matters shortly.
A second issue must also be acknowledged. What is one to make
of the fact that the defeated chariot belongs to the son of Sūrya, the
Sun God? Georges Dumézil has left it beyond doubt that a link has
been fashioned between the chariots of the Ṛgvedic Sūrya and the
epic Karṇa. In both cases, Sūrya and Karṇa are defeated—in the Vedic
myth by Indra, in the epic by Indra’s son Arjuna—when one of the
wheels of their chariots becomes disabled.63 This recurrent detail seems
in both cases to have cosmological implications, but somewhat differ-
ent ones. Dumézil suggests that the Vedic myth is concerned with the
conflict between Indra’s role as patron of storms and Sūrya’s as god
of the sun.64 Given the Vedic recognition of the beneficent charac-
ter of the monsoon, this explanation is certainly plausible. But in the
epic, where Karṇa—as Biardeau has argued65—represents the errant
sun of the pralaya, the disabling of the solar wheel has more sinister
implications. Again, as in the battle of Tripura, it would seem that
the chariots of Arjuna and Karṇa represent conflicting cosmological
61 Ibid., p. 112.
62 See n. 26 above.
63 Georges Dumézil, “Karṇa et les Pāṇḍava,” Orientalia Suecana 3 (1954): 60–66,
and Mythe et épopée, vol. 1 (n. 6 above), pp. 125–44, esp. pp. 135–38. Dumézil adds
to the argument for a connection by noting that the beneficiary of Indra’s intervention
in the Veda is Kutsa Ārjuneya, “son of Arjuna” (p. 137).
64 Dumézil, Mythe et épopée, p. 136.
65 See Biardeau, EMH V (n. 17 above), pp. 173–74; Alf Hiltebeitel, “Draupadī’s
Garments,” Indo-Iranian Journal 22 (1980): 102–3.
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 509
images. In the Purāṇas, where whole chapters are frequently devoted
to the cosmic imagery of the solar chariot, it is frequently said that it
has but one wheel,66 no doubt symbolizing the sun’s “rotation” around
Mount Meru.67 Moreover, although the sun is said to have a bimonthly
succession of different “charioteers,” it is actually Dhruva, the fixed
polar star (a far cry from the fickle Śalya), who holds the solar chari-
ot’s reins (Matsya Pur. 125.50–58; 126.7–12; Liṅga Pur. 1.55.7–15), the
“wind ropes” that connect all the “planets” to Dhruva (Matsya Pur.
127.12–14). For the solar chariot to remain on its course is thus a most
fundamental condition of the cosmic order, the ṛta.68 Yet, as the Mat-
sya Purāṇa (126.43–44) indicates, there is a limit to this arrangement:
“The horses were yoked at the beginning of the kalpa and carry on the
sun till end of the great dissolution” (mahāpralaya). If Karṇa’s con-
nection with Sūrya symbolizes the errant sun of the pralaya, it would
seem likely that the disabling of his chariot wheel in the epic might
already evoke “purāṇic” themes: the termination of the “rotation” of
the single wheel of the solar chariot at the time of the pralaya, the
time when the sun alters its course, multiplies itself sevenfold, and
desiccates the earth.
Both of these issues carry on into speculative areas that go beyond
the Gītā and epic texts. But a third correlative between the myth and
the epic is more easily substantiated and confirms further the connec-
tives drawn between Arjuna and Śiva. As we have seen, Arjuna fights
on the same chariot at Kuruksẹ tra that Śiva occupies at the battle of
Tripura. The Karṇaparvan does not forget to expand on this persistent
rapport. Along with their parallelism as warriors on the same chariot,
we have noted the allusion to Śiva as Jisṇ ̣u and Arjuna’s request of
permission from Śiva, Kṛsṇ ̣a, and Brahmā to kill Karṇa. One finds
interspersed among these references further reminders of Arjuna and
Śiva’s rapport. On the first of Karṇa’s two days of marshalship (the
sixteenth day of the war), Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a set out with an homage
to Śiva (8.21.13), and then Arjuna, having drawn his bow Gāṇḍīva,
“as if dancing in battle” (raṇe nṛtyanivārjunaḥ), begins to slaughter
66 Matsya Purāṇa 126.39, 41; Linġ a Purāṇa 1.55.3. Visṇ ̣u Purāṇa 2.8 differs here and
at other points in its description of the solar chariot. The solar chariot is, of course, an
archaic image, already important in the Veda.
67 Recall also the theme that Karṇa must fight the two Kṛsṇ ̣as alone.
68 Such a notion is already clear in the Veda; see Miller (n. 32 above), pp. 54, 59:
the rathaḥ ṛtasya (Ṛg Veda 2.23.3).
510 chapter seventeen
the Kauravas (21.15). As argued elsewhere, Arjuna’s battlefield dance
is itself an evocation of the dancing Śiva.69 The same adhyāya con-
firms this with a description of the battlefield at the close of the six-
teenth day’s fighting: “Yaksạ s, Rāksạ sas, Piśācas and beasts of prey
came en masse to the terrible battlefield, which was like the danc-
ing ground of Rudra” (rudrasyānartaṇopamam, 21.42). But the most
definitive statement of Arjuna’s likeness to Śiva comes the next day
from Arjuna himself. It is a convoluted scene. Enraged that Arjuna
should delay in fighting Karṇa, Yudhisṭḥ ira tells him to give his bow
to someone else. Arjuna had vowed to kill anyone who spoke such an
insult and must thus kill Yudhisṭḥ ira. Kṛsṇ ̣a then tells Arjuna how to
escape this seemingly hopeless impasse by telling Arjuna to address
his elder brother in the familiar, thus “killing” him symbolically. This
symbolic fratricide stands against the background of the real fratricide
which, unbeknown to them, both Yudhisṭḥ ira and Arjuna are plotting
against their elder brother Karṇa.70 But now that Arjuna has “slain”
his brother Yudhisṭḥ ira, he despondently prepares to kill himself. Here
again Kṛsṇ ̣a counsels: Arjuna should “kill” himself equally symboli-
cally, with self-praise. Thus Arjuna begins: “there is no other bow-
bearer like me, O king, except the God with the Pināka bow [Śiva].
Indeed, I am esteemed by that great-souled one. In a moment I can
destroy the universe, with its mobile and immobile things.”71 Kṛsṇ ̣a
merely tells Arjuna to “kill” himself by praising his own qualities or
merits (guṇāni). He certainly does not tell him to lie. He does not even
tell him to exaggerate.
Out of the remarkable constellation of “double identities” by which
the epic characterizes the true identity of Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a, it is,
of course, Arjuna’s “concealed” identification with Śiva that has the
greatest theological significance. For just as the epic insists, in numer-
ous ways, on the identity of Arjuna and Kṛsṇ ̣a, so it insists on the
reciprocity and ultimate ontological unity of Śiva and Visṇ ̣u.72 As I
have shown elsewhere, Arjuna’s “concealed” identity with Śiva is most
significantly “revealed” in the symbolism of the disguise he assumes
during the year the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī must spend incognito in
69 Hiltebeitel, “Śiva, the Goddess, and Disguises” (n. 13 above), p. 155.
70 Hiltebeitel, “Brothers, Friends, and Charioteers” (n. 2 above), p. 96.
71 Na mādṛśo ‘nyo naradeva vidyate/dhanurdharo devamṛte pinākinam//ahaṃ hi
tenānumato mahātmanā/ksạ ṇena hanyāṃ sacarācaraṃ jagat (8.49.93).
72 See, to begin with, Biardeau, EMH IV (n. 12 above). pp. 111–15.
the two kṛṣṇas on one chariot 511
the kingdom of Matsya. Not only do the roles he assumes as dancer,
musician, and eunuch identify him with Śiva. It is his name Bṛhannalā/
Bṛhannaḍā, reinforced by numerous puns and comic allusions, that
holds the greatest implications. For if Bṛhannalā/Bṛhannaḍā conceals
the etymology bṛhad-nara (“great man”), and if nara is an allusion to
Arjuna’s identity not only as Nara but also as the purusạ or “soul,”
then Bṛhad-nara as the “Great Nara” would identify Arjuna as the
“Great Purusạ ” or Mahāpurusạ , or more exactly—given the feminine
ending and the “eunuch” disguise—“the Great Purusạ who is also a
woman.” In other words, though the title Mahāpurusạ or its equiva-
lents could apply either to Visṇ ̣u or Śiva, the “name and form” Arjuna
assumes can only evoke Śiva as Ardhanārīśvara, “the Lord who is half
woman.”73
Given these associations, one must perforce ask why it is that Arjuna
should be Nara everywhere else in the Mahābhārata and only reveal
himself to be “the Great Nara” in the period of concealment. The
answer emerges from the previous discussions. First of all, the period
which the Pāṇḍavas spend in disguise provides the dīksạ̄ -like rebirth
from the “womb” which prepares them for the “sacrifice of battle.”74 It
is also attended by numerous images of the pralaya: the name of the
city (Upaplavya, “before the deluge”) and the country (Matsya, the
“fish”) where they reside.75 But above all it is Arjuna’s evocation of Śiva
as Ardhanārīśvara that implies the pralaya and, specifically, the prākṛta
pralaya, for it is on the dissolution of the universe into prakṛti that
Śiva and the Goddess—or Purusạ and Prakṛti—are reunited in their
ultimate Ardhanārīśvara form. Arjuna abandons this ultimate iden-
tity of Śiva (or of Śiva and Śakti) at the end of his period of disguise,
although it is probably evoked throughout by his name Savyasācin, he
who “draws the bow with the left hand,” that is, the one who shoots
equally well with the left (female) or right (male) hand. But he retains
his identity with Śiva as the destroyer, thus linking Arjuna’s warrior
activities at Kuruksẹ tra with the Śiva who destroys the universe at the
periodic or “occasional” (naimittika) pralayas that occur thousands of
times over between prākṛtapralayas. And indeed, as Vyāsa explains
to Arjuna at one point in the battle, Śiva is present in all of Arjuna’s
73 See Hiltebeitel, “Śiva, the Goddess, and Disguises,” pp. 153–57.
74 Ibid., pp. 149, 159–61, with citations, especially of Biardeau, EMH IV, pp. 207–8,
and EMH V (n. 17 above), pp. 149–57, 187–88.
75 See Hiltebeitel, “Śiva, the Goddess, and Disguises,” pp. 149–50, and nn. 12–14.
512 chapter seventeen
destructive acts.76 Now if Arjuna’s disguise as Bṛhannalā/Bṛhannaḍā
identifies him not only with this ultimate form of Śiva but also with
activities (especially the dance and his defense, even as a eunuch, of
Virātạ ’s kingdom) that prefigure his role in the war, it is not surpris-
ing that Kṛsṇ ̣a should subordinate himself to Arjuna as his charioteer.
For he is, in fact, subordinating himself to Arjuna in his destructive
dimension as a form of Śiva. But again, one must not forget the dou-
ble soteriological language. For not only do they mutually subordinate
themselves to each other as alternate representations of purusạ and
Mahāpurusạ . They also ride together as the two Kṛsṇ ̣as on the one
chariot of the “impartial” Brahmā, the Brahmā with whom Kṛsṇ ̣a is
compared, and the Brahmā who can be “superior to the gods,” even
Śiva or Visṇ ̣u, only because he is the personification of the brahman
in which all hierarchies and distinctions merge and cease.
76 Ibid., p. 159, referring to Mahābhārata 7.173.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
BUDDHISM AND THE MAHĀBHĀRATA:
BOUNDARY DYNAMICS IN TEXTUAL PRACTICE
It has long been felt that in the formation of boundaries between the
religious traditions of South Asia, the composers of the Mahābhārata
would have played a considerable role in generating the dynamics of
what was to become Hinduism. But since the Mahābhārata is quiet if
not exactly silent on the non-Brahmanical traditions, and particularly
about Buddhism, scholars have not found it easy to discern how it
might have constructed such borders and, still more durably, how it
might have generated a new textual praxis that could be used by later
epic and purāṇic authors to patrol them—if indeed such borders existed.
One strain of scholarship approached this question from the standpoint
that the Mahābhārata would have grown from oral origins into a mas-
sive ‘encyclopedia’, one that could eventually claim, ‘whatever is here
may be found elsewhere; what is not here does not exist anywhere’
(Mahābhārata, 1.56.33; 18.5.38).1 From this vantage point, a text of such
self-sufficiency and self-importance could, at the most, have absorbed
some minor references to the heterodoxies only haphazardly as a reflex
of its snowball descent through the centuries (Hopkins 1969: 363–402;
475). This view concurs with an assimilationist model of Hinduism’s
relation to other traditions. Another approach has been to suspect
that the Mahābhārata has more to say about Buddhism than it makes
immediately obvious, and that what it has to say would have to have
been said at some significant time in history. This view requires a more
dialogical or interactive model such as is favored in this essay. But it is
important to emphasize that the question is posed not with regard to
the relation between traditions themselves as ‘wholes’, but with regard
to the position of texts, and mainly one text, in defining one aspect of
the relation between these traditions.
1 For an argument that the term ‘encyclopedia’ has been misleadingly applied to
the Mahābhārata, particularly with reference to this verse, which, rather than defining
the exhaustiveness of the text, is pitched toward an ‘ontological debate’, see Hiltebeitel
2001a: 162–163.
514 chapter eighteen
The question of the relation between Buddhism and the Mahābhārata
is an old one, going back most famously to the younger Adolf Holtz-
mann’s ‘inversion theory’ of 1892–95, which views the original
Mahābhārata as a Buddhist epic celebrating Duryodhana in the image
of Aśoka, and in memory of a national resistance against the Greeks,
only to be subject to later Brahmanical inversion marked by the rise of
Kṛsṇ ̣a and Visṇ ̣u, that turned the plot upside down (Hiltebeitel 1979a:
69). As we shall see, certain authors are still playing with some of the
same game pieces. But they come to quite different conclusions and
have, I think it fair to say, a better understanding of the text and the
historical possibilities for contextualizing it. What is perhaps surpris-
ing is that the issue took on sudden new steam, with three authors—
Madeleine Biardeau, James Fitzgerald, and Nicholas Sutton—taking
up the topic between 1997 and 2002.2 Fitzgerald also offered a preview
of his argument in a footnote in his 1980 dissertation (Fitzgerald 1980:
151, n. 1 [see then Fitzgerald 2001: 64, n. 5]), the very year that I
developed an argument of my own for a different Buddhist backdrop,3
one that I would now like to rethink in relation to these more recent
offerings.
Biardeau hypothesizes a strict correlation in time between the
Mahābhārata and Aśoka. Indeed, for her the two ‘successive’ epics,
the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa, with the Mahābhārata in the
earlier of the two, make up a ‘brahmanical manifesto’ provoked by
the ‘imperium of Aśoka’, one that ‘dissimulates its real end’, which
must be decrypted or decoded.4 Moreover, while the Mahābhārata
is composed under conditions of ‘urgency’ apparently during the
Aśokan reign itself, the Rāmāyaṇa may, she thinks, have been created
2 One should also be alerted to work in progress by Greg Bailey, for the moment
exemplified in his paper presented at the Conference on Religions in the Indic Civiliza-
tion and kindly supplied by the author (Bailey 2003). I comment on this paper only
lightly.
3 See now chapter 19. The article was written in late 1979 and delivered in January
1980 at the ‘Seminar on Ancient Mathurā’, sponsored by the American Institute of
Indian Studies at New Delhi and Mathurā, but was not published until 1988 (Hiltebeitel
1988: 93–102). See Biardeau’s kind encouragement to revisit the topic in Biardeau 2002:
vol. 1, 21 n. 7. Fitzgerald and I developed our early views on these matters entirely
independently.
4 While I am cautious of the notion of ‘code’, and would prefer to think of a more
flexible semiosis of referencing or allusion (Hiltebeitel 2001a: 119 and passim), the
test of a code is to see if it works. I can only say that in thinking through the figures
and terms that Biardeau decodes in connection with Jarāsaṃdha, I have found several
points, to be discussed below, where I believe it is possible to extend her insights.
buddhism and the mahābhārata 515
under less urgent conditions after the Mauryan empire had ‘crumbled’
(Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 776). Nicholas Sutton also proposes “a date for
the final reworking of the epic narrative some time in the Mauryan
era” (Sutton 1997: 335; 339). The period of Aśokan rule is probably too
early for the epics to have been written, but others—myself and James
Fitzgerald included—have proposed a later date, about a century later
at the earliest: that is, for me, no earlier than the Śuṅgas and probably
about 150 B.C.E. to the year Zero.5 That would make writing far more
feasible. I also argue, as does Fitzgerald, that when the Mahābhārata
speaks of nāstikas or ‘heretics’, it has other non-Brahmanical coun-
ter-movements in mind beside Buddhism alone: i.e. the Jains, whom
Biardeau treats as having little if any relevance (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2,
768 n. 23), the Materialists, and the Ājīvikas.6 I do not think, however,
that Aśoka is the only royal figure of the period to leave traces in the
Mahābhārata, for I think it quite likely that in its problematization
of fighting and royal Brahmans, especially Droṇa,7 the Mahābhārata
may be reflecting on the reign of the Brahman Pusỵ amitra Śuṅga
(ca. 185–149 B.C.E.), the overthrower of the Mauryas—a point with
which Fitzgerald agrees.8 Further, as Biardeau herself notes, the post-
Mauryan era marks a rise in the significance of the northwest as a
place opposed to the more orthodox center. There one finds the Yava-
nas, Śakas, and Yue-chi, with a great stūpa at Purusạ pura/Peshawar,
and Taxila/Taksạ śīlā as a crossroads of mixed population following
destructive wars, while commercial exchanges are open with the West
and China (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 149)—all of which may have some-
thing to do with the way the northwest is represented in both epics
as a place where kingdoms (Gandhara [Biardeau 2002: vol. 1, 531],
Madra, Bālhīka, Kaikeya) have questionable dharma.
Nonetheless, Fitzgerald9—like Nicholas Sutton (Sutton 1997: 331–
341)—would agree with Biardeau that Aśoka is the most high-impact
5 See Hiltebeitel 2001a: 18; Fitzgerald 2001: 78–83.
6 Hiltebeitel 2001a: 163 and n. 115 (with various references, several drawn from
Nicholas Sutton 2000), Fitzgerald (Fitzgerald 2001) and I are close on these matters.
See also the Jābāli episode in Rāmāyaṇa, 2.100–102.1.
7 But consider also Kṛpa, Aśvatthāman; and see Rāvaṇa.
8 We both consider the epic’s negative evaluation of Brahman rule as evidence
for a post—or at the date mid-Śuṅga date. See Fitzgerald 2001: 84; Hiltebeitel 2001a:
16–17.
9 As observed above—mentioning Fitzgerald 1980: 151, n. 1; Fitzgerald 2001: 64,
n. 5—Fitzgerald traces his view back to his 1980 dissertation. There, the note on the sub-
ject follows this statement: “A proper king should be aśoka in his execution of dharma”
516 chapter eighteen
historical royal figure on the Mahābhārata, but the three of them dif-
fer over how and where to trace that impact. Biardeau traces Aśoka
primarily into the career of the Magadha king Jarāsaṃdha; Fitzger-
ald and Sutton trace him into the figure of Yudhisṭḥ ira. Yet Fitzger-
ald and Sutton part company over whether Yudhisṭḥ ira is a dark or
light counterpart to Aśoka. For Fitzgerald, Dharmarāja Yudhisṭḥ ira
is a grim and somber extension of his father Dharmarāja Yama, the
god of death, who must oversee a divine raiding party of the gods
that descends to earth to restore Brahmans to privileges denied them
by Aśoka—Brahmans, that is, who, Fitzgerald thinks, composed an
initial ‘main Mahābhārata’, a first written redaction, out of ‘rage’ at
their treatment under Aśoka—“a deep and bitter political rage at the
center of the Mahābhārata.” For Sutton, on the contrary, Yudhisṭḥ ira
is a rather ideal representation of Aśoka as a figure of non-cruelty and
forgiveness. Sutton argues that “[t]he ksạ triya-dharma taught in the
dharma-śāstras and the Śāntiparvan of the Mahābhārata is rejected by
the Aśoka of both legend and edict, as it is by Yudhisṭḥ ira in the epic”
(1997: 334)—a somewhat anachronistic point for Aśoka, while for
Yudhisṭḥ ira it is in unexplained contradiction to his being not only the
main hearer of the Śāntiparvan, but his rather small show of resistance
to its Realpolitik.10 Moreover, Sutton thinks that Brahmans would have
admired Aśoka because he patronized them along with Buddhists (Sut-
ton 1997: 340). Sutton and Fitzgerald also have diametrically opposed
views of the Mahābhārata’s take on Aśoka’s c onversion. For Sutton,
(Fitzgerald 1980: 151). But Fitzgerald supplies no citation for such a description of the
king in the epic, and must rather admit in his note: “Actually, more typical language of
the text is viśoka or vitaśoka. I do not get the impression that the late or final redactors
of the MBh consciously attempted to draw a parallel between Yudhisṭḥ ira here and the
legendary Buddhist king. [. . .] On the other hand, the parallels between the situations
of Yudhisṭḥ ira and Aśoka, and the contrast at the doctrinal level (regardless of actual
behavior) between the non-violent and renunciatory ideology of Buddhism and the
deliberate Hindu sanctioning of violence for dharmic ends and the Hindu attempts to
synthesize the renunciatory perspectives of moksạ with the material and social processes
of society (in the āśramadharma and the karmayoga) make it difficult not to see the
MBh making some reply to the Buddhist pretense of having an adequate definition of
the role of the emperor. The Hindu king must fight and be aśoka at the same time”
(Fitzgerald 1980: 151, n. 1). It is not clear whether Fitzgerald at this point was inclined
to think the epic’s rebuttal of Aśoka would have been only in a late redaction, to which
he assigns most of the Śāntiparvan in his more recent work.
10 See further Sutton 1997: 336, stating, “Yudhisṭḥ ira utterly rejects this part of his
education” rather overstating the case. Similarly, it is unconvincing to align Aśoka’s
condemnation of religious festivals and rituals with Yudhisṭḥ ira’s hesitant run-up to
his post-war Aśvamedha (Sutton 1997: 357).
buddhism and the mahābhārata 517
Aśoka converts to a peaceful rule by dharma, and he sees “the func-
tional Yudhisṭḥ ira” as “modeled” after “the historical Aśoka and other
kings of a similar disposition” (1997: 334; 339). Fitzgerald, however,
regards “the figure of Yudhisṭḥ ira at the beginning of the Śānti Par-
van, in his attempt to renounce the kingship and go to the forest”, as
“deliberately scripted by the authors of the epic to represent what they
saw to be wrong with the Mauryan emperor Aśoka, to purge and refute
whose rule was, I believe, the principal purpose for the creation of
the first generation of our written Sanskrit Mahābhārata” ( Fitzgerald
2001: 64–65). On these differences, we could say that Biardeau agrees
with both on the pivotal character of Aśoka’s conversion, but has
greater agreement with Fitzgerald at least to the degree that the Aśoka
reflected in the text would be the dark one.11 But her Jarāsaṃdha is,
as we shall observe further, a figure not of the Hindu god of death,
Dharmarāja Yama, but the Buddhist one, Māra.
Meanwhile, my attempt12 was also to consider Jarāsaṃdha as a figu-
ration of Buddhism, but of Buddhist cosmological and soteriological
ideas rather than of a specific personage, whether mythic or histori-
cal. I shall unpack this difference in the next section. Nonetheless,
Biardeau and I would agree that whatever the correlations one makes,
they require an interpretation tied to the Mahābhārata’s articula-
tion of bhakti themes and idioms, which set the iconic and narra-
tive conventions for multiple deities and other related figures, but in
particular those connected with Kṛsṇ ̣a, who leads the opposition to
Jarāsaṃdha. As Biardeau demonstrates, while Kṛsṇ ̣a, Balarāma, and
Visṇ ̣u as Purusọ ttama acquire “distinctive attributes that one finds as
well on coins, pillars, and in the epic text”—without it being possible
to say which is prior—, “the representation of the Buddha and his
partisans starting from the monumental aniconic stūpa reliquary” goes
on along side that “of the essential personages of postvedic Brahman-
ism, whom the epic already endows with specific attributes that are
acquired henceforth” (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 751). In particular:
The Mathurā region, on the Yamunā and all around out to Avanti and
Vidiśā and Sāñcī, is testimony to this. At Mathurā, to our surprise, it is
Buddhism that appears dominant there. But has not Kṛsṇ ̣a himself taken
11 See above all, and most recently, Biardeau 2002: vol. 1, 782 (the theme appears
in numerous of Biardeau’s earlier writings).
12 See n. 3 above.
518 chapter eighteen
the precaution in the epic to explain why he and the ‘clans’ that surround
it . . . have had to flee from Mathurā . . . because of Jarāsaṃdha? They now
occupy the extremity of the Gujarat peninsula! But above all, let us keep
from confounding epic time and historical time. The epic neither invents
the future nor recalls the past, not to mention the present. Apparently
history gives another explanation: the Buddhists have invaded Mathurā
(more by conversions than by migrations), but despite all, there are
devotees of Bhagavān Visṇ ̣u not far from there as we know, a little more
to the south, not far besides from the illustrious Buddhist cult center at
Sāñcī. Kṛsṇ ̣a will have his revenge at Mathurā, and it is still there that
one finds him today.13 (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 751)
Fitzgerald takes a different view here. For him, bhakti is late to the epic
and the Jarāsaṃdha episode would probably not be part of his earliest
written ‘main Mahābhārata’.14 In excising bhakti, Fitzgerald’s notion
of Brahman rage is quite different from Biardeau’s take on Brahman-
Buddhist interactions, in which she proposes two forms of bhakti, Brah-
manical and Buddhist, developing along side each other, in the latter
case among Buddhists who are “for the most part of Indian origins and
inserted in the society of castes”, fully ‘at home’ (chez eux) there, with “no
one desir[ing] their departure, despite this sort of Brahmanical manifesto
[. . .] that the imperium of Aśoka provokes” in the form of the two epic
texts (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 776). Here, of course, I side with Biardeau,
and can see nothing to recommend Fitzgerald’s conception of a pre-
bhakti ‘main Mahābhārata’ in which faith is a matter of afterthoughts.
For me, the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa are both designed to sustain
a subtle, patient, and emerging political theology that propounds a new
bhakti framework in which royal patronage and Brahman prestige are
provided with new places and meanings. Nonetheless, while I regard
Biardeau’s stress on Buddhism and Brahmanism’s mutual at-homeness
to be of vital importance, something more needs to be said about the
oppositions between them that can be a self-conscious feature of their
texts. The Mahābhārata in particular often reflects greater antipathy
13 Similarly, one finds representation of Rudra-Śiva, Mahisạ̄ suramardiṇī, Skanda,
Sūrya (fitted with Iranian boots), all “announcing the diversity of Hinduism” (Biardeau
2002: vol. 2, 752–753). See, for discussion of extra details, also Biardeau 2002: vol. 1,
131–133. Further Hiltebeitel 1988: 94–97.
14 Fitzgerald doesn’t mention it among those he thinks to be not ‘main’, but he does
include the closely related Śiśupāla episode as exemplifying the non-originality of “all
episodes that elaborate some theme of devotion to Visṇ ̣u, Śiva, or Kṛsṇ ̣a” (Fitzgerald
2003).
buddhism and the mahābhārata 519
toward Buddhism than Biardeau indicates. I shall recall this point in
connection with some of the passages she cites.
From here on, then, I would like to turn to two points that Biardeau
makes central to her interpretation of the relation between Buddhism
and the Mahābhārata: her decoding of the Magadha king Jarāsaṃdha,
which I shall compare with my own; and her treatment of Mārkaṇḍeya’s
prophetic account of the ills of the Kaliyuga.
Jarāsaṃdha Decoded
Toward the beginning of the Mahābhārata’s second book, the Sabhāpar-
van, it is the troubleshooter-saint Nārada who inspires Yudhisṭḥ ira with
the idea of the dangerous Rājasūya sacrifice that will make him an
‘emperor’ (saṃrāj). Yudhisṭḥ ira checks with Krṣ ṇ ̣a, who says they must
first eliminate Jarāsaṃdha, Yudhisṭḥ ira’s only rival for paramountcy or
empire (saṃrājya), who ‘has imprisoned eighty-six kings in an “enclosure
for men” (purusạ vraja) at Girivraja, the future Rājagrḥ a in Magadha
[. . .] in preparation for a sacrifice of a hundred kings to Śiva, that is,
implicitly, a sacrifice of the entire [ārya] ksạ tra’ excluding his own line
and others to be mentioned, ‘for, as Krṣ ṇ ̣a tells Yudhisṭḥ ira, Jarāsaṃdha
sows dissension among the one hundred and one lineages of the Solar
and Lunar dynasties’ (Mahābhārata, 2.13.4–8 [see Hiltebeitel 1988a:
97]). At Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s advice, Yudhisṭḥ ira sends Krṣ ṇ ̣a (for policy or guid-
ance, naya), Arjuna (for victory), and Bhīma (for force) to Magadha,
to which the three set off on Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s chariot with its Garuḍa pennant,
Krṣ ṇ ̣a at the reins prefiguring his role as Arjuna’s charioteer (Biardeau
2002: vol. 2, 775).
Meanwhile, we learn of Jarāsaṃdha’s birth. Caṇḍa Kauśika, a
Vaiśvāmitra Ṛsị, gave a mango to the Magadha king Bṛhadratha, who
then gave halves of it to his two wives. The child was born in two halves,
discarded near the palace, and then—soon giving him his name—he
was ‘put together by Jarā’: a magnanimous Rāksạ sī who ‘jauntily’ gave
the ‘put-together’ child back to the king—since “she wished to rec-
ompense the king for the good treatment she received as a domes-
tic divinity of the palace [. . .] Oh! Oh! [says Biardeau] Do we dare
exclaim: what is this Rāksạ sī doing in a royal palace?” (Biardeau 2002:
vol. 2, 755–56). Indeed, Biardeau sees her as a precursor of Rāvaṇa and
the Rāksạ sas and Rāksạ sīs of Laṅkā; but let us note that Duryodhana’s
ninety-nine brothers are at least Rāksạ sas incarnate. Later, during the
520 chapter eighteen
Mahābhārata war, Kṛsṇ ̣a tells how Jarā died in the fight over Mathurā
between Jarāsaṃdha and Kṛsṇ ̣a when she was slain by Balarāma’s fall-
ing mace.15
According to Kṛsṇ ̣a, Jarāsaṃdha’s allies are Śiśupāla as protecteur
des sots (that is, ‘protector of fools’); Haṃsa (whose name ‘Gander’
evokes the supreme self or ātman) and Ḍimbhaka (sot, ‘fool’). The
last two die as part of a triple death: first a pretext-Haṃsa is killed in
battle; then Ḍimbhaka drowns having thought it was the real Haṃsa,
his inseparable friend; then the real Haṃsa drowns having learned of
the drowning of Ḍimbhaka. It seems to Biardeau that, along with the
initial pretext-death of the first Haṃsa in battle, this double drowning
evokes the Upanisạ dic two birds as friends in the one tree,16 the ātman
and jīva (the embodied ‘living soul’)—leaving Śiśupāla as a ‘protector
of fools (sots)’ who could not, however, protect these fools who rep-
resent a Buddhist misrepresentation of these two inseparable dimen-
sions of the soul (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 756).
Further ‘decoding’ Jarāsaṃdha, Biardeau calls attention to the list
of ‘descents’ of gods, demons, and others into the heroic generations,
in which Jarāsaṃdha is the incarnation of an Asura named Vip-
racitti (Mahābhārata, 1.61.4)—Biardeau suggests “‘sans intelligence’
(?)” (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 756). Jarāsaṃdha also appears at two
svayaṃvaras: that of Draupadī in Pañcāla,17 and that of an unnamed
princess of Kaliṅga, daughter of the Kaliṅga king Citraṅgada, who
becomes the wife of Duryodhana—a story told only at the beginning
of the post-war Śāntiparvan, where Nārada answers a question from
Yudhisṭḥ ira: why was my brother Karṇa so fated with adversities?
When the Kaliṅga princess reviewed the kings who had come to win
her hand, she passed over Duryodhana, and feeling the snub, Duryod-
hana abducted her on his chariot—counting on the help of Bhīsṃ a and
Droṇa, but helped especially by Karṇa who routed the ensuing kings
and escorted Duryodhana and his new bride home to Hāstinapura.
Having admired Karṇa’s warrior prowess, Jarāsaṃdha then demanded
to fight him in single combat—a sporting challenge (where it took
15 Mahābhārata, 7.156.10–14. See Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 219–220; and further dis-
cussion below.
16 Śvetāśvataropanisạ d, 4.4.6–7; Muṇḍakopanisạ d, 3.1.1–3.
17 Biardeau is relying on the Vulgate here, citing Mahābhārata, 1.186.23 (= Critical
Edition 1.1821*) and Mahābhārata, 1.187.26 (= Critical Edition 1.1828* lines 5–6), but
in both cases with fairly wide manuscript support.
buddhism and the mahābhārata 521
place is not said) rather than a duel to the death. The fight began on
chariots and ended in wrestling, until Jarāsaṃdha had to call a halt,
since the seam left from his two halves being ‘put together by Jarā’ at
birth had begun to show signs of rupture. Recognizing “Karṇa as the
victor, Jarāsaṃdha gave him the city of Mālinī, which is apparently
in or near Aṅga—where Karṇa must already rule in subordination to
Duryodhana. Says Biardeau:
These two little chapters permit us to know that Duryodhana and Karṇa
are in the camp of Jarāsaṃdha, and that Jarāsaṃdha is obliged to recognize
the superiority of Karṇa. But it is difficult to go farther and draw conclu-
sions from this as to their fidelity to Brahmanism, not least because they
would have to be deceiving the warrior Brahmans or Ksạ triyas who fight
on their side against the Pāṇḍavas. (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 757)
In the Harivaṃśa, Jarāsaṃdha does include Duryodhana and his broth-
ers among his allies (Biardeau 1978: 226; Hiltebeitel 1988a: 97). More-
over, it is highly fascinating that in the Tamil Terukkūttu tradition of
dramas on the Mahābhārata, this story from the Śāntiparvan is clearly
known, despite the fact that the drama cycle and the classical Tamil
Makāpāratam of Villiputtūr Ālv̠ ār that it builds on both stop their narra-
tives with the death of Duryodhana and the end of the war. Moreover, it
is not Duryodhana who marries this princess—now named Poṉnu̱ ruvi,
the ‘Golden Earth’—but Karṇa because Karṇa touched her during her
abduction, and because Duryodhana, despite his great friendship for
Karṇa, always sees him as a man of low caste (de Bruin 1999: 286–90;
314; de Bruin 1998: 238–47).18
Biardeau also calls attention to the other kings who came to this
Kaliṅga svayaṃvara to vie for the princess. One is named Aśoka
(Mahābhārata, 12.4.7c)—a surprise that Biardeau does not do more
than note in passing without working it directly into her interpretation
(Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 527; 529–32; 757). But the list is interesting,
and bears on her notion of alliances between Duryodhana and possi-
bly pro-Buddhist camp. Here is the list of kings attending the Kaliṅga
svayaṃvara—an odd lot that would likely consist quite precisely of
kings not penned up in Jarāsaṃdha’s corral at Magadha, the properly
Ārya kings whom Jarāsaṃdha is keeping to sacrifice to Śiva:
18 On the name Poṉṉuruvi, following Madeleine Biardeau’s suggestion, see Hilte-
beitel 1988b: 399.
522 chapter eighteen
Śiśupāla, Jarāsaṃdha, Bhīsṃ aka, Vakra, Kapotaroman (Pigeon-Hair), Nīla,
Rukmin, Drḍ ̣havikrama, the Mahāraja Srg̣ āla who was the overlord of the
kingdom of women, Aśoka, Śatadhanvan, and the heroic Bhoja—these
and many other kings from the south, and mleccha preceptors and kings
from the east and north, O Bhārata. (Mahābhārata, 12.4.6–8)
One wonders at the company that Duryodhana and Jarāsaṃdha keep,
which includes not only this Aśoka and Mlecchācharyas—implying
some kind of ‘barbarian preceptors’ from the north and east (the
Bhaviṣyapurāṇa uses the term mlecchācharya for Adam, Enoch,
Noah, Moses, Buddha, Jesus, and Muhammad) (Hiltebeitel 1999:
277–78)—, but the ‘great king Śrg̣ āla (‘Jackal’), overlord of the kingdom
of women’, who may be the Śrg̣ āla Vāsudeva mentioned in the Harivaṃśa
as one of the ‘pseudo Vāsudevas’, another of whom, Pauṇḍra (i.e. from
Bengal) Vāsudeva, is explicitly mentioned in the Mahābhārata as siding
with Jarāsaṃdha (Sörenson 1963: 718–19; Hopkins 1969: 217).19 These
‘pseudo-Vāsudevas’ perversely claim the title that ‘properly’ belongs to
Krṣ ṇ ̣a, for whom it denotes both his paternity and divinity (Hiltebeitel
1988a: 101, n. 49).
As with this Aśoka, Biardeau only notes these names, and turns
her attention to Bhīsṃ a as, again, one who abducts (or in this case
helps to abduct) a bride for another Kuru king: that is, as he did at a
svayaṃvara at Kāśi, prior to these other two svayaṃvaras, where he
abducted three brides for the Kuru prince Vicitravīrya, his own half-
brother. But, notes Biardeau, this current svayaṃvara
takes place among the Kalinġ as, that people whom Aśoka made famous by
the (historical) bloody conquest, regarding it as the regret that he put to
the test to the point of inscribing it on stone in several places of India, not
including Kaliṅga, to be sure, and describing it as the point of departure
for his conversion to Buddhism. (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 529)
That Duryodhana goes to Kalinġ a, confident in Karṇa’s aid, to get his
bride is for Biardeau a confirmation of an earlier suspicion that the
name ‘Kalinġ a’, interpreted as ‘that which goes toward Kali’ (kaliṃ-ga),
implies affinities between Kalinġ a and Duryodhana, who is the incar-
nation of the demon Kali and who would thus (for Biardeau) be the
19 See further Hiltebeitel 1999a: 150 (in the Bhavisỵ apurāṇa’s retelling of the Hindi
oral epic Ālhā, Śṛgāla, ‘Jackal’ is the demon incarnated by the demonic king Jambuka,
who is himself the father of the major demon foe Kāliya, an incarnation of Jarāsaṃdha).
See also Hiltebeitel 1999a: 164, n. 27: in the Mahābhārata, Vāsudeva of Puṇḍra is not
only a false Vāsudeva but a false Purusọ ttama.
buddhism and the mahābhārata 523
king Kali of the Kali Yuga.20 Indeed, Biardeau finds more to support the
idea that the epic gives a singular attention to Kaliṅga, whose people,
she suggests, would likely have been converted to Buddhism by Aśoka’s
conquest (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 54). For during the Mahābhārata war,
Kalinġ a allies itself with the camp of Duryodhana, “whose Buddhist
sympathies one can only guess” (Biardeau 2002: vol. 1, 298); and when
Arjuna travels to the east on the first phase of the tour that will bring
him three additional wives, the Brahmans accompanying him turn back
at the entrance to Kalinġ a, determining not to accompany him there
(Mahābhārata, 1.217.10)—on which Biardeau remarks, “so as not to
tread on an impure terrain?”.21
For Biardeau, then, the account of the svayaṃvara in Kaliṅga gives
the poet the opportunity to place at the forefront an alliance between
Duryodhana and Jarāsaṃdha that is possible thanks to Karṇa. Karṇa’s
centrality to this alliance is in evidence again after Kṛsṇ ̣a has used
‘stratagems’ to engineer the death of Ghatọ tkaca, which finally makes
the death of Karṇa possible as the last real hurdle to Duryodhana’s
defeat. It is at that very point—at Mahābhārata, 7.156—that Kṛsṇ ̣a
tells Arjuna how stratagems have been used to eliminate other foes,
and that had Duryodhana been able to ally himself in particular with
Jarāsaṃdha, Śiśupāla, and Ekalavya, he would have been unconquer-
able. Moreover, it is in this context that Kṛsṇ ̣a reveals how Jarā died
as a result of Balarāma’s falling mace, as cited above. Amid such con-
nections, it is perhaps significant that Kṛsṇ ̣a is repeatedly referred to
as Madhusūdana in the episode of the ‘temptation of Karṇa’22—as
if Karṇa, as the errant figure of the pralayic sun, elicits this aspect
of Kṛsṇ ̣a-Visṇ ̣u as the god who safeguards the Vedic cosmogony
20 “Le Kaliyuga ou le roi Kali qu’est Duryodhana” (Biardeau 2002: vol. 1, 298). See
also Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 54. The Bhavisỵ apurāṇa and the Ismaili ginān literature
would seem to provide supportive evidence that the name can be used in this sense.
This Purāṇa, in retelling the Hindi folk epic Ālhā, completes its profile of the story-
launching demonic king (whom Hindi versions call Karingha or Kariyā) by naming
him Kāliya as lord of the Kali Yuga and making him an incarnation Jarāsaṃdha.
Meanwhile, the gināns simply call him Kaliṅga, raising the likelihood that ‘Kāliya’ in
the purāṇa evokes the Kali Yuga by augmentation rather than by connection with the
verb gam). In either case, as also in Ālhā, the Pāṇḍavas (reincarnated or resurrected)
join the divine leader (the reincarnated avatāra or the Imām) to destroy this king who
embodies the Kali Yuga. See Hiltebeitel 1999a: 150–152; 341–347. Further, on deploy-
ment of themes from the Jarāsaṃdha-Śiśupāla sequence, Hiltebeitel 1999a: 150–152;
162–164; 346, n. 27.
21 Biardeau 2002: vol. 1, 298: “pour ne pas fouler une terre impurer?”.
22 See n. 12 above.
524 chapter eighteen
(Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 531–32). But it is still Jarāsaṃdha who remains
central to this configuration of alliances. Biardeau’s hypothesis is that
for the Mahābhārata poet, Jarāsaṃdha is a figure of Māra, Death, the
Buddhist form of the Tempter who arouses desires and thus leads to
“old age (jarā) and death”—that is, to repeated births (Biardeau 2002:
vol. 2, 530, n. 5). Jarāsaṃdha is thus an ‘apocalyptic’ figure of Māra,
recalling the Upanisạ dic compound jarā-mṛtyu and the ‘more Bud-
dhist’ jāra-maraṇa from which the Buddhist teachings of suffering,
thirst, and impermanence, including the impermanence of the ātman,
proceed (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 757). Thus when Jarāsaṃdha is out-
wrestled by Karṇa and pronounces the latter victorious, this ‘ “Bud-
dhist’ king plays a determining role in Karṇa’s celebrity and in the
extension of his power, since he cedes a city to him”—by name Mālinī,
which is also a name for Draupadī in disguise, suggesting what is really
coveted by Karṇa but also forbidden to him (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2,
757). Says Biardeau:
Karṇa now has a rank that is more and more ‘royal’, whatever may be
his birth. And the alliance of the three robbers gives precision to the
hypothesis that the alliance with the Buddhists has been reinforced even
before the intervention of Kṛsṇ ̣a, Arjuna, and Bhīma that is commanded
from afar by Yudhisṭḥ ira in preparation for his Rājasūya. But at the same
time Jarāsaṃdha discovers his limits, his congenital fragility. It serves
as a warning of how he will die in combat with Bhīma. (Biardeau 2002:
vol. 2, 530–31)
My own reading of Jarāsaṃdha’s relation to Buddhism began with the
observation that probably before, or at least in addition to, these alli-
ances between Jarāsaṃdha and the Kauravas, Jarāsaṃdha has, as part
of his ‘net of alliances’, one with Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s first nemesis Kaṃsa, whose
anxieties that Krṣ ṇ ̣a has been born to kill him result in Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s taking
on his ‘cowherd disguise’ among the Gopās and Gopīs. Kaṃsa is allied
with Jarāsaṃdha through his marriage to the latter’s daughters Asti
and Prāpti (Mahābhārata, 2.13.30; Harivaṃśa, 2.34.4–6). I proposed
that just as the Vālmīki-Rāmāyaṇa probably associates Lank̇ ā, “among
its many symbolic associations, [. . .] with Buddhism”, so too would it
be “likely for Girivraja, with its caitya peak which Krṣ ṇ ̣a, Arjuna, and
Bhīma destroy—disguised as Brahmans!—upon entering the city on
their way to killing Jarāsaṃdha” (Mahābhārata, 2.19.2, 17, 41), to be
associated with Buddhism:
buddhism and the mahābhārata 525
Girivraja and Rājagrḥ a are of course prominent in the early history of both
Buddhism and Jainism, and a center of early Buddhist kings—most nota-
bly Bimbisāra and Ajātaśatru—whose throne supposedly descends from
Jarāsaṃdha (see e.g. Visṇ ̣u Purāṇa 4.23). And the region of Magadha is
later the base of the first great Buddhist emperor, Aśoka. But most curious
are the names of Jarāsaṃdha’s two daughters—Asti and Prāpti—whom
he marries to Kaṃsa. It is these two women who prompt their father’s
revenge against Kṛsṇ ̣a after the slaying of Kaṃsa. Unusual names for
Indian girls, they both evoke prominent features of Sarvāstivādin Bud-
dhism: Asti (sarvam asti, the phrase which gives the school its name) and
Prāpti (‘obtention’, the Sarvāstivādin ‘pseudo-soul’). No other explanation
for their names seems likely. (Hiltebeitel 1988a: 98)
As I still would not do today, I did not single out Aśoka to the extent that
others have come to do, but would rather place him in a long history of
Brahman dissatisfactions not only with heterodoxies and heterodox rule,
including not just the Buddhists but the Jains, but further with rule by
Brahman kings. But of course Biardeau’s tracing of Jarāsaṃdha’s Kalinġ a
connections would justify giving Aśoka a certain prominence.
From there, like Biardeau (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 751), I attempted to
relate the opposition between Kṛsṇ ̣a and Jarāsaṃdha to ground condi-
tions, with Mathurā being “connected not only with [Kṛsṇ ̣a’s] need to
operate in the epic from Dvārakā, but with the prominence in Mathurā
during the period of the Mahābhārata’s composition of both Jainism
and Buddhism” (Hiltebeitel 1988a: 98). But my greatest emphasis was
on Jarāsaṃdha not as a figure who could be decoded with reference to
one figure, one ‘signified’, whether Aśoka or Māra as implying Aśoka,
but as a figure in juxtaposition with Kṛsṇ ̣a through whom—or rather,
through both of whom—the Mahābhārata poets could bring into
relief a contest between Brahmanical and Buddhist cosmological and
soteriological ideas. Thus, although I take Jarāsaṃdha’s “curious name
[. . .] ‘Put together by jarā’ ” much as Biardeau now does23 (that is, as
implying the Buddhist connection between old age and death), I also
take it to further allude to
[. . .] the Buddhist ‘wheel’, the bhāvacakra [which] is precisely ‘put together
by old age and death’. The twelve nidānas are drawn into a circle that
‘puts these two together’ with ‘ignorance’: [. . .] avidyā. But more than
this, the Buddhist bhāvacakra is precisely a closed circle, without periods
23 Biardeau had an earlier explanation—Biardeau 1978: 227—relating the sandha
in his name to either ‘pact’ or ‘twilight’ (as in sandhyā). See Hiltebeitel 1988a: 98 and
n. 54.
526 chapter eighteen
of crisis and renewal, yugas. That is, it is a circle that does not admit the
intervention of the avatāra who ‘comes into being from yuga to yuga’
(Bhagavad Gītā 4–8). ( Hiltebeitel 1988a: 98–99)
Here I refer back to a passage from the Mahābhārata’s Udyogaparvan
where Saṃjaya tells Dhrṭ arāsṭṛa how Krṣ ṇ ̣a rules the ‘Wheel of the Yugas’
in relation to two grander wheels, the ‘Wheel of Time’ (probably imply-
ing kalpas) and the ‘Wheel of the Universe’ probably implying space):
As if sporting, the supreme being (purusọ ttama) Janārdana keeps the
earth, atmosphere, and heaven running. Having made the Pāṇḍavas
his pretext, and as if beguiling the world (lokaṃ sammohayann iva),
he wishes to burn your deluded sons [the Kauravas] who are disposed
toward adharma. By his self’s yoga, the Lord Keśava tirelessly keeps the
Wheel of Time, the Wheel of the Universe, and the Wheel of the Yugas
revolving (kālacakraṃ jagaccakraṃ yugacakraṃ [. . .] parivartayate). I tell
you truly, the Lord alone is ruler of Time and Death (kālasya ca hi mrṭ yoś
ca), and of the mobile and the immobile. Yet ruling the whole universe,
the great yogin Hari undertakes to perform acts like a powerless peasant
(kīnāśa iva durbalaḥ). (Mahābhārata, 5.66.10–14)24
I thus conclude that Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s opposition to Jarāsaṃdha and other “wheel-
evoking foes25 may represent a confrontation of cosmologies: the bhakti
cosmology of Hinduism which admits ruptures of time—twilights—for
the sake of the world’s renewal, and images of Time without the possibil-
ity of such divine intervention, such as occur in Buddhism and Jainism”
(Hiltebeitel 1988a: 99). On this type of contrast, I was then as I am now
indebted to the inspired work of Randy Kloetzli on Buddhist, Hindu,
and Jain cosmologies (Kloetzli 1983; 1985; 1987). The important differ-
ences concern the avatāra and the yuga, which thus points the way to
Biardeau’s discussion of references to Buddhism in Mārkaṇḍeya’s account
of the Kaliyuga. Be it emphasized, however, that the avatāra and the
yuga are both concepts in formation in the epics: the one not yet used
as a substantive;26 the other used with great fluidity;27 and neither yet
codified and ordered in the way they are to be in the Purāṇas.
24 Slightly modified from the translation in Hiltebeitel 1988a: 95.
25 Such as Kālanemi, see Hiltebeitel 1988a: 98.
26 As has been long and widely recognized (though see now, however, Couture
2001, 314, for an exception at Mahābhārata 3.146.33 that does not concern divine
incarnation). See Hiltebeitel 2001a: 109, n. 56—a note overlooked even though it is
back-referenced in a note on a page (236 n. 36) cited to criticize one of my approaches
to this topic as ‘implausible’ on the sole stated grounds that I ‘show no recognition of
the fact that the term [avatāra] is later than the epics’ (Brockington 2002: 601).
27 See Luis Gonzáles-Reimann 2002. Also Hiltebeitel 2001a: 152, n. 82 (I would stand
by my point that Gonzáles-Reimann’s atomization of yuga references is not successful,
buddhism and the mahābhārata 527
The Degradation of Dharma in the Kali Yuga
Just after Mārkaṇḍeya has wound up his account of how he survived
the pralaya or dissolution of the universe on the remaining single ocean
and has revealed that Janārdana Krṣ ṇ ̣a, who is sitting there with the
Pānḍ ̣avas listening, is none other than the primal god who not only
sleeps on that ocean and wakes at creation but is the very god whom
he, Mārkaṇḍeya, met as a baby on a branch of a banian tree on that
vast ocean, and who swallowed him then and there to bring him back
to this world (Mahābhārata, 3.186.77 ff), Yudhisṭḥ ira asks Mārkaṇḍeya
to tell him next about ‘the future course of the world under imperial
rule’ (sāṃrājye bhavisỵ āṃ jagato gatim [3.188.3])—or ‘under empire’—in
the Kali age (Mahābhārata 3.188.5). I take some liberty in translating
sāṃrājye by ‘under imperial rule’ here, but do so bearing three points
in mind. First, there is nothing to support van Buitenen’s making
Yudhisṭḥ ira ask “about the future course of the world under his sov-
ereignty” (Van Buitenen 1975: 593)—that is, under Yudhisṭḥ ira’s own
sovereignty or imperial rule. Second, that it is a question about future
saṃrājya in the abstract allows one to consider it as a back-reference
to, or reminder of, Jarāsaṃdha’s own past rule itself. As I indicate in
Rethinking the Mahābhārata, the epic “[. . .] construes the whole episode
of Yudhisṭḥ ira’s assertion of paramountcy through the elimination of
his rival, the Magadha king Jarāsaṃdha, and his performance of a
Rājasūya sacrifice around the issue of empire”. This sequence provides in
a flurry most of the Mahābhārata’s usages of the terms sāṃrāj, ‘emperor’,
and sāṃrājya, ‘empire’—to which I note, “Within the Pune C[ritical]
E[dition], there are, between 2.11 and 2.42 [that is, in the Jarāsaṃdha-
Śiśupāla sequence], eight out of the fourteen such usages in the entire
epic”28 (Hiltebeitel 2001a: 8 and n. 37). Thus, as regards Jarāsaṃdha,
“Once Yudhisṭḥ ira learns from Nārada that he should consider the
Rājasūya as a means to empire (sāṃrājyam; 2.11.61), Krṣ ṇ ̣a says that
he has the qualities (guṇas) to be emperor (saṃrāj) and to make him-
self emperor of the Ksạ tra (ksạ tre saṃrājam ātmānaṃ kartum arhasi;
2.13.60), but must first defeat Jarāsaṃdha who has obtained empire by
but add that his work is valuable in demonstrating that uses of the yuga concept are
fluid in the epic, and that a consistent or even overriding view of their applications is
not easy to arrive at); cf. Biardeau 2002: vol. 1, 1007–1008 (with a view different from
mine on the prevailing yuga context of the Mahābhārata war).
28 My source for such epic word-counts was Tokunaga 1994.
528 chapter eighteen
birth (sāṃrājyaṃ jarāsaṃdhaḥ prāpto bhavati yonitaḥ, 2.13.8)”29 (Hilte-
beitel 2001a: 8). Third, I do not follow Biardeau’s argument that the epics
do not mean empire by the term sāṃrājya (Biardeau 2002: vol. 1, 299;
845; vol. 2, 711). Indeed, it would seem she would have to concede that
they use the term to talk about it if she considers Jarāsaṃdha a cryptic
figure for Aśoka (Hiltebeitel forthcoming, chapter 12).
In any case, Mārkaṇḍeya addresses this topic under the heading of
what will happen ‘at the end’ or ‘with the destruction of the yuga’
(yugānte, yugaksạ ye).30 Among these things to come, here are some
of the passages that Biardeau finds most interesting, along with some
others that bear on our concerns in this essay. I take them in their
textual order.
The Brahmans shall find fault with the Veda and abandon their vows;
seduced [deceived]31 by argumentation/logic,32 they will neither offer
worship nor sacrifice (na vratāni carisỵ anti brāhmaṇā vedanindakāḥǀna
yaksỵ anti na hosỵ anti hetuvādavilobhitāḥ). (Mahābhārata, 3.188.26)
The Vulgate adds here the following line, which Biardeau emphasize
as a double reference to the key phrase: ‘Deceived by argumentation/
logic, they will make effort in the lowlands’ (nimnesṿ īhāṃ karisỵ anti
hetuvādavimohitāḥ) (Mahābhārata, 3.948*).33 Biardeau glosses hetuvād-
avilobhitaḥ as “[. . .] led into error by discussions that pretend to be
logical”.34 And she continues:
But let us not fall asleep over this appeal to logical discussion that draws
the Brahmans into error: discussions with whom? On what subject? Let
29 I do not agree—as indicated in Hiltebeitel 2001a: 8, n. 36—with those who argue
that the whole Rājasūya episode is late.
30 Note that this suggests for Yudhisṭḥ ira, who goes on speaking in the future tense,
that the Kali Yuga is an age yet to come. In what follows, Mārkaṇḍeya distinguishes Krṭa
etc. with imperfect or present tense verbs (Mahābhārata, 3.188.10 ff) from Kali Yuga
traits described by future tense ones (Mahābhārata, 3.188.15 ff).
31 Where the Critical Edition has vilobhitāḥ here, the Vulgate has vimohitāḥ.
32 See Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 760; 778.
33 Biardeau does not in this context draw attention to the mention of the ‘lowlands’
here but elsewhere she notes that the marshy delta areas of Kaliṅga-Orissa, classifi-
able as ‘lowlands’ are off-bounds to the Brahmans accompanying Arjuna (Biardeau
2002: vol. 1, 298, 516, 528, 530). This interpolated passage is found in the manuscripts
B3, Dn1, n2, D6, and seems to have made its own connection between seduction by
hetuvāda and the ‘low-lands’, which are mentioned in the next verse as a place where
people commit malpractices in plowing (Mahābhārata, 3.188.27).
34 Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 760: “induits en erreur par des discussions prétenduement
logiques”.
buddhism and the mahābhārata 529
us keep in mind these logical discussions that, this time, cannot situate
themselves in the sacrificial arena during the pauses of the ritual process,
but which can no longer be purely mythical inventions, for it is the first
time that one hears them spoken of in a Brahmanical text. (Biardeau
2002: vol. 2, 760)
This notion of ‘pauses in the ritual’—that is, the intervals in which
debates could be held among Brahmans and Ksạ triyas and (though
Biardeau doesn’t mention it) stories could be told—is important in her
contrast between Brahmanical and Buddhist theories of karman, the
act: the Brahmanical act defined in relation to the rite and specifically
to sacrifice; the Buddhist rite taken out of that context and explained
in relation to impermanent aggregates of a moment, that is, dharmas
(Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 763, 768). Here we find Biardeau at her most
pithy: “Faced with Brahmanical society [. . .], the Buddha had only
several words to say about it: Brahmans are inferior to Ksạ triyas (the
Buddha being himself a Ksạ triya) and their rites are perfectly use-
less” (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 768). In this vein and further along in
Mārkaṇḍeya’s prophesy,
The entire world will be barbarized.35 without rites and sacrifices, without
joy, and also without festivals (mlecchabhūtaṃ jagatsarvaṃ nisḳ riyaṃ yaj-
ñavarjitam/bhavisỵ ati nirānandam anutsavam atho tathā), (Mahābhārata,
3.188.29)
It is worth recalling Gregory Alles’ attention to the ‘repressive’ central-
ization that marked imperial policies of the Mauryas, among whom
Aśoka “explicitly forbade popular religious assemblies” (Alles 1994:
65; also Hiltebeitel 2001a: 16). Still further along these lines, and now
most decisively, Biardeau brings up Mārkaṇḍeya’s references to eḍūkas,
the oldest term for Buddhist reliquaries and to begin with those for the
bones of the Buddha after his cremation: a term found both in Sanskrit
and Pāli (where it occurs ‘eventually also under the form elụ̄ ka’) and
the early form of what are to become stūpas.36
35 Mārkaṇḍeya makes this a recurrent phrase; see Mahābhārata, 3.188.37a (variant)
and 45a.
36 Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 759–760. The eḍūka references are among the “various Bud-
dhist terms and concepts” that E. W. Hopkins thought made it “impossible to suppose
that during the triumph of Buddhism such a poem [as the Mahābhārata] could have
been composed for the general public for which it was intended” (Hopkins 1969a: 399).
See further Hopkins 1969a: 391 (with the eḍūka references); 475.
530 chapter eighteen
The world will be totally upside down: people will abandon the gods
and will offer pūjā to [Buddhist] reliquaries; Śūdras will refuse to
serve the twiceborn at the collapse of the yuga (viparītaś ca loko ‘yaṃ
bhavisỵ atyadharottaraḥ/eḍūkān pūjayisỵ anti varjayisỵ anti devatāḥ/śūdrāḥ
paricarisỵ anti na dvijān yugasaṃksạ ye). In the hermitages of the great
Rṣ ịs, in the settlements of Brahmans, at the gods’ temples (devasthānesụ ),
in the Caitya sanctuaries, and in the abodes of the Nāgas, the Earth
will be marked by [Buddhist] reliquaries and not adorned by houses
of the gods. At the expiration of the yuga, that will be the mark of the
yuga’s end (āśramesụ maharsị̄ṇām brāhmaṇāvasathesụ ca/devasthānesụ̄
caityesụ nāgānām ālayesụ ca//eḍūkacihnā pṛthivī na devagṛhabhūsịtā/
bhavisỵ ati yuge ksị̄ṇe tad yugāntasya laksạ ṇam). When men become
ever-gruesome and lawless meat-eaters and liquor-drinkers, the yuga will
collapse [. . .]. Then the earth will soon be overrun by barbarians while
Brahmans, out of fear of the tax burden, will flee to the ten directions
(mahī mlecchasamākīrṇā bhavisỵ ati tato ‘cirāt/karabhārabhayād viprā
bhajisỵ anti diśo daśa). (Mahābhārata, 3.188.64–67, 70)
Note that such explicit reference to Brahmanical temples is rare in the
Sanskrit epics.37 Yet more horrors are to follow (including the appear-
ance of six suns [Mahābhārata, 3.188.75]), until Mārkaṇḍeya tells how
the Kṛta age begins anew (Mahābhārata, 3.188.87):
A Brahman by the name of Kalki Visṇ ̣uyaśas will arise, prodded by
time (kālapracoditaḥ), of great prowess, wisdom, and might. He will
be born in the village of Sambhala in an auspicious Brahman dwell-
ing, and at his mere thought all vehicles, weapons, warriors, arms, and
coats of mail will wait on him. He will be king, a Turner of the Wheel,
triumphant by the law, and he will bring this turbulent world to tran-
quility (sa dharmavijayī rājā cakravartī bhavisỵ ati/sa cemaṃ saṃkulaṃ
lokaṃprasādam upanesỵ ati). That rising Brahman, blazing, ending the
destruction (ksạ yāntakṛd), noble minded, will be the destruction of all
and the one who makes the yuga turn. Surrounded by Brahmans, that
Brahman will extirpate the lowly Barbarian hosts (mlecchagaṇān) wherever
they are.38 After destroying the robbers he will ritually make over this
earth to the twiceborn at a great celebration of the horse sacrifice (tataś
37 Although there is a Ṛsị named Devasthāna in the Mahābhārata, this prophetic
passage provides not only the sole instances of eḍūka in the epic, but those as well of
devasthāna and devagṛha in the sense of ‘temple’ (to which the Rāmāyaṇa adds only
one usage of devasthāna at 2.94.3)—as derived from Tokunaga 1994 (see n. 39 above).
Since the Mahābhārata rarely turns prophetic, and is normally portraying an heroic
past, this is what one could expect in this passage.
38 An adhyāya break occurs here, resumed with ‘Vaiśampāyana said’ as the next
adhyāya begins.
buddhism and the mahābhārata 531
coraksạ yaṃ krṭvā dvijebhyaḥ prṭhivīm imām/vājimedhe mahāyajne vidhi-
vat kalpayisỵ ati): He will reestablish the auspicious limits that Svayaṃbhu
has ordained (maryādāḥ svayaṃbhuvihitāḥ śubhāḥ). And when he has
grown old in works of holy fame, he will retire to the forest. People who
live in the world will follow his morality (śīlam). And with the robbers
(cora) destroyed by the Brahmans, safety will prevail. Establishing black
antelope skins, spears, tridents, and emblematic arms in the conquered
territories (deśesụ vijitesụ ), that tiger-like Brahman Kalki, praised by the
chief Brahmans and honoring their leaders, shall walk the earth forever
bent upon slaughter of the Dasyus. The Dasyus will wail piteously, ‘Ah
father, Ah son!’ as he leads them to destruction. Adharma will decline
and dharma increase, Bhārata, and the people will observe the rites when
the Kṛta age arrives (bhavisỵ ati kṛte prāpte kriyāvaṃś ca janas tathā).
Ārāmas (resting-places), caityas (sanctuaries), temple tanks, wells, and
the many ceremonies (kriyāś ca vividhā) will reappear in the Kṛta yuga.
Brahmans will be strict, Munis will do tapas, hermitages [that were for-
merly filled] with heretics will be firm in truth; people will be subjects
(āśramāḥ sahapāsạ ṇḍāḥ sthitāḥ satye janāḥ prajāḥ) [. . .]. (Mahābhārata,
3.188.89–3.189.9)
Here we have a number of terms that provide further reminders of an
interface with Buddhism compounded by mlecchification. Kalki, like
Krṣ ṇ ̣a, is a ‘wheel-turner’, but moreover a militant Brahman Cakravartin
King who conquers by the dharma. His rule allows ‘conquered terri-
tories’ to be reconquered. He restores a ‘morality’ (śīla) of ‘auspicious
limits ordained by Brahmā’ that would be nothing other than a morality
ordained by the Veda.39 In a world restored by Kalki, ‘robbers will be
destroyed by the Brahmans’.
I believe we must recognize in such a prophesy a greater antipathy,
indeed, the projection of an ongoing antipathy, between the B rahmans
who composed the Mahābhārata and their heterodox others, than
Biardeau stresses. And I believe the feelings and strategies were prob-
ably reciprocal, and that counterpart expressions are not difficult to
find in Buddhist texts. Nonetheless, I agree with Biardeau that the
texts of these two main traditions have an answering relationship to
each other, with bhakti as one of their shared vocabularies—though
certainly not the only one. More specifically, I would agree with her,
39 A Veda which certain thieving demons, probably crypto-Buddhist, would
have liked to hurl into hell at the moment of cremation—according to the myth of
Madhusūdana in the Mahābhārata’s Nārāyaṇīya, as we have noted in chapter 1 and
discussed further in chapter 5.
532 chapter eighteen
as I do with my starting point from Jarāsaṃdha’s daughters Asti and
Prāpti, that it is pertinent to think of the Sarvāstivādins as one locus
of Buddhist bhakti in formation that would have been familiar to the
epic poets, along with the trends that would have led to the inclu-
sion of the Mahāsaṃghikas as another early formation that included
Buddhist bhakti-prone sects40 among the so-called eighteen Hināyāna
schools—counted (let me suggest) from a perspective familiar with
both totalistic and oppositional senses of this epic number.41 I also
like Biardeau’s formulation that bhakti is the epic-composing Brah-
mans’ ‘trump’ (atout), in that their bhakti is a bhakti of acts centered
on relations between God and the king (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 763;
777).42 And I further concur that contending ideas about compassion
(Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 762), the gift,43 caste (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2,
773), and descent (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 776) are among the basic
areas in which to explore this interface, to which I would add formu-
lations about friendship,44 and the very basic shibboleths of what is
a Bhagavat and what is a self—in the latter case, the very issue that
would seem to be at stake in the choice of names like Asti, Prāpti,
Haṃsa, and Ḍimbhaka. Indeed, if Biardeau is right about such twists,
as I believe she is, the Mahābhārata’s answers to Buddhism are much
40 See Étienne Lamotte 1988: 526–527 (the prominence of both in Mathurā, and
of the Mahāsaṃghikas in Magadha); 622–629 (‘Sarvāstivādin and Mahāsāṃghika
Buddhology’); John Strong 1979: 221–237 (on bhakti in the Sarvāstivādin avadāna
literature). Of course Theravāda texts must be studied as well (Bailey 2003), but as
texts canonized in a more distant milieu.
41 I go further than Biardeau here; see her more cautious treatment of some of these
factors (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 760–71). On the count of eighteen sects, see Lamotte
1988: 529, 533, 535, 547: a number ‘fixed by convention’ that is dated by Buddhist
sources to the period from the second to third century after the Buddha’s parinirvāṇa,
and related to the great schism at the time of Aśoka.
42 Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 750–752. Along with exchanges in the scientific, medical,
astronomical, and artistic domains would be transformations in the religious domain,
with the Mahābhārata being the principal witness to such from the brahmanical side,
while “the throne of the Buddha no longer remains empty” (Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 750).
That is, these transformations can be read as countering positions on kingship.
43 Biardeau 2002: vol. 2, 763–764. For instance, Mārkaṇḍeya prophesies that at the
end of the yuga, ‘people will be delighted with gifts in name only [or perhaps ‘tell-
tale gifts’?] even from the wicked’ (tat kathādānasaṃtusṭạ dusṭānām api mānavāḥ;
Mahābhārata, 3.188.31cd).
44 This is an old interest of mine, especially with reference to Karṇa; see Hiltebeitel,
[1976] 1990: 254–266; 1982a: 85–112; 1984: 1–26. See n. 27 above on the Upanisạ dic
image of the two birds as reflected, according to Biardeau, in Haṃsa and Ḍimbhaka.
As I hope to show in a future study, this whole cluster of themes—especially those of
caste, friendship, and the gift—comes together in Karṇa.
buddhism and the mahābhārata 533
more diverse and diffuse than others have imagined.45 I believe that
the Buddhist and Brahmanical texts, while preferring not to make it
obvious, make such twists prominent in the ways they refine posi-
tions over and against ‘each other’. As Frits Staal put it during the dis-
cussion that followed the initial presentation of this paper,46 whereas
everyday worshipers would seem to have moved rather easily between
Brahmanical and Buddhist discourses and objects of devotion, it was
the business of writers to make precise and subtle distinctions.47
From my perspective, which would stress polysemy, it is also less
determinative to make one-to-one political or religious readings—
such as a construction of Yudhisṭḥ ira on Aśoka, Yudhisṭḥ ira on
Dharmarāja Yama, or Jarāsaṃdha on Māra or Aśoka—than it is to
see that political readings must be tied in further with the larger cos-
mological and soteriological idioms through which the texts sustain
their narratives. From this perspective, all these one-to-one readings
may have something persuasive about them without being as singly
correct as their proposers propound. If Buddhism was in the air for
the poets of the Mahābhārata, they could very well have referenced it
in multiple ways, and—as they do with many other classes of beings,
including, as we have noted, Rāksạ sas—through figures allied with
both sides of the epic’s main rivalry.
45 See my discussion of Śaunaka’s instruction to Yudhisṭḥ ira, upon the latter’s enter-
ing the forest, about an ‘eightfold path’ (asṭạ̄ ṅgenaiva mārgeṇa): from number one,
‘right binding of intention’ (saṃyak saṃkalpasaṃbandhāt) through various Vedic and
yogic ‘right’ (saṃyak) procedures and proficiencies (numbers two through seven) to the
eighth, ‘right stopping of thought’ (saṃyak cittanirodhāt) (Mahābhārata, 3.2.71–75d).
Given what Śaunaka calls Yudhisṭḥ ira’s ‘eight-limbed awareness’ (asṭạ̄ ṅgaṃ buddhim)
(Mahābhārata, 3.2.17), this path will allow him to conquer saṃsāra, into which one
‘falls [. . .] womb after womb and is moved round like a wheel by ignorance (avidyā),
karma, and thirst (trṣṇ ̣ā)’ (67). I conclude: “Considering the echoes of Buddhist language
here, it would seem that Śaunaka’s instructions for the forest life combine a preemp-
tion and subversion of Buddhist teachings about forest enlightment and the eightfold
path with a strongly Vedic interpretation (or anticipation?) of an eight-limbed yoga”
(Hiltebeitel 2001a: 172).
46 The initial draft of this paper was prepared for Professor Frits Staal’s Buddhism
Class at the University of Leiden, the Netherlands, and presented November 6, 2003.
I thank Professor Staal for his kind invitation to bring my thoughts together for that
occasion on the topic that remains the lead title of this paper.
47 My italics, of course; and since apart from the quoted phrase this is a paraphrase,
I allow myself to add the word ‘subtle’.

CHAPTER NINETEEN
KṚSṆ ̣A AT MATHURĀ
This paper is written from the perspective of research carried out mainly
on the Mahābhārata, and involves reflections based on that text, and on
its relation to the Harivaṃśa. I will argue that the nature of these texts
must be understood before they can be pillaged for historical informa-
tion. I do not suggest that they lack such information, of course, but
rather that it has been symbolically processed. One must thus clarify
the symbolism of these texts before one can make out what historical
information is symbolized. The main and subordinate stories in these
works are myths.1 I do not use the word ‘myth,’ however, in the sense
that it is used by many of the authors who have written on these texts:
that is, simply the opposite of history, or a fanciful embellishment
thereupon.2 Myths are obviously generated and developed in historical
conditions. But rather than recording what is or what was, or for that
matter what will be, they project images on to the past (or future),
often of what is not, of what never was, and of what never could be: in
particular a pre-Mauryan war for the sovereignty of all India.
The pertinent question, then, is: what are the conditions—historical,
geographical, cultural—that would have crystallized the Mahābhārata
and its companion texts into their present form? I doubt that it was
achieved all at once, or even in a short time. The Mahābhārata story
almost certainly has oral roots that go back to pre-Mauryan times.
Aspects of the main narrative may even be survivals of Indo-E uropean
oral epic.3 Its core geography would seem to be the early Vedic h eartland
1 I avoid here the issue of distinctions between myth, legend, and epic. See Alf
Hiltebeitel, The Ritual of Battle: Krishna in the Mahābhārata, Ithaca, 1976, pp. 28–59.
‘Mythic’ can serve for all three.
2 See the essays in S. N. Gupta and K. S. Ramachandran, eds., Mahābhārata: Myth
and Reality. Differing Views, Delhi, 1976.
3 See Stig Wikander, ‘Sur le fonds commun indo-iranien des épopées de la Perse et
de l’Inde,’ La Nouvelle Clio, Vol. I (1950), pp. 31–329; idem, ‘Fran Bravalla till Kuruk-
shetra,’ Arkhiv för Nordisk Filologi, Vol. LXXV (1960), pp. 183–193; idem, ‘Germanische
und Indo-Iranische Eschatologie,’ Kairos, Vol. II (1960), pp. 83–88; Alf Hiltebeitel,
‘Brothers, Friends, and Charioteers: Parallel Episodes in the Irish and Indian Epics,’
Journal of Indo-European Studies, in press (= Hiltebeitel 1982a).
536 chapter nineteen
of Kuru and Pañcāla. But the story must have continually extended
itself geographically over a fairly long period of time, to incorporate
widening geographical horizons. Various cities and lands were given
roles in the story that can only be symbolic.4 Mathurā would seem to
be one of these. There seems to be no clear indication that Mathurā
was even settled prior to the seventh century B.C.—a date short of
most, if not all, given for the alleged Mahābhārata war. Mathurā’s
place in the epics and Harivaṃśa would thus be essentially symbolic.
But the point to be emphasized is that this is not true of Mathurā
alone, but of the treatment of geography and cosmology as a whole, as
a fundamentally symbolic map, projected onto the past.5
Yet it is more than just our understanding of Mathurā that is at
stake. I was given the title ‘Concept of Kṛsṇ ̣a at Mathurā,’ and have
sought to look at Kṛsṇ ̣a and his city together, still relying primarily
on the great early texts. I do not see how I could discuss the ‘concept
of Kṛsṇ ̣a at Mathurā’ by basing my remarks on the inscriptional frag-
ments and archaeological bits and pieces that have usually been used
to reconstruct the early Kṛsṇ ̣a cult. The reliance on piecemeal data by
such scholars as Jaiswal, Bhandarkar, Majumdar, Raychaudhuri and
others has been made in almost total evasion of what I consider the
most important document of the entire period: the Mahābhārata. It
is pointless to discuss Pāṇini’s Arjuna and Vāsudeva, the five Vṛsṇ ̣is,
Kṛsṇ ̣a and Balarāma, and so forth, in isolation from the epic, or as if
the epic was inadmissable evidence because it is treacherously undat-
4 For example, on Matsya and Virātạ deśa, see Madeleine Biardeau, ‘Études de
mythologie hindoue [henceforth referred to as EMH] (IV), Part II. Bhakti et avatāra,’
Bulletin de l’école française d’Extrême Orient, Vol. LXIII (1976), pp. 166 and 208, n. 1;
idem, ‘EMH (V), Part II. Bhakti et avatāra,’ Bulletin de l’école française d’Extrême Ori-
ent, Vol. LXV (1978), p. 189; and Hiltebeitel, ‘Śiva, the Goddess, and the Disguises of
the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī,’ History of Religions, Vol. XX (1980), pp. 149–150. On
Ekacakrā as projecting the ‘one wheel’ of the sovereignty temporarily divided between
the Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas, see Biardeau, EMH (V), p. 100. The names Hāstinapura
(‘City of the Elephant’) and Indraprastha (‘Residence of Indra’) reflect the same divided
sovereignty. The image of unity would be that of Indra riding his elephant. Furthermore
the Pāṇḍavas are connected with Indra, the Kauravas with nāgas (snakes, elephants).
5 Compare Jacob Neusner, ‘Map without Territory: Mishnah’s System of Sacrifice and
Sanctury;’ History of Religions, Vol. XIX (1979), pp. 103–127, discussing the Mishnah
as a symbolic map that serves to replace the lost temple. The analogy with Mathurā
as Kṛsṇ ̣a’s ‘lost city’ (to be discussed below) is striking, especially considering the
contemporaneity of the two traditions and the fundamentally similar response—even
though one is ritualized and the other mythicized—to what is in fact the same historical
continuum. This essay owes a debt to Neusner’s stimulating article.
kṛṣṇa at mathurā 537
able, probably unhistorical, or dismissably fanciful. Rather, we must
attempt to integrate the development of cults with the early texts, and
not just with the appearance in the latter of certain names and iso-
lated sectarian interpolations (like the Nārāyaṇīya). More than this,
we must seek out the relation between the early evidence of cults and
the central narratives of the early texts, and particularly the images
yielded in the latter of such things as cities, gods, and heroes.
1. Kṛsṇ ̣a and Mathurā
Mathurā is at the center of the Krṣ ṇ ̣a story, but Krṣ ṇ ̣a is not in Mathurā.
Upon this paradox, in its various expressions and ramifications, more
than a century of scholarship has constructed for us its image of multiple
Krṣ ṇ ̣as. This is not the place to account for them all. I have tried to
do this for most of them elsewhere.6 Suffice it to say that the analytical
atomists continue to do their work, and that, despite determined efforts
to keep the list short, the reductions to two, three, or four Krṣ ṇ ̣as are
never quite identical. There is inevitable overlap, and no two scholars
apply the scalpel in exactly the same way. Now, the city of Mathurā
is consistently found on several of the lines of dissection. Born in
Mathurā as a Κsạ triya, Krṣ ṇ ̣a is taken away to Vraja to be raised as a
cowherd, and returns to Mathurā as a cowherd to recover his identity
as a Κsạ triya. Does Mathurā then belong to ‘Krṣ ṇ ̣a the cowherd,’ or to
‘Krṣ ṇ ̣a the Ksạ triya,’ or again to the ‘pastoral demigod’ or ‘folk deity,’
or to the ‘divinized’ ksạ triya hero? Since both the Mahābhārata and
the Harivaṃśa tell of his conflicts with king Jarāsaṃdha of Magadha,
does one connect Kṛsṇ ̣a’s resultant flight from Mathurā to Dvārakā
with the ‘earlier’ epic Kṛsṇ ̣a (who operates entirely from Dvārakā),
or with the ‘later popular’ Krṣ ṇ ̣a of the Harivaṃśa and the Vaisṇ ̣ava
Purāṇas (texts in which Dvārakā stories proliferate)? And because the
texts have him spend most of his youth in Vraja and most of his adult-
hood in Dvārakā, does this, along with the relative paucity of iconic
representations of Krṣ ṇ ̣a in and around Mathurā during the period of
the formation of these texts (i.e., prior to the Gupta period),7 provide
6 See Hiltebeitel, ‘Kṛsṇ ̣a in the Mahābhārata: A Bibliographical Study,’ Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Vol. LXI (1979), pp. 65–107.
7 This is a conventional dating for the Mahābhārata. Datings for the Harivaṃśa
vary widely; see Daniel H. H. Ingalls, ‘The Harivaṃśa as a Mahākāvya,’ in Melanges
538 chapter nineteen
evidence that ‘his association with Mathurā is but a fleeting one,’ that
‘it provides but an entrance and an exit,’ and that a strong identification
of Mathurā and its surroundings with Krṣ ṇ ̣a is but a recent sixteenth
century phenomenon?8
The weight of this scholarly dismemberment should give us pause.
But not much. The assumptions on which it has been carried off are
too fragile. If I may be excused for echoing some positions of Mad-
eleine Biardeau,9 the matter may be stated as follows. The persistent
hypothesis of Ābhīra or other ‘folk’ origins for a separate ‘cowherd god’
cycle is completely arbitrary and unconvincing. The Mahābhārata and
Harivaṃśa are not antithetical texts. Both can be assumed minimally
to reflect oral (and perhaps also written) traditions which would have
developed concurrently, at least for a while, in the pre-Gupta (includ-
ing the Kusạ̄ ṇa) period. Without presenting them in narrative form,
the Mahābhārata is well aware of stories of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s childhood as a
cowherd;10 and the Harivaṃśa is constructed with the Mahābhārata
story in full view.11 The Critical Editions of these texts are of very little
use in stratifying and dissecting Kṛsṇ ̣a’s biography.12 Certainly neither
text yields the slightest convincing grounds for reconstructing origi-
nally separate identities, a ‘gradual divinization’ of Kṛsṇ ̣a, or for that
matter ‘traces’ of his ‘prior humanity’—the flight from Jarāsaṃdha
d’Indianisme à la mémoire de Louis Renou, Paris 1968, pp. 381–394 (first to third cen-
tury A.D.) and Charlotte Vaudeville, ‘Aspects du mythe de Kṛsṇ ̣a-Gopāla dans l’Inde
ancienne,’ in the same Renou Festschrift, p. 753 (eighth to tenth century). I would
favor something close to the earlier dates, but the important point is the material from
which the Harivaṃśa draws must be pre-Gupta. See now Couture 1996, 135–36, lean-
ing toward “an earlier date than one usually assumed.”
8 Charlotte Vaudeville, ‘Braj, Lost and Found,’ Indo-Iranian Journal, Vol. XVIII
(1976), pp. 198, 199, and passim.
9 For the full discussion, see Biardeau, EMH (V), pp. 204–237.
10 See Sadashiva L. Katre, ‘Kṛsṇ ̣a, Gopas, Gopīs, and Rādhā,’ in H. L. Hariyappa
and M. M. Patkar, eds., Professor P. K. Gode Commemoration Volume, Poona, 1960,
part 3, pp. 83–85; Bimanbehari Majumdar, Kṛsṇ ̣a in History and Legend, Calcutta,
1969, pp. 49–57.
11 Biardeau, EMH (V), p. 217. The Harivaṃśa abounds in references to the forth-
coming events of the Mahābhārata.
12 In making citations, the Critical Editions of the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa
are used, but for the Harivaṃśa (which needs even more to be studied as a fluid
tradition) I have used the edition of the Citrashala Press. I do not suggest that certain
episodes concerning Kṛsṇ ̣a may not be later than others: see Hiltebeitel, ‘The Burning
of the Forest Myth,’ in Bardwell L. Smith, ed., Hinduism: New Essays in the History
of Religions, Leiden, 1976, pp. 208–224; idem, ‘Draupadī’s Garments,’ Indo-Iranian
Journal; Vol. XXII (1980), pp. 98–101; but there is nothing to indicate that one can
eliminate whole ‘cycles.’
kṛṣṇa at mathurā 539
notwithstanding. ‘Contradictions’ between the human and the divine,
the ksạ triya and the cowherd, are in the minds of scholars. They
are certainly not derivable from the texts or the early iconography.
Indeed, to put the matter briefly, what has been persistently resisted
and obscured by the various strains of atomistic scholarship is that
the stories are rooted in theology, cult, and myth, that their material
is presented primarily in terms of symbols, and that the image of theo-
logical unity toward which these symbols point must be understood
before any analysis of the materials into components can be seriously
attempted.
I have never been convinced by these atomization of Kṛsṇ ̣a, and,
more generally, have never subscribed to the view that gods are made,
as it were, with lego blocks. But until recently no convincing argument
had been raised for the effective unity of the figure, including my own—
suggested rather despairingly—that ‘from the standpoint of compara-
tive mythology, a [royal] childhood in the country is a commonplace.’13
The situation now has changed, thanks to Biardeau. The solution is
astonishingly simple, and requires accepting no more than two highly
defensible arguments. First, the problem is not to find separate origins
for ‘contradictory’ aspects of a composite Kṛsṇ ̣a, but to understand why
his essentially unitary biography is largely split in two; that is, why it is
found in two texts, the earlier Mahābhārata and the later Harivaṃśa,
And second, one must reconcile oneself to the fact that both texts are
rooted in the same theology: Kṛsṇ ̣a is an avatāra of Visṇ ̣u-Nārāyaṇa.14
Drawing these two arguments together, Biardeau writes: ‘Everything
passes as if, having given scene to an avatāra in the epic to have him
serve the model of the ideal king (Arjuna), one must then show him
13 Hiltebeitel, ‘Kṛsṇ ̣a in the Mahābhārata,’ n. 194; I allow myself to introduce this
bracketed ‘royal,’ because with it the comparative point can still be made. See also Jan
de Vries, Heroic Song and Heroic Legend, London, 1963 (the pattern of ‘the youth of
the hero threatened’). Arguing for the unity of the Kṛsṇ ̣a figure from different angles,
see A. D. Pusalkar, Studies in the Epics and Purāṇas, Bombay, 1963, pp. 94–96 and
109–110; Vishnu S. Sukthankar, On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata, Bombay, 1957,
passim (see especially pp. 5, 94–95).
14 Atomists, of course, resist identifying Kṛsṇ ̣a as an avatāra in the epic, and more
particularly in the Gītā. There may be stages in the use of the term, and of its theological
and mythological precision, but the myth in the Mahābhārata of the unburdening of the
earth, Arjuna’s references to Krṣ ṇ ̣a in the Gītā as Visṇ ̣u, plus the whole Nara-Nārāyaṇa
theme in the epic are, in my mind, indissoluble facets of the avatāra theology. On the
unburdening of the earth, see Hiltebeitel, ‘Draupadī’s Garments,’ p. 103 and n. 30;
on the place of the Gītā in me epic, see Hiltebeitel, Ritual of Battle, pp. 114–128, and
n. 21. The avataraṇa theme clearly pervades the Harivaṃśa.
540 chapter nineteen
such as he is himself, avatāra in full status, acting by himself as avatāra
instead of effacing himself before the epic king.’15 This perspective of
course abolishes the ‘contradiction’ between a human Kṛsṇ ̣a and one
‘gradually divinized.’ But more than this, Biardeau is able to present
a resolution to the ‘contradiction’ between the Ksạ triya and the cow-
herd. The latter identity does not derive from separate pastoral origins.
It is simply the Ksạ triya Kṛsṇ ̣a’s bucolic disguise: ‘Just as the epic has
dressed the Pāṇḍavas in disguises that reveal their real character as
much as they hide it, so the Harivaṃśa will invent for Kṛsṇ ̣a and his
brother a form of clandestinity which will symbolically unveil their
true identity.’16
The word ‘invent’ may be too strong, for as Biardeau further dem-
onstrates, the epic Kṛsṇ ̣a is not without important associations with
cows and cowherds. First there is the epic’s frequent use of the name
Govinda, of which the ‘cow’ element is incontestable. Second, when
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s sister Subhadrā removes the garments of a princess to appear
before Draupadī as a servant-cowgirl (1.213.16), she subordinates her-
self to Draupadī as Kṛsṇ ̣a does to Arjuna, and in doing so takes on
the same disguise as Kṛsṇ ̣a’s. Third, Kṛsṇ ̣a gives the Pāṇḍavas cows
from Mathurā after Subhadrā’s wedding with Arjuna (1.213.41–42).
And fourth, while he helps the Pāṇḍavas in battle as a non-combat-
ant, his troops—the so-called Nārāyaṇa Gopās—fight for the Kaura-
vas. Biardeau is surely correct in seeing these ‘warrior-cowherds’ as
a prolongation of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s own person, materializing his own omni-
presence on the battlefield.17 And most suggestive is her notice of
the description of the Gopā-Nārāyaṇas as gokule nitya-saṃvṛddhāḥ
(8.4.39), ‘ever raised in Gokula,’ no matter whether that term indi-
cates an unspecified camp of cowherds, or, more specifically, the one
15 Biardeau, EMH (V), p. 218.
16 Biardeau, EMH (V), p. 212; note also that Biardeau shows that both ‘periods in
disguise’ are expressed in terms and themes of the dīksạ̄ , the ‘consecration’ preparatory
to a sacrifice. On this latter, see Biardeau, EMH (V), pp. 187–200, and Hiltebeitel, ‘Śiva,
the Goddess, and Disguises,’ pp. 149, 159, 168–174.
17 Their main role is as part of the group of Saṃśaptakas who keep Arjuna from
protecting his and Subhadrā’s son Abhimanyu (i.e., Kṛsṇ ̣a’s own nephew). The impli-
cation that Kṛsṇ ̣a thus manipulates the death of Abhimanyu is affirmed from another
angle in south Indian versions of the story, in which Kṛsṇ ̣a engineers Abhimanyu’s
death because the latter is a rāksạ sa incarnate (oral information from Tindivanam,
Tamilnadu, and from Martha Ashton concerning Karnataka).
kṛṣṇa at mathurā 541
of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s upbringing.18 There are also other epic passages oriented in
this same direction.
As if sporting, Janārdana, soul of beings, keeps the earth, atmosphere, and
heaven running. Having made the Pāṇḍavas his pretext, and as if beguiling
the world, he wishes to burn your deluded sons (the Kauravas) who are
disposed toward adharma. By his self’s yoga, the Lord Keśava tirelessly
keeps the Wheel of Time, the Wheel of the Universe, and the Wheel of the
Yugas revolving (kālacakraṃ jagaccakraṃ yugacakraṃ . . . parivartayate).
I tell you truly, the Lord alone is ruler of Time and Death, and of the
mobile and the immobile. Yet ruling the whole universe, the great yogin
Hari undertakes to perform acts like a powerless peasant (kīnāśa iva
durbalaḥ; 5.66.10–14).
Kināśa, cultivator of the soil, peasant, evokes the agriculturalist more
than the pastoralist, but the Indian tiller of the fields no doubt stands
behind his bullock. Here too the ‘disguise’ theme is implicit, and the the-
ology and cosmology, as we shall see, most informative. And one must
wonder at the description of the attendance upon Krṣ ṇ ̣a as he wakes up,
after the war, in one of the Pāṇḍavas’ palaces at Hāstinapura:
Then, sweet voiced practiced singers who knew the Vedic hymns and
Purāṇas praised Vāsudeva, the All-Maker, Lord of Creatures. Hand clap-
pers recited as singers sang. Conchs and various drums were sounded
by thousands. And the exceedingly delightful sound of viṇas, cymbals,
and bamboo flutes (veṇu), spread like laughter, was heard throughout
his abode. (12.53.3–5).
What have we here if not an evocation of pūjā (what is an abode where
god is a guest if not a temple?), a seeming forerunner of the kīrtan or
bhajan, and a possible allusion to an earlier-than-expected connection
between Krṣ ṇ ̣a and the flute? Add to these points the well recognized
allusions to Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s youth and cowherd status which remain unshakably
in the Critical Edition,19 and one must agree that, even if a full account of
Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s pastoral childhood cannot be assumed, the epic already appeals
to a cowherd complement of this type.
The Harivaṃśa, then, merely brings this to completion by telling the
story of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s disguise, his līlā or krīḍa, in full. He is gopavesạ visṇ ̣u,
‘Visṇ ̣u in the guise of a cowherd’ (HV 2.25.21); he and Balarāma are
18 This summarizes Biardeau’s analysis in EMH (V), pp. 205–209. She also cites
an unpublished dissertation by André Couture, ‘Kṛsṇ ̣a-Gopāla, Avatāra de Visṇ ̣u,’
Paris, 1977.
19 See above n. 10.
542 chapter nineteen
gopavesạ vibhūsịtau, ‘adorned in the guise of cowherds’ (HV 2.27.40).
Having seen Kṛsṇ ̣a hold up Mount Govardhana, the bewildered cow-
herds ask: ‘To what end do you sport among us, wretchedly in the
guise of a cowherd? Like one of the Lokapālas, why do you protect
the cows?’20 To which, as Biardeau perceives, there is an answer. As a
ksạ triya he disguises an identity as a protector of cows.21 As a cowherd
he disguises an identity as a Ksạ triya. And when he lifts Mount Gov-
ardhana, he reveals the divine dimensions of both ‘disguises,’ Indra
acknowledging: ‘You have attained lordship of cows, thus people will
extol you as Govinda’ (tvaṃ gavām indra gataḥ govinda iti lokās tvaṃ
stosỵ anti; HV 2.19.45). ‘Lordship of cows’ is not only a bucolic and
royal title but a divine title. Indra indicates that it ranks Kṛsṇ ̣a as para-
mount lord (Indra) above himself, and one cannot help but suspect
that it represents for Kṛsṇ ̣a-Visṇ ̣u an auspicious counterpart to Śiva’s
title of Paśupati.22
To put the matter briefly, then, there is no true contradiction between
Kṛsṇ ̣a the cowherd and Kṛsṇ ̣a the Ksạ triya. And the elaboration of the
cowherd narrative in the Harivaṃśa builds upon well established epic
symbols, themes, and allusions concerning Kṛsṇ ̣a’s ‘cowherd’ dimen-
sion. This is not to deny that later bhakti traditions have favored and
further elaborated the cowherd dimension.23 It is merely to argue that
the early texts provide no ground for supposing that their original
source was a separate pastoral ‘folk’ tradition.
The resolution of this perennial problem has many implications for
understanding Kṛsṇ ̣a at Mathurā. Clearly the city is no mere ‘entrance
20 kimarthaṃ gopavesẹ ṇa ramase ‘smasu garhitaṃ lokapālopamaścaiva gāstvaṃ kiṃ
pariraksạ si (HV 2.20.7).
21 Biardeau perceptively cites here the ancient Indian associations between the king
and cows, and Arjuna’s protection of cows in the Virātạ parvan. It should be noted that
Arjuna protects the cows also while in disguise, and that Bhīma (as govikartṛ; 4.2.7)
and Sahadeva (as watcher of Virātạ ’s herds) also take on disguises that involve rapports
with cattle; see Hiltebeitel, ‘Śiva, the Goddess, and Disguises,’ pp. 168–173.
22 On the inauspicious character of this title, see Hiltebeitel, ‘The Indus Valley
“Proto-Śiva”, Reexamined through Reflections on the Goddess, the Buffalo, and the
Symbolism of vāhanas,’ Anthropos, Vol. LXXIII (1978), pp. 769–770, and idem, ‘Śiva,
the Goddess, and Disguises,’ pp. 173–174. One may also note that Kṛsṇ ̣a’s killing of
Kaṃsa is preceded by the killings of Arisṭạ and Keśī. This bull-horse-man sequence is
most likely an echo of the culminating three of the five paśu suitable for Vedic sacrifice.
This may help explain why the Keśīvadha is singled out in the epic as one of the few
episodes from Kṛsṇ ̣a’s childhood alluded to; see S. Sörensen, An Index to the Names
in the Mahābhārata, Delhi, 1963, p. 423.
23 See Biardeau, EMH(V), pp. 236–237 (‘Et le Veṇugopāla?’).
kṛṣṇa at mathurā 543
and exit point.’ His association with it is more than ‘fleeting.’ And it
belongs neither to Kṛsṇ ̣a the Ksạ triya nor Kṛsṇ ̣a the cowherd precisely
because it belongs to both. Here we must turn to Mathurā’s symbolic
significance. In the Mahābhārata, Kṛsṇ ̣a recalls the happiness of his
people at Mathurā (2.13.45), his having to ‘abandon Mathurā for fear
of Jarāsaṃdha’ (13.65), and his people’s remembrance of the Middle
Country (smaranto madhyamaṃ deśam; 13.59), incontestably an allu-
sion to their experience at Mathurā. And in the Harivaṃśa, even more
explicitly, it is asked by Janamejaya, the Kuru heir:
To what end did the slayer of Madhu abandon Mathurā, that (zebu’s)
hump of the Middle Country, the safe abode of Laksṃ ī, easily perceived
as the horn of the earth, rich in money and grain, abounding in water,
rich in Āryas, the choicest of residences?24
The symbolism here has certain obvious associations with Visṇ ̣u, sug-
gesting that the absence is in a sense only apparent.25 It is the sole
abode of Śrī-Laksṃ ī, Visṇ ̣u’s wife. If the Middle Country is a cow or
bull, Mathurā—where the ‘Lord of Cows’ was born and from which he
retains cows to bring to the Pāṇḍavas even after moving to Dvārakā—is
its hump. It is the ‘horn’ (sṛnġ a) of the earth, evoking the many associa-
tions of Krṣ ṇ ̣a and Visṇ ̣u with the horn, including Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s Śārnġ a bow
and the ekaśrṇ ġ a with which Visṇ ụ uplifts the earth as Varāha, the boar.26
In fact, we may ask whether the term refers to Mathurā as the midpoint
of the earth, or as the horn by which the earth will again—through the
Mahābhārata war—be rescued from sinking into the ocean. And the
combination of the name Madhusūdana with Mathurā points to a con-
nection between the stories of Mathurā being founded in the forest of
the asura Madhu (to be discussed further), Visṇ ̣u slaying another asura
by that name after waking from his yoganidrā, his cosmic yoga-sleep,27
and another of Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s names, Mādhava.
24 kimarthaṃ ca parityajya mathurāṃ madhusūdanaḥ/madhyadeśasya kakudaṃ
dhāma laksṃ yāśca kevalam//śṛṅga pṛthivyāḥ svālaksỵ aṃ prabhūtadhānadhanyavat/
āryāḍhyajalabhūyisṭạ m adhisṭḥ ānavarottamam (HV 2.57.2–3).
25 See above, n. 5.
26 See Michel Defourny, ‘Note sue le symbolisme de la corne dans le Mahābhārata
et la mythologie brahmanique classique,’ Indo-Iranian Journal, Vol. XVIII (1976),
pp. 17–23.
27 These myths are known to both the Mahābhārata and Harivaṃśa and, with the
exception of the lifting up of the earth (see above, n. 14), will be discussed further
below.
544 chapter nineteen
One thus gets the impression that both texts evoke close connec-
tions between Kṛsṇ ̣a and Mathurā, connections which have been
ruptured, but not irremediably. This is, of course, less explicit in the
Mahābhārata than the Harivaṃśa, but even in the former text, where
Kṛsṇ ̣a remains entirely in Dvārakā, it is evident that his actions reflect
the fate of Mathurā and Madhyadeśa, the Middle Country.28 As to the
Harivaṃśa, one cannot miss the strong ceremonial, mythical, and
theological overtones with which Kṛsṇ ̣a’s three entries of Mathurā are
described. When he enters Mathurā to kill Kaṃsa, it is to participate
in Kaṃsa’s bow festival (HV 2.27–32). And when, prior to his final
departure for Dvārakā, he returns to Mathurā twice after indecisive
victories over Jarāsaṃdha, he is welcomed as a god, the first time along
with Balarāma (HV 2.45), the second alone (HV 2.55.53–63), having
just been given a divinely ordered abhisẹ ka consecrating him this time
as paramount among human kings (rajendra; HV 2.50–55). I would
suggest that these ‘returns’ are cast in the royal imagery of temple
festivals, and also as events of symbolic and theological dimensions.
The city of Mathurā personified comes down (ava-tṛ) from Heaven to
honor him (HV 2.55.85). And in the words of the citizens of Mathurā
as they welcome Kṛsṇ ̣a’s last return, just prior to his settling at Dvārakā
(which is at the moment being scouted out for him by Garuḍa): ‘He is
Nārāyaṇa, the abode of Śrī living in the milk ocean; leaving his serpent
couch he has come to Mathurā city.’29 In fact, I would suggest that
this latter verse tells us something not only about Mathurā, but about
Dvārakā. Are there not echoes in all the associations of Mathurā with
the term madhu of the connection between the madhu as drink (mead,
honey drink, Soma, etc.) and the theme of the bestowal of sovereignty,
śrī? Such associations are well established in India, and have Indo-
European roots.30 If, as we have seen above, Mathurā is regarded as the
‘safe abode of Śrī-Laksṃ ī,’ does this not help to explain the necessity
of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s connection with it, for it is he who bestows sovereignty on
28 See J.A.B. van Buitenen, ed. and trans., The Mahābhārata, I: The Book of the Begin-
ning, Chicago, 1973, Introduction, pp. 8–13, perceiving Kṛsṇ ̣a’s geopolitical motives as
centered on his concern for Mathurā.
29 esạ nārāyaṇaḥ śrīmān ksṛ īrārṇavaniketanaḥ/nāgaparyaṅkamutsṛjya prāpto ‘yaṃ
mathurāṃ purīm (HV 2.55.60).
30 See Madeleine Biardeau, ‘Comptes Rendus des Conferences,’ École Pratique des
Hautes Etudes, 5th Section, Religious Sciences, Annuaire, Vol. LXXXIII (1975), pp.
109–110; Georges Dumézil, The Destiny of a King, Chicago 1973, pp. 70–129; Hiltebeitel,
Ritual of Battle, pp. 143–191, 203–206, 222–228.
kṛṣṇa at mathurā 545
the Pāṇḍavas.31 And as to Dvārakā, the ‘City of Gates’ redeemed from
the ocean, is this not but an evocation of Visṇ ̣u on the cosmic waters,
indeed, of Visṇ ̣u as he wakes from his cosmic sleep, grants boons,
and slays Madhu and Kaitạ bha to earn the name Madhusūdana? Else-
where I have argued for this connection already.32 In the epic, when
Kṛsṇ ̣a wakes from his bedside at Dvārakā to begin the culmination of
his earthly mission, the unburdening of the earth at Kuruksẹ tra, he
grants boons to Arjuna (his service as charioteer) and Duryodhana
(the Nārāyaṇa Gopās), and thus lays the groundwork for his ‘omni-
presence’ during the great slaughter to come. We can thus perceive
the mythical and theological necessity for Kṛsṇ ̣a’s dual residence at
Mathurā and Dvārakā.
If the Harivaṃśa has introduced the entrances of Mathurā into
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s biography in terms that evoke Kṛsṇ ̣a bhakti, and if the
Mahābhārata, as we have already seen, shows similar motives in vari-
ous narrative passages, it must be noted that the epic is more restrained
when it comes to highlighting Mathurā. It is Kṛsṇ ̣a’s absence that is
most important there. Kṛsṇ ̣a never returns to Mathurā from Dvārakā
in the Mahābhārata, and though he tells of the killing of Kaṃsa, there
is no description of his entry into the city (see 2.13.33).33 But the
Mahābhārata does have its symbolic context for Mathurā, and ulti-
mately, as we shall see, it is probably again one that evokes themes
of bhakti. Here we must look more closely at that second nodal point
(after the childhood cycle) in the connection between Kṛsṇ ̣a and
Mathurā: his flight from Jarāsaṃdha. In this instance we are not deal-
ing with the ‘contradiction’ between cowherd and Ksạ triya, but with
the scene that is most often regarded as the surest sign of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s
humanity prior to ‘divinization.’34 That line of inquiry, however, can
only lead to bafflement. How to explain the divinization of a loser, a
31 This applies in a number of senses: his roles in the marriages of Draupadī and
Subhadrā, at the Rājasūya, and in the war.
32 Hiltebeitel, Ritual of Battle, pp. 102–107. Compare now the waking scene cited
earlier in this essay.
33 Biardeau, EMH (V), pp. 224–225, regards the entry to kill Kaṃsa in the Harivaṃśa
as modelled on that of Girivraja in the Mahābhārata.
34 See Christian Lassen, Indische Altertumskunde, Osnabrück 1968, Vol. I, Part 2,
pp. 758 and 823; Adolf Holzmann, Das Mahābhārata und seine Theile, Kiel 1892–1895,
Vol. II, pp. 48–49; Edward Washburn Hopkins, Epic Mythology, New York 1969,
pp. 215–216; Walter Ruben, Krishna: Konkordanz und Kommentar der Motive seines
Heldenlebens, Istanbul 1944, pp. 6, 137, 211–216; S. N. Tadpatrikar, ‘The Kṛsṇ ̣a Prob-
lem,’ Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Vol. X (1929), pp. 269–320;
546 chapter nineteen
Ksạ triya who flees from battle! There is a contradiction! The answer
must lie elsewhere.
2. The Flight from Jarāsaṃdha
Once again Biardeau has laid the groundwork:35 It is the Jarāsaṃdha
episode that links the Kṛsṇ ̣a of the Mahābhārata with the Kṛsṇ ̣a of
the Harivaṃśa. First, the Jarāsaṃdha episode is greatly elaborated and
treated somewhat differently in the latter text, but with a clear view
to its being an essential part of the Mahābhārata story.36 Secondly,
whereas the story of Kaṃsa culminates Krṣ ṇ ̣a’s career as avatāra acting
independently,37 the story of Jarāsaṃdha forms ‘the mythic introduc-
tion to the entire problematic of the Mahābhārata,’ 38 in which Krṣ ṇ ̣a
subordinates himself to the Pāṇḍavas.
The slaying of Jarāsaṃdha in the Mahābhārata is necessary, accord-
ing to Kṛsṇ ̣a, if Yudhisṭḥ ira is to perform the Rājasūya, the consecra-
tion to royal paramountcy (sarṃrājya). Jarāsaṃdha is Yudhisṭḥ ira’s
only rival for this suzerainty, and—according to the epic—he has
imprisoned eighty-six kings in an ‘enclosure for men’ (purusạ vraja;
2.13.64) at Girivraja, the future Rājagṛha, in Magadha. This is being
done in preparation for a sacrifice of a hundred kings to Śiva, that
is, implicitly, a sacrifice of the entire ksạ tra except for his own line,
for, as Kṛsṇ ̣a tells Yudhisṭḥ ira, Jarāsaṃdha sows dissension among
the one hundred and one lineages of the Solar and Lunar dynasties
(2.13.4–8).39 Now, whatever the significance these two lines may have,
it is evident that the epic regards their proper interaction and non-
Sadashiva L. Katre, ‘Kṛsṇ ̣a and Jarāsaṃdha,’ Indian Historical Quarterly, Vol. XIII
(1932), pp. 500–508, and idem, Vol. IX (1933), pp. 854–865.
35 Biardeau, EMH (V), pp. 221–235.
36 A heavenly voice keeps stopping Balarāma from killing Jarāsaṃdha (HV 2.36.29;
43. 72–73), saying his death is ordained to occur at another’s (i.e. Bhīma’s) hands.
37 The Harivaṃśa keeps remarking on the paradoxical character of Kṛsṇ ̣a’s appear-
ances alone in contrast with his appearances with allies, and of his appearances
with and without a city. He and his foes both know that he is truly most dangerous
when he is alone, and when there is no king for him to subordinate himself to (HV
2.49.20–22; 50.15–17; 51.40). This theme is also played out in his theophany before
Duryodhana in the Kaurava court (in the Mahābhārata); see Hiltebeitel, Ritual of
Battle, pp. 120–128.
38 Biardeau, EMH (V), p. 235.
39 See Biardeau, EMH (V), pp. 225–226.
kṛṣṇa at mathurā 547
contention as essential for proper rule and the sustenance of dharma.40
Yet Jarāsaṃdha threatens the abolition of this order, and, more than
this, he comes from outside Madhyadeśa, the very Middle Country
which Kṛsṇ ̣a and his people ‘remember’ from Dvārakā and of which
Mathurā, according to the Harivaṃśa, is the zebu’s ‘hump.’ We must
thus remind ourselves of certain features of the symbolic geography
of the Mahābhārata.
Although the term Madhyadeśa has considerable flexibility in the
Indian tradition as a whole, the Mahābhārata and Purāṇas give a basi-
cally consistent picture.41 It is the terrain from which the dharma is
upheld: says Karṇa, ‘Those who are situated away from the Himavat and
apart from the Gaṅgā, Yamunā, Sarasvatī, and also Kuruksẹ tra . . . are
impure (aśūcīn) and beyond the pale of dharma’ (dharmabāhyān;
8.30.10–11).42 But those around the Gaṅgā-Yamunā Doab represent
the opposite: ‘Among the Matsyas and those of the Kuru-Pāñcāla
countries, among the Naimisạ s, the Cedis, and others who are distin-
guished, the good (santaḥ) uphold the ancient dharma’ (8.30.62–63).
As I argued elsewhere, the Mahābhārata war represents a reasser-
tion of the center over against the periphery. It is the Pāṇḍavas who
come to ally themselves with the above named forces of Madhyadeśa,
whereas the Kauravas ally themselves primarily with the kings from
the outlying regions.43
Now, these oppositions are prefigured and reversed in the saṃrājya
of Jarāsaṃdha. In the Mahābhārata, Jarāsaṃdha’s allies in his attacks
on Mathurā are—with the exception of Śiśupāla of Cedi, whom Kṛsṇ ̣a
will kill and replace with a Pāṇḍava ally—all from outside Madhyadeśa.
And those whom he puts to flight toward the west include not only
Kṛsṇ ̣a’s people from around Mathurā, but the Pāñcālas and the Mat-
syas, two of the Pāṇḍavas’ most important allies in the upcoming war.
Jarāsaṃdha’s saṃrājya is thus one which puts the forces of the center,
the mainstay of dharma, to flight—all, that is, except the Kauravas and
Pāṇḍavas. In the Harivaṃśa, in fact, Jarāsaṃdha includes Duryodhana
and his brothers among his allies (HV 2.34.20).44 And there, when he
40 Biardeau, EMH (V), p. 234.
41 See D. C. Sircar, Cosmography and Geography in Early Indian Literature, Calcutta
1967, pp. 71–73.
42 Karṇa refers to Bāhlīkas of the Punjab, but his geography is typical of the epic.
43 See Hiltebeitel, Ritual of Battle, pp. 273–279.
44 On this and the above, see Biardeau, EMH (V), p. 226.
548 chapter nineteen
besieges Kṛsṇ ̣a at Mathurā and Mount Gomanta, all the great kings
of the Mahābhārata are at his disposal, future allies of the Kauravas
and Pāṇḍavas (who are the only ones noticeably absent) alike. Here
the kings’ imprisonment seems to be no more than their service to
Jarāsaṃdha; there is no mention of the impending sacrifice to Śiva, or
of a majority of the ksạ tra being retained at Girivraja.
We are now in a position to look more closely at the place of Mathurā
in this scheme. Mathurā is, of course, at the heart of Madhyadeśa.
Both the Mahābhārata and the Harivaṃśa emphasize this strongly.
Yet it is caught up in a most suggestive net of alliances. Through
Kaṃsa’s marriage to Jarāsaṃdha’s daughters Asti and Prāpti (2.13.30;
HV 2.34.4–6), Mathurā is allied with Girivraja, the future Rājagṛha,
in Magadha. More anciently, according to the Harivaṃśa and the
Rāmāyaṇa (HV 1.54.21–56; 2.37.28–29; 38.39–42; Rām 7.52–63), the
city of Mathurā was founded by Śatrughna, brother of Rāma Dāśarathi,
after he slew Lavaṇa who had, till then, protected the site known as
the Madhu forest after it was bestowed on him by Madhu, his father.
Though Madhu is in both texts a Dānava, his son Lavaṇa is in the
Rāmāyaṇa both Dānava and Rāksạ sa: his mother (Madhu’s wife) is
the Rāksạ sī Kumbhanīsī, and Rāvaṇa is his ‘maternal aunt’s brother’
(see Rām 6.7.7 and 7.60.14), that is, a brother of Kumbhanīsī as well.
In any case, Lavaṇa is a rather close relative, a distant ally, and clearly
an ‘understudy of Rāvaṇa.’45 This is a curious triangulation, and at the
risk of bypassing the perennial debate on the whereabouts of Laṅkā,
I would venture that in the Vālmīki-Rāmāyaṇa at least, Laṅkā refers
to Śri-Laṅkā/Ceylon, and, moreover, that among its many symbolic
connections, the poet associates it with Buddhism.46 I would further
argue that by the time of the composition of the Mahābhārata, the
same would be likely for Girivraja-Rājagṛha, with its caitya peak
which Kṛsṇ ̣a, Arjuna, and Bhīma destroy—disguised as brahmans!—
upon entering the city on their way to killing Jarāsaṃdha (2.19.2, 17
and 41). Girivraja and Rājagṛha are of course prominent in the early
history of both Buddhism and Jainism, and a center of early Bud-
dhist kings—most notably Bimbisāra and Ajātaśatru—whose throne
45 Hopkins, Epic Mythology, p. 43.
46 To argue this would be out of place here. Let me just note that Rāvaṇa is opposed
most directly not to Rāma, but to the traditional Vedic Ṛsịs, for whom Rāma is but
an agent. It may be that Rāvaṇa’s conversion to Buddhism in the Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra
(ca. 300 A.D.) merely makes official an already implicit theme.
kṛṣṇa at mathurā 549
supposedly descends from Jarāsaṃdha (see e.g. Visṇ ̣u Purāṇa 4.23).
And the region of Magadha is later the base of the first great Buddhist
emperor, Aśoka. But most curious are the names of Jarāsaṃdha’s two
daughters—Asti and Prāpti—whom he marries to Kaṃsa. It is these
two women who prompt their father’s revenge against Kṛsṇ ̣a for the
slaying of Kaṃsa. Unusual names for Indian girls, they both evoke
prominent features of Sarvāstivādin Buddhism: Asti (sarvam asti, the
phrase which gives the school its name) and Prāpti (‘obtention,’ the
Sarvāstivādin ‘pseudo-soul’). No other explanation for their names
seems likely.
From here it is but a short step to completing this triangulation,
and suggesting that Kṛsṇ ̣a’s absence from Mathurā is symbolically con-
nected not only with his need to operate in the epic from Dvārakā, but
with the prominence in Mathurā during a period of the Mahābhārata’s
composition of both Jainism and Buddhism,47 and again, more par-
ticularly, of its associations with Buddhism during the Kusạ̄ ṇa period
under the other great Buddhist emperor Kanisḳ a.48 Indeed, once
again reinforcing the symbolic character of these stories, we see the
Harivaṃśa quadrangulating the network of pseudo-historical forces
pitched against the Aryandom of Mathurā. In that text Jarāsaṃdha’s
last hope of defeating Kṛsṇ ̣a is Kālayavana, the ‘Black Greek’ or ‘Greek
of Time.’ Like a number of Jarāsaṃdha’s allies,49 Kālayavana is a
pseudo-Kṛsṇ ̣a, the son of an Apsaras disguised as a Gopī and named
Gopalī (gopalī tvapsarās tatra gopastrīvesạ dhariṇī; HV 2.57.14)! As he
assumes power, he takes leadership over such ‘barbarian’ (mleccha)
kings as the Śakas, Tukhāras, Daradas, Pahlavas, and others. ‘Encircled
by those dasyus, who were like locusts, with their varied terrible weap-
ons and garments, he turned toward Mathurā.’50 There can be little
doubt that these new forces of opposition are imported into the story
for their symbolic associations. There is no way to connect the Greeks
47 See Ruben, Krishna, p. 288; Vaudeville, ‘Braj,’ pp. 288, 204.
48 Though ruling from Peshawar, Kanisḳ a is said to have placed his son Vāsisḳ a
at Mathurā as his viceroy; J. Allan, T. Wolseley Haig, H. H. Dodwell, The Cambridge
Shorter History of India, New York, 1934, p.79.
49 This, I think, is the main point to be realized about such caricatures as Sṛgāla
Vāsudeva, Puṇḍra Vāsudeva, Śiśupāla, and others. They are not historical challengers
to Kṛsṇ ̣a. in the first two cases for the ‘title’ of Vāsudeva. Rather, they are symbolic
perversions, symbols of divinity unworthy of respect, of pseudo-divinity.
50 sa taiḥ parivṛto rājā dasyubhiḥ śalabhairiva nānāvesạ̄ yudhairbhīmair mathurā-
mabhyavartata (HV 2.57.21).
550 chapter nineteen
and their northwestern ‘allies’ with the actual ‘epic time,’ the ‘heroic
age,’ of the Mahābhārata or Harivaṃśa.51 These sources collapse his-
tory into myth, but do so with a clear sense of a consistent symbolic
geography which identifies Mathurā with the Middle Country, and
its enemies, who threaten this Center from without and within, with
forces that must certainly involve evocations of the great religious and
historical forces—projected onto the distant heroic past—that were
perceived as having eroded the stability of the dharma in this Middle
Country.
With this in mind, I may hopefully be excused some specula-
tions on the figure of Jarāsaṃdha. As we have seen, the Harivaṃśa
provides him with a new ally, Kālayavana, the ‘Black Greek’ or the
‘Greek of Time.’ Either name evokes opposition to Kṛsṇ ̣a, who is of
course ‘black’ and frequently identified with Time. As we have seen,
‘like a peasant’ Kṛsṇ ̣a ‘tirelessly keeps revolving the Wheel of Time,
the Wheel of the Universe, and the Wheel of the Yugas.’ The con-
notation ‘Greek of Time’ is all the more suggestive, because Kaṃsa,
another ally of Jarāsaṃdha, is said to be an incarnation of the asura
Kālanemi (1.55.9 critical apparatus; HV 1.54.64–65), a former vic-
tim of Visṇ ̣u who terrified the gods when he appeared ‘like Time’
(kālasannibham; HV 1.46.58), stepped forth with three strides remind-
ing them of Nārāyaṇa (idem, 59), and was finally dismembered by
Visṇ ̣u with his cakra.52 As Biardeau points out, Kālanemi is synony-
mous with Kālacakra, ‘Wheel of Time.’53 Now Jarāsaṃdha also has a
curious name and story. The name is composed of jarā ‘old age, Time,
decline,’ and sandha, which Biardeau takes in the sense of either ‘pact’
or ‘twilight’ (as in sandhyā).54 The straightforward etymology, how-
ever, which the Mahābhārata uses by introducing a personification
of jarā—the Rāksạ sī Jarā, who unites Jarāsaṃdha’s two halves when
he is born split—is ‘put together by jarā,’ that is, ‘put together by old
age, Time, or decline.’ Now the Buddhist ‘wheel,’ the saṃsāramaṇḍala
or bhāvacakra, is precisely ‘put together by old age and death.’ The
twelve nidānas are drawn into a circle that ‘puts these two together’
with ‘ignorance’: jarā-maraṇam, ‘old age and death,’ with avidyā. But
51 On the notion of an ‘heroic age,’ see Hiltebeitel, Ritual of Battle, pp. 48–59.
52 The full account occurs at HV 1.46.48–48.51.
53 Biardeau, EMH (V), p. 222.
54 Biardeau, EMH (V), p. 227. Biardeau’s interpretation differs from the one sug-
gested here.
kṛṣṇa at mathurā 551
more than this, the Buddhist bhāvacakra is precisely a closed circle,
without periods of crisis and renewal, yugas. That is, it is a circle that
does not admit the intervention of the avatāra who ‘comes into being
from yuga to yuga’ (Bhagavad Gītā 4.8) and ‘tirelessly keeps revolv-
ing the Wheel of Time, the Wheel of the Universe, and the Wheel of
the Yugas.’ Kṛsṇ ̣a’s confrontations with these wheel-evoking foes may
thus represent a confrontation of cosmologies: the bhakti cosmology
of Hinduism which admits ruptures of time—twilights—for the sake
of the world’s renewal, and images of Time without the possibility of
such divine intervention, such as occur in Buddhism and Jainism.
Such remarks are admittedly highly speculative. To close with some-
thing more concrete, it is of the greatest interest that recent schol-
arship has found that the earliest iconic representations of Kṛsṇ ̣a at
Mathurā, probably from the Kusạ̄ ṇa period, show him jointly with
his brother Balarāma and sister Ekānaṃśā. I do not, however, think
that this triad provides grounds for identifying an early ksạ triya
Vāsudeva Kṛsṇ ̣a exempt from associations with a separate cowherd
Gopāla Kṛsṇ ̣a. Actually, one can propose that there is a consistent tri-
adic theological paradigm that gives shape to a variety of combina-
tions and relations in the early Kṛsṇ ̣aite tradition. We are not yet at a
point where we can decipher the significance, or determine an histori-
cal order, of the various triads that persistently crop up in connection
with Kṛsṇ ̣a: Balarāma, Kṛsṇ ̣a, and Ekānaṃśā at Mathurā and Gayā;
Balarāma, Kṛsṇ ̣a, and Subhadrā at Puri55 and, in the Mahābhārata story
at Dvārakā; and Kṛsṇ ̣a-Arjuna (counterpart to Balarāma as Kṛsṇ ̣a’s
inseparable companion), Kṛsṇ ̣a-Vāsudeva, and Kṛsṇ ̣a-Draupadī (to
whom Subhadrā subordinates herself) in the Mahābhārata. In this lat-
ter combination, we are dealing with three of the Mahābhārata’s four
Kṛsṇ ̣as, a designation by which the epic points to some of its deepest
theological mysteries.56 These triads would seem to involve a prismatic
55 See Doris Srinivasan, ‘Early Kṛsṇ ̣a Icons: The Case at Mathurā,’ Kalādarśana:
American Studies in the Art of India, ed. Joanna Williams Delhi etc. 1981; pp. 127–136.
P. L. Gupta, ‘Ekānaṃśā and Her Images,’ Bihar Research Society Journal, Vol. LIV
(1968), pp. 229–244; N. P. Joshi, ‘Ekānaṃśā in Early Kusạ̄ ṇa Art,’ Journal of the Indian
Society of Oriental Art, N.S. (1967/68), pp. 34–36; idem, Iconography of Balarāma, New
Delhi 1979, pp. 26, 30, 51, 75, 83; see also Anncharlott Eschmann, Hermann Kulke,
and Gaya Charan Tripathi, eds., The Cult of Jagannāth and the Regional Tradition of
Orissa, New Delhi 1978, pp. 15, 70, 101, 121–123, 151, 153, 159, 169–98.
56 See Hiltebeitel, Ritual of Battle, pp. 60–76; idem, ‘Draupadī’s Hair,’ Purusạ̄ rtha,
Vol. V (1981), discussing Draupadī in relation to the Goddess.
552 chapter nineteen
set of c omplementary images through which Kṛsṇ ̣a is involved in dif-
ferent yet related contexts, just as today in India divinities are known
through local names and shifting mythical associations. But there is
no way to detach either a cowherd nor a Ksạ triya component from
the whole, or for that matter to identify stages in a process of ‘divini-
zation.’ The iconic images and literary roles reflect the likelihood of
a well diffused cult and mythology well before the pre-Gupta period,
in which the variety of combinations suggests the recognition that no
one grouping, or for that matter anyone locale or text, was meant to
exhaust the theological whole. Moreover, it is important to stress that
it is never a question of an independent deity, but of one always found
in theologically significant combinations, particularly these recurrent
sets of triads.57 In this connection, it is perhaps noteworthy that at
Madurai, the ‘Mathurā of the South’ (Daksịṇa-Mathurā) where Kṛsṇ ̣a
was also popular at a roughly contemporary early period,58 a funda-
mental triad is still the basis of the city’s most prominent festival: the
marriage, during the Cittirai festival, that brings together Śiva with the
sister of Alagar-Visṇ ̣u, Mīnāksị.59 The significance of these and other
triads, and the question of a relationship between them and the textual
traditions of the epics and Harivaṃśa, is a matter that will reward
further investigation.
57 One finds other important associations besides triads (indeed dyads, tetrads, and
pentads) in both early and later Kṛsṇ ̣a literature and iconography, but the triads seem
to have a central place in relation to the emergence of bhakti and temple worship.
58 As Māyōn̠, the ‘Black’; see Biardeau, EMH (V), p. 235, n. 1.
59 See Dennis Hudson, ‘Śiva, Mīnāksị̄, Visṇ ̣u—Reflections on a Popular Myth in
Madurai,’ Indian Economic and Social History Review, Vol. XIV (1977), pp. 107–118.
CHAPTER TWENTY
EMPIRE, INVASION, AND INDIA’S NATIONAL EPICS
India’s Sanskrit classical epics occupy a strange place in the compara-
tive study of Indian myth, literature, and history. Comparisons have
been made, and often at their expense. In terms of the metaphoric
mapping strategy outlined by Fitz Poole (1986), the Sanskrit epics
have usually been the ‘target domain,’ while either Greek epics, Indo-
European epics,1 oral epics, or historical plausibility have provided the
‘source domain.’ When invoking
a comparison by delimiting the focus of analysis to the comprehension of
one entity in terms of another, [one] often [considers] the more incho-
ate and problematic in terms of the better understood . . . . The target
phenomenon or domain to be understood is new, abstract, uncharted,
problematic, and less familiar than the source phenomenon or domain in
terms of which it is described. Aspects of the known domain are analogi-
cally mapped onto aspects of the target domain (Poole 1986: 420–21).
Nowhere has such mapping been more tempting and indeed necessary
than in the seemingly more-abstract-than-usually-realized Sanskrit
epics. But the resulting maps have proved ineffective and misleading. The
target is mined for whatever looks like the pure criterion of the source,
and the rest of the landscape is reduced to encumbrances and rubble
(interpolations, digressions, contaminations, growths). False maps are
made, in such a way that any search for clarification is discouraged.
Although there is more to learn about the scholarly myths that have
sustained this project, it may be that we have reached a point where
‘comparative epic’ has met its limits. Part of the problem has been one
of genre. I will not suggest that we reject the term ‘epic’ for the Sanskrit
works, though it is well known that Indian texts and languages have
no corresponding term. It is clear that in comparing the Mahābhārata
and the Rāmāyaṇa with other literatures, one must look not only at
1 On Indo-European comparisons, see among recent attempts Hiltebeitel 1975, 1990;
Katz 1989. As I now see it, the error lies in looking at common themes as evidence
for older strata of the epics themselves and of their original character rather than as
evidence of what the epic poets have done with older themes.
554 chapter twenty
epics, encyclopedias, and other religious texts but also at philosophi-
cal and religious works of fiction (and ultimately the novel). However
with the publication of David Quint’s book on Western epics, Epic and
Empire (1993), scholars of India’s epics should find themselves gifted
with new comparative challenges: to ask how and why Indian epics
deploy tropes of empire and resistance to them; to reexamine those
crumbs previous comparative efforts have dropped from the epics’
supposed originals; and, even to consider the anxiety of influence, for
after all it was the same Alexander who invaded India in 327–325 B.C.E.
who ‘carried on his campaigns a copy of the Iliad, which he kept under
his pillow, together with a dagger,’ and later placed it ‘in a precious
casket that had been captured from the Persian king Darius’ (Quint
1993: 4).
In the West, Quint (1993: 7, 55) argues, Alexander was the first
to imagine epic as imperial, and Virgil the first to make this impe-
rial vision into a ‘national epic,’ celebrating the founding of Rome.
In India, shortly after Alexander’s invasion with its highly brutal
massacres,2 the Magadhan metropolitan state gathered renewed impe-
rial force under the Mauryas. This ‘transition in Magadha,’ as Romila
Thapar observes,
remains without an epic to eulogize it. This may be due to the inclina-
tion of the rulers of Magadha towards the heterodox sects, where, in the
chronicles of early Buddhism, the epic as it were, of the rulers of Magadha
is to be found in the Dīpavaṃśa and the Mahāvaṃśa . . . requiring a dif-
ferent form from the epic (1984: 141).
On the contrary, the ‘transition to a monarchical state in Kosala is
reflected not only in the form in which the lineage is recorded in the
Purāṇas but also in the Rāmāyaṇa itself ’ (Thapar 1984: 141). Thapar
wants to retain some historicity to the Rāmāyaṇa’s main story and
thus sees this second transition as one in which the poet recalls and
embellishes real events in Kosalan history. But here she follows the
risky practice of extracting history from what seems plausible in epic.
Thapar (1978b, 1979) rightly raises the question of empire and epic
with regard to the Mauryas and Buddhists, where it has a negative out-
come. She does not however see its implications for the ‘Hindu epics,’3
2 Including one of a ‘city of Brahmans’ (Bosworth 1996: 95).
3 The term is often—and from a modern perspective, rightly—used to describe the
Sanskrit epics; the term ‘Hindu,’ however, being anachronistic.
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 555
in which what interests her are ‘reflections’ of history. But if we resist
reading history into the epics’ main narratives, it would seem that they
are the creations of Brāhmaṇa poets who developed their own variants
on the epic genre, who centered their stories on kingdoms eclipsed
by the time of the Magadhan imperial states, stories that celebrated
these kingdoms by transposing them into a ‘double past’ that is simply
unavailable to the modern historian.
As we shall see, a number of scholars have assumed a relationship
between the Sanskrit epics and Indian experiences of empires—both
those invading from without (Greeks, Persians, Kusạ̄ ṇas) and those
rising from within (Magadhan states, Śātavāhanas). But, as far as I
know, no one has effectively suggested a link between these experi-
ences and the Brāhmaṇical poets’ adoption of an epic ‘form.’ I believe
this link raises serious historical questions about Indian literature
and religion, though it could of course encourage the creation of new
myths of influence or indigenous invention. In any case, Quint’s study
should motivate further comparative reconsideration of the connec-
tions between empires, invasions, and the production of the Indian
epics. This essay is an attempt in that direction.
It is in fact not a new issue, but one that has, until fairly recently
(see Alles 1989, 1994; Fitzgerald 1991; Hiltebeitel 1989; Pande 1990),4
dropped out of sight, indeed since 1947. This year is significant for
both the independence of India from British imperialism and a resur-
gence of Western scholarly interest in the Indian epics, first as expres-
sions of Indo-European mythology.5 My purpose then is twofold. On
the one hand, much of what has been said about the link between
empires, invasions, and the Sanskrit epics is spurious. Most of what is
spurious results from transforming the relation between history and
genre into modern mythologies of empire that have more to do with
the Āryans, Mughals, and British than with the Nandas, Mauryas, and
Śuṅgas. As we shall see, scholarly discussion of empire and invasion
in relation to the Sanskrit epics gets colored by such related constructs
as eras, ages, national epic, nationalism, patriotism, and the so-called
4 For an earlier view not discussed below, see Hiltebeitel (1979a: 69) on the younger
Adolf Holtzmann’s ‘inversion theory’ in which the Mahābhārata begins as a Buddhist
epic celebrating Duryodhana in the image of Aśoka and in memory of national resis-
tance against the Greeks and is then subject to Brāhmaṇical inversions.
5 For the beginnings of this project, see Dumézil 1948; for some of my own attempts
to contribute to it, see Hiltebeitel 1975, 1990.
556 chapter twenty
‘Āryan invasion.’ Further, all these issues, which tie in with current
debates about Orientalism and colonial ‘constructions’ of Hinduism,
force us to consider how ‘Hinduism in the making’ must be recog-
nized not only ‘objectively’ in the texts, practices, and monuments
attributed to its tradition but also reflexively in the contending strains
of scholarship that ‘construct the object.’ I would say that it is rather
shallow to argue, or insinuate, that the epic poets did not construct a
Hinduism avant la Iettre, before the Mughals and British re-’invented’
their own. Likewise, to think that one can position oneself as post-
Orientalist simply by saying the word to name a scholarly era now past
is equally superficial (see Pollock 1994; cf. Biardeau 1989; Hiltebeitel
1995). According to Nick Allen, ‘Nowadays it becomes more and more
apparent that the charter for Hinduism is the Mahābhārata’ (1991 327;
emphasis in original). I would make just two provisos: that one should
really say ‘the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa,’ and that these epics’
place in the construction of Hinduism needs to be rethought around
many issues, including empire and invasion.
On the other hand, there can be no doubt that past scholars were
right to see that Indian epics do offer their own reflections on experi-
ences of empire and invasion. The Mahābhārata in particular construes
the episode of Yudhisṭḥ ira’s rise to power, through the elimination of
his rival, the Magadha king Jarāsaṃdha, and the performance of a
Rājasūya sacrifice, around the issue of empire (see Hiltebeitel 1989).
Indeed, this sequence provides most of the Mahābhārata’s usages
of the terms ‘saṃrāj’ (emperor) and ‘saṃrājya’ (empire).6 From the
beginning of the episode, after Yudhisṭḥ ira learns he should consider
the Rājasūya as a means to empire (Mahābhārata 2.11.61), Kṛsṇ ̣a says
Yudhisṭḥ ira has the qualities to be emperor, to make himself emperor
of the ksạ tra (2.13.60). First, though, he must defeat Jarāsaṃdha, who
has obtained empire by birth (Mahābhārata 2.13.8). Let us note that
Jarāsaṃdha’s empire is ascribed; Yudhisṭḥ ira’s must be achieved. Then,
once Yudhisṭḥ ira wins the Mahābhārata war and considers renouncing
his hard-won kingdom, Kṛsṇ ̣a urges him to hear the Sọ ḍaśarajakīya
(the ‘Story of the sixteen kings’ of old; Mahābhārata 12.129). Indeed,
6 Within the Poona Critical Edition, there are between 2.11 and 2.42, eight out of
the fourteen such usages in the entire epic. Saṃrāj is probably used ironically when
Yudhisṭḥ ira and Draupadī call Virātạ ‘emperor’ (Mahābhārata 4.6.7, 19.25). Sullivan
(1990: 31, 48, 60, 75) makes the point that both the Rājasūya and Aśvamedha are
imperial sacrifices and that Vyāsa acts as priest at both.
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 557
Yudhisṭḥ ira might remember from an earlier telling of the story told
by Vyāsa, at the death of Abhimanyu, that Pṛthu was ‘consecrated by
the great Ṛsịs in an imperial Rājasūya’ to be the first emperor. He
milked the earth for trees, mountains, gods, Asuras, men, snakes, the
seven Ṛsịs, the Apsaras, and the Fathers after he was lauded by them
with the words, ‘You are our emperor. You are a Ksạ triya, our king,
protector, and father’ (Mahābhārata 7, Appendix 1, no. 8, 11. 764,
779–84). The corresponding term ‘cakravartin’ (turner of the wheel) is
used not for Yudhisṭḥ ira but for ‘heroic Ksạ triyas who were emperors
in the Tretā Yuga’ (Mahābhārata 6.11.10) and some of the sixteen
kings in contexts that suggest overlap with the title Saṃrāj. In the
Rāmāyaṇa (5.29.2), Rāma inherits the empire of his father Daśaratha,
who was a cakravartin. Of course, these epic usages have a prehistory,
which we cannot examine here (but see Witzel 1987; cf. Gonda 1969:
123–28; Sircar 1969: 48–56; Strong 1983: 150, 154, 158, 163–64); they
also envision empire in distinctive ways, which we will consider.
Issues of empire and invasion thus run through the epics themselves
and through earlier generations of scholars who seriously misconstrued
them. I will single out two particularly durable misconstruals: of ‘ages’
or ‘periods’ around the epics, and of the significance of Ksạ triyas and
Rājpūts.
Periodizing the Epics
The variety of conceptions developed around periodizations of the
epics arises from the need to conceptualize the relationship between
historical and literary orders of interpretation. This relationship comes
into play when scholars address the historiographical and textual
problems involved in defining periods for the epics’ ‘development.’
Most typically they are placed into an eight- or nine-hundred year
post-Upanisạ dic period, up to and including the Guptas. The epics are
treated as both emblems and byproducts of this period of synthesis:
emblems in that they are taken to define the period as a departure from
the prior ‘Vedic’7 period, and byproducts in that they are assumed—
and here one speaks especially of the Mahābhārata—to have accreted
into being. They are represented as gathering heavier and heavier
7 Consider, for instance, Macdonell’s Vedic Mythology (1974) with Hopkins’ Epic
Mythology (1969b) as guidelines to one element of such periodization.
558 chapter twenty
cultural, theological, and sectarian freight to become ‘encyclopedias’
of the period. Further, it is generally assumed that these periods of
textual development recall earlier times within the Vedic period that
involved the transmission of the epics as songs, stories, and/or histori-
cal recollections.
I believe these periodizations to be questionable and have argued
elsewhere (Hiltebeitel 1993, 1995)8 that much of what they have to
offer derives from scholarly conventions unable to address the issues
involved.9 To indicate the standpoint from which I discuss others’
views, and to obviate repeated statements of agreement and disagree-
ment, let me say the following. I consider the epics to have been written
by Brāhmaṇas over a much shorter period than is usually advanced—
in the Mahābhārata’s case, by a group; in the Rāmāyaṇa’s, mostly by a
single author. Arguments for prior oral epic behind these written texts
have been fashionably opportunistic and theoretically naive, as have
those for a prior Ksạ triya tradition ‘appropriated’ by the Brāhmaṇas
(see Hiltebeitel 1993: 12, n.d.; cf. Alles 1989: 221–22, 231n22, 1994: 123;
Fitzgerald 1991: 150–56). Rather than being byproducts of a historical
period of synthesis, the epics serve their authors to ground intertextual
projects of that period in a historical periodization of their own.10 As
indicated, I regard the incessantly repeated encyclopedia notion to be
inadequately supported by the historiography it presumes. As an anal-
ogy, it has its uses and also its limits (see Patton 1996: 455–61), but it
has been falsely applied to the text’s production.
Regarding scholarly periodizations, it will be useful to differentiate
three types: the ‘heroic age,’ the ‘encyclopedic period,’ and the ‘epic
period.’ Heroic age is used, for example, by N. K. Sidhanta to envision
an age that ‘depends both on Mars and the Muses. Mars may still be
there; but [when] the Muses are absent,’ the heroic age is over (1930:
224, cf. 218, citing Chadwick 1912: 440 ff.). The Indian heroic age thus
8 Compare Alles (1989: 222–24, 231, 241n45) on the non-necessity of positing
strata and the ‘19th century European bias against the intellectual capabilities of an
ancient poet’ (223n8). But Alles holds to the idea that Indian epics begin with ‘defin-
ing narratives’ (1994: 26–28) that leave Vālmīki’s original Rāmāyaṇa without its first
and last books and the Mahābhārata ‘overburdened with episodic material’ (1989:
223, 1994: 36).
9 Derived from biblical and Homeric ‘higher criticism’ and colonialist and Christian
‘comparative religions’ historiography and apologetics.
10 The epics put in place the solar, lunar, and Magadhan dynastic chronologies along
side the theory of yugas, which, taking them together, the Purāṇas carry forward as
history.
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 559
continues so long as bards sing songs to the heroes’ descendants and
ends, according to Sidhanta (1930: 37, 70–90, 218), about the elev-
enth or tenth century B.C.E. At this point ‘authentic’ epic yields to
the development of literary epic, with its artificialities of embellish-
ment, narrative digression, and didactic overgrowth. Sidhanta sees a
‘heroic nucleus’ only in the Mahābhārata, not in the Rāmāyaṇa, which
‘seems the product of an age of polish and culture, quite distinct from
the “barbarism” of the Heroic Age’ of the Mahābhārata (1930: 89).11
Nonetheless, he sees the Kauravas as sufficiently ‘civilized’ to enable
a comparison between them and the Romans. Taking the Pāṇḍavas
as coming from a ‘tribe with an inferior culture’12 who ‘tried to make
their conduct approximate to the standards of the [Kaurava] society
in which they found themselves,’ Sidhanta sees the conflict between
the two as one
typical of the heroic poems of other lands as well, [which] may be traced
to a contact between a semi-civilized people and one of a higher culture,
leading through a period of training of the former to one of domination
of the latter by the former (1930: 221).
The Pāṇḍavas are thus like the ‘semi-civilized Teutons’ brought by war
and trade ‘into close touch with the Romans and the civilization of the
Empire’ (Sidhanta 1930: 221). One may note how Sidhanta strains to
make the analogy. He never says that the Pāṇḍava tribe invaded the
Kauravas (as others did before him, including C.V. Vaidya) or that the
Kauravas had an empire. His real analogy would seem to be with the
British and with his attempt to match the epics as best he can with the
heroic-age model of H.M. Chadwick.
Encyclopedic period will serve to bracket the time of textual forma-
tion. Although I know of no actual usage of the term, I use it to char-
acterize scholarship that promotes the idea that the Mahābhārata is an
encyclopedia. Representative here is Edward Washburn Hopkins, who
‘imagines’ the beginnings of an ‘original Bhāratī Kathā’ in a ‘circling
narration’ that ‘may lie as far back as 700 B.C. or 1700 B.C., for ought
we know’ (1969a: 386). Still, he considers himself on solid ground when
he puts his ‘facts together’ to propose a five-stage development of the
Mahābhārata from 400 B.C.E. to 400 C.E.+. During this time the ‘Pandu
11 For comparable attempts to treat the Rāmāyaṇa as a source for information about
an ‘age,’ see Dharma 1941; Vyas 1967.
12 For instance, their polyandry and breaches of the rules of combat.
560 chapter twenty
heroes’ are consolidated into a story that probably begins without them
as ‘Bhārata (Kuru) lays’ and Kṛsṇ ̣a rises from a hero to a ‘demigod’
to an ‘all-god’ (Hopkins 1969a: 397–98). V.S. Sukthankar, summing
up his foundational work as chief editor of the Mahābhārata’s Poona
Critical Edition, comments, ‘I will say candidly that for all intents and
purposes this pretentious table is as good as useless’ (1957: 9). But such
assessments (cf. Hiltebeitel 1979a: 75–83) remain ignored by the run
of textbook writers on Hinduism and Indian civilization, who con-
tinue to reproduce the received wisdom. The consensus further folds
Rāmāyaṇa composition into a shorter window within an early phase
of this same period, presumes that both epics begin as ‘secular’ works
of the martial class appropriated by Brāhmaṇas, sees both as gradu-
ally deifying or divinizing a central hero (Rāma, Kṛsṇ ̣a), and views
both (the Rāmāyaṇa, only less so) as encyclopedically accretative (see,
for instance, decade by decade, Basham 1963: 407–15; Hopkins 1971:
87–95; Brockington 1981: 54–69; Flood 1996: 104–8).
Hopkins, however, makes some interesting statements about inva-
sions and empires during the period in which he sees the ‘Pandu epic’
being ‘cast in its present shape’ (1969a: 399n1). Numerous references
to Greeks indicate that ‘the Pandu epic as we have it, or even without
its masses of didactic material, was composed or compiled after the
Greek invasion’ (Hopkins 1969a: 398). ‘Contemptuous’ allusions to
Buddhist monuments and references to Buddhist terms and concepts
(Hopkins 1969a: 391, 475) make it
impossible to suppose that during the triumph of Buddhism such a
poem could have been composed for the general public for which it was
intended; . . . while a Buddhist emperor was alive no such Brahmanic
emperor as that of the epic could have existed, no such attacks on Bud-
dhism as are in the epic could have been made (399).
Hopkins (1969a: 399, 399n1) sees more favorable conditions for the
‘casting’ of this ‘anti-Buddhist epic’ emerging in the second century,
after the overthrow of the Maurya dynasty by Pusỵ amitra Śuṅga. In
calling the Mahābhārata anti-Buddhist, however, Hopkins implies that
it makes a head-on confrontation with just one religion. Rather, both
epics use the term ‘nāstika’ (those who teach what is not) to cover all
heresies—Buddhist, Jaina, and Materialist—presumably to deny sig-
nificance to anyone rival and to generalize opposing movements into
this deontologized category.
Hopkins’ window for the casting of the Mahābhārata is thus open
between Pusỵ amitra and 200 C.E., but ‘handbook writers may safely
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 561
assign it in general to the second century B.C.’ (1969a: 398). As oth-
ers have observed—most notably Gregory Alles (1989, 1994), who
assigns Rāmāyaṇa composition to the Śuṅga period for many similar
reasons—Pusỵ amitra was a Brāhmaṇa who reasserted sway through
the Brāhmaṇical imperial symbolism of sponsoring two Aśvamedha
sacrifices. According to Binod Sinha (1977: 94–98), Pusỵ amitra spon-
sored the first of these Aśvamedhas to celebrate the departure of the
Yavanas (Ionians or Greeks) from his territory. He undertook the
second, ‘more glorious’ one during a second Yavana invasion under
Menander (of Buddhist fame). Yet, if we may speak of Śuṅga impe-
rialism (as does Sinha 1977), Śuṅga regionalism (Alles 1989: 235,
1994: 68) and decenteredness (1994: 70) differed markedly from the
‘repressive’ centralization of Maurya imperial policies. As we will see
with Vaidya, as Brāhmaṇical imperial sacrifices, the Aśvamedha and
Rājasūya are always cast in a regionalist mold, particularly in the epics.
Yet although there is much to recommend the Śuṅga period as pos-
sible for the epics’ composition, Alles (1994: 116–24, especially 119)
remains stuck with Hopkins’ problem of explaining how in the Indian
context it becomes ‘inevitable’ that Rāma is divinized. And neither
Hopkins nor Alles wrestles with what the epic poets would have made
of their Śuṅga royal patrons being Brāhmaṇas, not Ksạ triyas—that is,
unsuitable as kings. This argument could be made, given all that is in
both epics concerning the bad kingships of Brāhmaṇas. But it would
require answering why Śunġ a Brāhmaṇa kings would have indulged it.
Finally, epic period is used by Vaidya to cover the whole gamut
from the epics’ presumed beginnings in history to their completion.13
Vaidya is of special interest because of his work with both the Sanskrit
epics and the history of Rājputs in medieval India. Despite its many
rash formulations, his often overlooked scholarship is significant for its
close consideration of this relationship. He opens Epic India, the culmi-
nation of his trilogy on the epics, declaring, the ‘Epic period . . . extends
roughly speaking, from 3000 to 300 B.C.E. (Vaidya 1907: v, cf. 21, 28,
1905: 65–110).14 This span however covers only the Mahābhārata. In
treating the Rāmāyaṇa, Vaidya (1907: 21n, 84–85, 175, 1972: 7–43,
13 Compare Smith (1961; 44–60), who uses the terms ‘epic period’ and ‘epic India’—
contrasted with ‘Vedic period’—as headings to cover the same issues but shies away
from incorporating the terms into his actual discussion.
14 Vaidya (1907: v, 28) is also willing to consider 1400–1250 B.C.E.—the ‘latest dates
assigned’ to the Mahābhārata war—as possible, but he theorizes only about the longer
span and treats the 1600–year difference as a trifle.
562 chapter twenty
62–67) extends the epic period from 3500 to 100 B.C.E. The chronology
is inseparable from a vocabulary of invasions and empires.
Epic India begins with credit given to Herbert Risley whose ‘anthro-
pometric labours’ on nasal indexes for the 1901 Census of India ‘dis-
pelled for all time to come the doubt which was often entertained as
to whether there was any Aryan population at all in this vast country
of diverse races’ (Vaidya 1907: 1, cf. 4).15 For Vaidya, Risley’s work
confirms prior philological claims about
the same [Indo-European] family group of languages [and shows that]
students of the Rigveda, the oldest hymn-book in the world, have not
created a myth of their own, when they discovered in it the traces of an
Aryan people entering India through the north-west and conquering the
Punjab (1907: 1).
Vaidya’s challenge is to fit the Ṛg Veda and the ‘venerable Epics of
India’ into Risley’s ‘very interesting and scientific sevenfold division of
the peoples of India’ (1907: 29). His only objection is to the designa-
tion Scytho-Dravidian for the population of western India, that is, the
people of Maharashtra, among whom Vaidya counted himself (Vaidya
1907: 2–3, 29–47).
Vaidya’s solution is a succession of three invasions. First, as reflected
in the Ṛg Veda, Indo-Āryans entered the Punjab in about 4000 B.C.E.,
ridding that area of the tribes of a probably Dravidian aboriginal race.
Most surviving Dravidians, ‘some of whom were ferocious cannibals,’
‘receded to their original home in the south’ (Vaidya 1907: 6). As the
Āryans fanned out to the east and south, they refrained from mix-
ing with the Dravidians. Such was India down to the time of Rāma,
ca. 3500 B.C.E. (Vaidya 1907: 4–7, 10–11).
Second, following the advance of ‘colonies’ planted by Brāhmaṇa
Ṛsịs, the exiled Rāma ‘visited all those colonies’ on his ‘successful
march to Lanka’; just, says Vaidya, as ‘nobody questions the truth of
Alexander’s march to the Punjab, we do not doubt its truth’ (1907:
9). And indeed, in his Rāmāyaṇa study, its historicity is the subject
of an extended analogy and a detailed comparison between Rāma and
Hernán Cortés, the Spanish conquistador (Vaidya 1972: 62, 71–89,
109–12, 124–35). Drawing on William Prescott’s History of the Con-
quest of Mexico (1843), Vaidya (1972) considers Montezuma to be ‘the
15 Vaidya cites Risley’s ‘The study of ethnography in India,’ Journal of Anthropologi-
cal Institute 20, which is unavailable to me.
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 563
prototype of Rāvaṇa’ (83), finds similar references to unusual cause-
ways over water (126–27),16 and compares Rāma’s and Cortés’ adven-
tures into ‘unknown regions peopled by unknown races’ (135) and
their projects of deliverance of the Rāksạ sas and Aztecs from cannibal-
ism (84). In effect, Rāma besieges the proto-imperial Rāksạ sas (Vaidya
1972: 79). If Vaidya is not persuasive in his historical argument, he
uncovers an intriguing set of literary—and in particular epic—tropes
of empire and invasion. Rāma’s ‘adventure,’ however, did not result
in conquest because of the area’s thick population. It only gave the
Āryans an early ‘glimpse of the south,’ which remained ‘almost a “terra
incognita” ’ to them (Vaidya 1907: 9). But the southern Dravidians
‘soon gave up cannibalism after the fall’ of Laṅkā and, ‘easily assimilat-
ing the Aryan civilization under the tutelage of a few Brahmin lead-
ers, became orthodox Hindus in the course of succeeding centuries’
(Vaidya 1907: 9). Still, Vaidya allows that the Brāhmaṇas’ ‘religious
domination . . . over the Dravidian people became in the course of time
most rigid and despotic and continues to be so down to this day’ (1907:
9). Here, rather ironically, he anticipates the arguments by which E. V.
Ramasami contested nationalizing Brāhmaṇical uses of the Rāmāyaṇa
(see Richman 1995), setting an antinationalist course for the Dravidian
movement from 1930 to 1971.17
Finally, the ‘second wave of invasion by the Aryan speaking people’
enters India around 3200 B.C.E., not ‘by the usual north-west gate
but by the circuitous way via Gilgit and Chitral’ (Vaidya 1907: 11).
Because of the ‘difficulties of the road,’ they brought ‘very few women’
with them and were ‘compelled’ to intermarry with Dravidian women
(Vaidya 1907: 11). This wave complexified the caste system, composed
the Vedas (as distinct from the Ṛg Veda), and developed the Vedas’
‘tortuous ritual’ (Vaidya 1907: 11–13, 69). It is above all the Pāṇḍavas
who ‘evidence the truth of a second invasion by peoples akin in race,
language, and religion to the Aryans who had already established
themselves in the Punjab and spread eastward’ (Vaidya 1907: 13). The
Pāṇḍavas were born in the Himalayas. When they came to the city of
the Kurus, ‘they were looked on as intruders’ (Vaidya 1907: 13). After
first trying ‘to reject the invaders,’ Dhṛtārasṭṛa gave them half the Kuru
16 Bosworth (1996: 12n310), who draws a similar comparison between Cortés and
Alexander, also finds an analogy here in the latter’s pontoon work.
17 Ramasami interpreted the Rāmāyaṇa as a Brāhmaṇical-propagated fiction justify-
ing Āryan colonization of the Dravidian south.
564 chapter twenty
kingdom in an area to the south dominated by cannibals and Nāgas.
Here they built their capital of Indraprastha. The Pāṇḍavas, accord-
ing to Yudhisṭḥ ira, had that telling kuladharma (family custom)18 of
polyandrous marriage by brothers. The latter shows that they cannot
be from the same family as the Kurus and they come from a people
‘not in possession of a sufficiently large number of women’ (Vaidya
1907: 14–15, cf. 70). The Pāṇḍavas’ Himalayan births and polyan-
drous marriage thus combine to lend ‘great support to the theory of an
Aryan invasion coming from the Himalayas’ (Vaidya 1907: 14). Also,
although there is nothing to indicate their Himalayan origins, other
‘kindred races’ came along with, or in advance of, the Pāṇḍavas: the
Cedis, Kuntibhojas, Magadhas, Mālavas, Matsyas, Śūrasenas (Kṛsṇ ̣a’s
people). These settled across North India, all advancing lax marriage
customs, and in at least one other case, conquering aboriginal Nāgas
(Vaidya 1907: 17–18).
The Mahābhārata war is then ‘something like a civil war between
the pure Aryans and the mixed Aryans,’ won by the latter, with a
‘counterpart in the civil war of America.’19 It is followed up by Jana-
mejaya’s ‘war of extermination . . . against his hereditary enemies the
Nagas’ (Vaidya 1907: 19–20). Needless to say, it requires great pre-
cision to extract only what is needed to support this ethnohistorical
roman à clef. Furthermore, when Vaidya compares the dark complex-
ion of the ‘three Kṛsṇ ̣as’ and Arjuna (see Hiltebeitel 1984, 1989, 1990:
60–76) to ‘black colour coming into favour with the Aryan people of
this time’ (the result of racial mixing and severe heat) (Vaidya 1907:
18, 108), he must reject such evidence for Rāma: ‘The complexion of
Rāma is believed to have been dark or blue as that of Krishna. It is
difficult to believe that it was so: Not only is it historically impossible,’
but it is also contradicted by a particular verse. The passage has Visṇ ̣u
18 Vaidya seems to stretch the text at this point. He recalls without citation a ‘fos-
sil’ verse ‘strangely preserved from the old nucleus’ in which Yudhisṭḥ ira explains to
Drupada: ‘This is our family custom and we do not feel we are transgressing Dharma
in following it’ (Vaidya 1905: 123, 1907: 13–14). (I cannot find this verse in either
the Vulgate or the Critical Edition, including its apparatus.) Possibly Vaidya refers to
Yudhisṭḥ ira’s explanation by way of the Pāṇḍavas’ covenant of sharing every treasure
(Mahābhārata 1.187.24), which, together with the dharma of heeding the word of their
highest guru, their mother (1.188.15), provides his justification of the practice.
19 Aware that the American Civil War involved ‘the strange instance . . . of Europeans
coming into close contact with a black population’ (1907: 55), Vaidya would seem to
equate the Pāṇḍavas with the Union and the Kauravas with the Confederates.
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 565
becoming ‘red and not dark’ in the Dvāpara Yuga, in which Vaidya
situates Rāma (1907: 112–13).
Once the Pāṇḍavas are established at Indraprastha, which ‘figures
throughout Indian history as Delhi, the capital of the Empire’ (Vaidya
1907: 15), Vaidya’s tale turns explicitly to empires. We should not
underestimate the importance of this association. Janamejaya, the
Pāṇḍavas’ great grandson, is already a great horse sacrificer and uni-
versal conqueror in the Aitareya and Śatapatha Brāhmaṇas (Bharad-
waj 1986: 126). Indeed, according to Michael Witzel (1995: 5, 9, 20), he
and his father are consolidators of the first Indian state, the Kuru state
in the region of Kuruksẹ tra. For Vaidya (1907), the epic celebrates
Janamejaya as a ‘great sovereign,’ ‘great king,’ and ‘great sacrificer.’
Empire in India actually begins with him: ‘What Akbar was in rela-
tion to Babar or Shahu in relation to Shivaji, Janamejaya may be said
to have been in relation to the Pāṇḍavas, the founders of the kingdom’
(Vaidya 1907: 20). Moreover, Janamejaya ‘was already master of the
valleys of the Jumna and the Ganges, and the Mahābhārata relates
that he conquered the Punjab or the country of Takshashila’ (Vaidya
1907: 20). His conquest of Taksạ śilā has also convinced the historians
H. C. Raychaudhuri (1923: 34) and Asim Chatterjee (1980: 164f.) that
Janamejaya held ‘control over an extensive empire’ (Bharadwaj 1986:
12). But Bharadwaj notes that the Mahābhārata refers to Taksạ śilā
only once in an intertextual context, one that otherwise isolates it in a
literary and geographical vacuum. He is thus ‘inclined to believe that
Taksạ śilā did not in reality form a part of the kingdom of Janame-
jaya Pāriksịta and its association with him is born out of poetic fancy’
(Bharadwaj 1986: 12)—what we might call ‘a poetic imperial fancy.’
The epic’s story of its recitation to Janamejaya at Taksạ śilā would seem
to reflect Taksạ śilā’s borderland reputation in Indian imperial history
as a center of Vedic learning, even from the time of Alexander (Smith
1961: 85–92). A suggestion that such history may be cumulative is
found in a Punjab legend, gathered by R. C. Temple (1962, 1: 494;
see also Bharadwaj 1986: 123–24). Tātig Nāga, the snake who bites
Pariksịt and survives Janamejaya’s vengeful snake sacrifice, reads the
Qur’ān! Known as Taksạ ka in the Mahābhārata, he gives his name to
Taksạ śilā.
Vaidya’s scheme thus positions the epic period between two impe-
rial histories: Janamejaya’s, and the imperial history from Magadha
through Alexander’s invasion of the Punjab. It is with Janamejaya’s
empire that Vyāsa’s original Bhārata swells into the Mahābhārata,
566 chapter twenty
through the additions of Vaiśaṃpāyana who sings it during the inter-
vals of Janamejaya’s snake sacrifice. According to Vaidya’s twist on the
epic’s story, Janamejaya performed the snake sacrifice ‘in commemora-
tion of the war of extermination he waged against his hereditary ene-
mies the Nagas’ (1907: 20). The impression left is that Vaiśaṃpāyana’s
snake sacrifice represents a war already completed, thus transform-
ing it into allegory. In any case, Vaidya dates Janamejaya to roughly
3000 B.C.E. and ‘believe[s] that the great epic was then born’ in his
reign from Vyāsa’s earlier and shorter version (1907: 20). Its growth
then continues until ‘it assumed its final shape after the rise of Bud-
dhism’ and Alexander’s invasion (Vaidya 1907: 21). At this point,
Sauti (Ugraśravas) cast it in its final form, sometime during the reign
of Candragupta Maurya. ‘Through Narada’s mouth,’ Sauti envisioned
‘the rules of a well-conducted government as they must have been
enforced in the days of Chandragupta’ (Vaidya 1907: 220–21), when
this emperor, tutored by his Brāhmaṇa minister Kautạ lya, brought ‘the
despotic power of kings’ and ‘Machiavellian policy’ to ‘their highest
expression’ (266, cf. 175). Vaidya thinks Sauti ‘recast’ the epic at this
time out of concern for ‘the defence of the whole orthodox religion,
as it then existed, against Buddhism’ (1907: 39–40). He accomplished
this task by making the more Vaisṇ ̣ava work of his predecessors ‘dis-
tinctly non-sectarian,’ with a ‘unifying spirit which is the charm of
this vast work from a philosophic point of view’ (Vaidya 1905: 44).
For Vaidya, the epic is written—not oral—at every stage, beginning
with Vyāsa’s ‘history called “Triumph,” ’ which ‘was written in glorifi-
cation of Krishna or Narayana as of Arjuna or Nara’ (1907: 38). Vyāsa
was ‘a contemporary of the event’ who ‘wrote his poem some time
after the war’ in a ‘simple and forcible’ language that ‘bears the mark
of a spoken language’ (Vaidya 1907: 38). This language is ‘archaic in
appearance and stands on the same level with the language of the Upa-
nishads’ (Vaidya 1907: 69).20 Vaidya (1972: 2, 5, 16, 42) also considers
Vālmīki to have written the Rāmāyaṇa.
Positioned between two imperial histories, India’s epic period thus
functions as a historiographical device to trace a potent combination
of textual growth and cultural decline. ‘The Indo-Aryans were . . . at
the beginning of the epic period like all young and free peoples ener-
getic and active, truthful and outspoken’ (Vaidya 1907: 163, cf. 1905:
20 Consult Yardi 1986 for his definition of five authorial styles in the Mahābhārata.
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 567
56–57). Indeed, Vyāsa has the Pāṇḍavas, Draupadī, and their mother
Kuntī speak and act ‘in true Rājpūt fashion’ (Vaidya 1905: 53); ‘and
what should we think when we are told that Kausalyā killed by her
own hands the sacrificial horse with three sword strokes . . . . She must
have been very strong and a true Rājpūt lady indeed’ (Vaidya 1972: 9).
The only high moral feeling or virtue these people lacked was patrio-
tism (Vaidya 1905: 57–58). Yudhisṭḥ ira, speaking in the context of
the second Āryan invasion while expressing the first ‘conscious revolt
against caste,’ could answer Nahusạ ’s question, ‘Who is a Brahman?,’
by citing the criterion of virtuous conduct rather than birth (Vaidya
1907: 71–75, 164). Wives could call their husbands by their first names
(Vaidya 1907: 176), and women, as evidenced by Draupadī, had an
‘independence of character’ and knowledge of the śāstras that ‘is far
different from the position’ Draupadī ‘assigns to a good wife’ in a
chapter ‘probably . . . interpolated by Sauti’ (98–99). Yet times changed
in accord with ‘that historical law which subjects the less civilized
conquerors to the higher civilization and religion of the conquered’
(Vaidya 1907: 22). Vaidya (1907: 35) finds other evidence for this law,
and we have seen Sidhanta approximate it as well. It clearly reflects a
posture toward the British.21
The new invaders picked up caste and the ‘pompous religion’ of
sacrifice, which, as reflected by the ‘interpolation’ of the Purusạ Sūkta
in the Ṛg Veda, had become ‘the chief characteristics of their predeces-
sors in settlements’ (Vaidya 1907: 21, 52–53). Then, through the long
epic period that followed, racial and caste mixing and division, restric-
tions on women, hypergamy, and marriage by purchase increased
(Vaidya 1907: 22, 48–82, 90–99, 175). Meat-eating, which earlier had
accompanied the ‘imperial dignity’ of the horse sacrifice (Vaidya 1907:
120), gave way to vegetarianism. It was a change deserving of ‘our
praise and admiration and yet who can deny that the people of India
have done so . . . only at the sacrifice of their political independence’
(Vaidya 1907: 117). Similarly, at the beginning of the epic period, ‘the
Indo-Aryans were as much addicted to drinking as their brethren in
Germany’ (Vaidya 1907: 130). Both ‘in battles and in war righteous
fighting was the glory of the Indian Kshatriyas’ (Vaidya 1907: 261),
and it was only after Alexander’s invasion that ‘they borrowed their
21 As perhaps it did for Mahātma Gandhi in his famous joke that he was not aware
there was such a thing as Western civilization.
568 chapter twenty
evil practices in war from the Greeks’ (264). Thus, the Śāntiparvan
(69) shows what ‘despotic’ kings had learned and what dastardly tactics
(destroying countryside, poisoning water, harnessing the enemy) ail-
ing kings could take in resistance against such rivals. Bhīsṃ a’s advice
about sowing dissension is ‘sickening’ evidence of the end of the epic
period; the episode (Mahābhārata 5.138) where Kṛsṇ ̣a sows dissension
by urging Karṇa to change sides was ‘introduced by Sauti’ and was
not part of the older epic (Vaidya 1907: 261–64). While Kautạ lya pro-
pounded his ‘Machiavellian policies’ under these ‘pitiable conditions,’
Plato and Aristotle ‘were writing their masterly treatises on politics
and government,’ showing ‘how vastly the Indo-Aryan and Greek civi-
lizations starting from a common point had diverged in the matter of
political development by the end of the epic period’ (Vaidya 1907: 267,
cf. 181). In sum, chapter 228 of the Śāntiparvan sets ‘vividly before
our eyes the idea of a demoralized state of society as conceived by the
Aryans about the end of the epic period, and we feel that it is not,
except in certain broad points, far different from our own’ (Vaidya
1907: 179, cf. 196, 203).
Most important, toward the end of the epic period, the tables on
invasion are turned. The ‘Vedic period’s’ distinction between Āryas
and Dāsas was ‘probably lost sight of during the epic period’ to be
replaced by Āryas and Mlecchas (Vaidya 1907: 23). Rather than Āryas
being the supposed invaders of indigenous Dāsas, the epics tell of
Mleccha combatants in the epics—some of whom must be identi-
fied as invaders of India. As Vaidya puts it, by the end of the epic
age, the Mahābhārata speaks of ‘the Aryans as distinguished from the
[Mlecchas] who surrounded their country’ (1907: 25). Here he cites
both epics’ telling of the all-conquering Ksạ triya Viśvāmitra’s efforts
to drag away the miraculous cow of Vasisṭḥ a. In the Mahābhārata’s
(1.165.9–44) version,22 once the superiority of Brāhmaṇa forbearance23
is established over Ksạ triya strength, Vasisṭḥ a confirms the former
by allowing all of Viśvāmitra’s soldiers to live. In the Rāmāyaṇa’s
22 Kāmadhugdhenu (‘Cow of plenty’) Nandinī retaliates by creating Pahlavas from
her tail or ‘arse’; Śabaras and Śakas from her dung; Yavanas from her urine; and,
Puṇḍras, Kirātas, Dramiḍas, Siṃhalas, Barbaras, Daradas, and Mlecchas from the
foam of her mouth.
23 Forebearance or ksạ ma is one of the high Mahābhārata virtues, exemplified by
Yudhisṭḥ ira.
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 569
(1.50–54, 53.16–54.7) more inclement version,24 as the outcome of the
narrative, Viśvāmitra determines to become a Brāhmaṇa. But there are
other implications. The all-conquering Ksạ triya who violates the pre-
rogatives of Brāhmaṇas is helpless against degrading foreign invaders
(and other peoples) from the northwest (Daradas, Kāmbojas, Pahlavas,
Śakas, Yavanas) as well as tribal, southern, and Laṅkan peoples. And
indeed, such Mlecchas are created, or can at least be produced, by a
Brāhmaṇa’ s cow to punish the reprobate Ksạ triya king.25 Vaidya makes
two observations about such Mlecchas. Those whom the Mahābhārata
mentions as fighting on either side of the ‘civil war’ between the ‘pure
Aryans and the mixed Aryans’ had ‘no existence in those days’ (Vaidya
1907: 20–21). And, though many of them were probably known in
India before the time of Alexander, they reflect the ‘end of the epic
period’ (Vaidya 1907: 26–28) when they would have presumably been
‘introduced by Sauti.’
Both Hopkins and Vaidya thus see Alexander’s invasion and the
rise of the imperial Mauryas as pivotal to the most decisive recast-
ing of the Mahābhārata. Each also appoints an Indian ruler to situate
the text historically: either Candragupta as its heterodox provoker or
Pusỵ amitra as its ‘Hindu’ patron. Hopkins sees this pivotal recasting
only as the most massive bulge in ‘a text that is no text, enlarged and
altered in every recension’ (1969a: 400); but Vaidya discerns behind
it the unifying motivations of the third of the text’s three writing
authors. Vaidya deems Sauti’s ‘poetical embellishments’ and contribu-
tions to ‘moulding a work of such enormous extent into a harmoni-
ous and consistent whole’ to be estimable (1905: 31–36). But he does
not find them commensurate with the splendid plot laying of Vyāsa,
of which he says, ‘It has often occurred to me that if the story of the
Mahābhārata is not a historical one, it must indeed be the production
of an imagination which is higher than that of Shakespeare’ (Vaidya
1905: 49).
24 Kāmadhenu (‘Cow of wishes’) first obtains Vasisṭḥ a’s permission and then routs
Visvāmitra’s hosts by creating dreadful Pahlavas, Śakas, Yavanas, and Kāmbojas from
her ‘roar’ or ‘bellow’; more weapon-bearing Pahlavas from her udders; Yavanas from her
vulva; Śakas from her anus; and, Mlecchas, Hārītas, and, Kirātas from the pores of her
skin. Finally, Vasisṭḥ a burns the remaining warriors to ashes with the syllable ‘Oṃ.’
25 Vaidya, however, reads the Vasisṭḥ a -Viśvāmitra myth as a ‘revolt by the Ksha-
triyas against the rising dogma’ that only Brāhmaṇas could be priests (1907: 56)—a
dubious proposition.
570 chapter twenty
The concession is crucial since Vaidya (1905: 59) credits his authors
with the literary skills to imagine complex plot, ‘chaste and power-
ful’ portrayal of character, and empire itself: ‘Even Duryodhana has
a charm and splendour of his own. His unswerving determination,
his ambition which knows no medium between death and the Impe-
rial crown’ (51). Indeed, Vaidya’s epic poets imagine Hindu empire as
having distinctive features, though not always the same. At ‘the begin-
ning of the epic period,’ India
consisted, like Greece, of a number of freedom-loving peoples or clans
settled in small patches of territory, distinguished by separate names
either derived from their chief towns or from some distinguished king
of theirs . . . . All these various clans in India as in Greece belonged to the
same race, worshiped the same deities, and spoke dialects of the same
language. They were with minor differences also one in manners and
religion and had unrestricted marriage relations with one another. But
politically they were all independent and almost always at enmity with
one another and yet they respected one another’s independence scru-
pulously. Although one clan might defeat another and almost crush it,
it rarely tried to efface it altogether. This state of things continued from
before the beginning of the epic period down to very nearly its close
(Vaidya 1907: 180–81).
Thus when Yudhisṭḥ ira aspires to obtain empire through his Rājasūya,
he recognizes that there are ‘kings in every house’ (Mahābhārata 2.14.2,
cited in Vaidya 1907: 182). An epic emperor would ‘never destroy these
small kingdoms entirely but always contented himself with the receipt
of tribute or mere presents’ (Vaidya 1907: 182). The ‘various “digvi-
jayas” [ritualized conquests of the four directions] of Yudhisṭḥ ira and
Duryodhana did not result in any extension of their territories’ (Vaidya
1907: 183)—as was also the case, according to Vaidya (1907: 9), with
Rāma. ‘When a king was conquered he was made to pay tribute; if
slain he was replaced by his own son or other relative’ (Vaidya 1907:
245)—as even Rāma does with Rāvaṇa’s Rāksạ sa brother Vibhīsạ ṇa.
Thus the permanence of each state was guaranteed though with
varying fortune. This feeling was probably due to that feeling of broth-
erhood which animated the Aryan peoples, and identity of language and
religion tended to strengthen that feeling, which Vaidya also sees ‘oper-
ating’ in ancient Greece and modern Christian Europe (1907: 245).
Such patterns persist ‘from the Brahmanas down to the Buddhistic
days’ (Vaidya 1907: 183) and undergo their great change when ‘exten-
sive kingdoms in the east of India like the Magadhas, . . . with their
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 571
overcrowded population of non-Aryan or mixed descent, became more
and more despotic’ (187). Vaidya finds evidence lacking as to ‘how
and when this state of things changed’ but emphasizes that it is the
Buddhist accounts which ‘give us an insight into how the kingdom of
Magadha began to extend its dominations in the absorption of minor
kingdoms’ (1907: 189). Considering that these events were ‘synchro-
nous with the establishment of the Persian empire’ under Cyrus and
that Darius then ‘reduced a portion of India to the west of the Indus
to a Persian Satrapy,’ Vaidya finds it ‘not at all strange’ that the auto-
cratic type of imperium launched by Darius would have ‘moulded the
growth of empires in India’ at Magadha (1907: 189). Vaidya observes
that neither epic mentions the new Mauryan capital of Pātạ liputra; both
always give Magadha its earlier capitals of either Rājagṛha or nearby
Girivraja. ‘The epics do not describe also empires as they came to be’
(Vaidya 1907: 190). Thus if Vaidya’ s Sauti was writing in the time of
Candragupta, he was not only imagining a Vedic imperium of the past
in Hindu terms but also, while translating the new Mauryan Machia-
vellianism of Kautạ lya into Bhīsṃ a’s advice to Yudhisṭḥ ira, refusing
to imagine the historical reality of the new Mauryan capital. Likewise,
the usually ‘incompetent’ ‘last editor’ of the Rāmāyaṇa probably took
his exaggerated descriptions of Ayodhyā from what he ‘actually saw of
a great city like Pātạ liputra’ (Vaidya 1972: 96; cf. Sircar 1969: 45–61).
Alles (1989: 225, 227, 231, 241) also remarks on the absence of such
imperial cities as Pātạ liputra and Kauśāmbī in the Rāmāyaṇa, while
Hans Bakker (1986) notes how both epics are the first texts to call
Sāketa by the name Ayodhyā, the Invincible. The Mahābhārata’s treat-
ment of Taksạ śilā would then be an exception, seemingly to assert
ancient Hindu empire on the boundaries while denying its erosion at
the center.
Translating for the Imperial Invaders
When British and other colonialists constructed a Hinduism to suit
their needs, they thus did not entirely invent it on their own. Yet if
they reinvented it, they did so by virtually omitting the epics and by
reducing the Ksạ triya to the issue of ‘ascribed’ genealogy, which they
could arbitrate with their research, histories, and darbārs. The Brit-
ish were motivated to both disinvent and reinvent the Indian national
epics in their own image, more or less simultaneously.
572 chapter twenty
Thomas Metcalf provides background to this rhetorical climate:
‘The British conceived that India’s buildings provided the best, if not
the only, book from which long periods of its history could “satisfac-
torily be read”’ (1995: 151, cf. 159). Metcalf also remarks on how the
‘Sepoy Mutiny’ was ‘cast in heroic form to create a “mythic” triumph’
and ‘monuments associated with the events of 1857 were organized in
a sacral way’ (1995: 156). A dismissal of the national epics is logical in
this context, which partook of the general view that India was a land
without a history of its own. Along with genealogies, the British could
control museums, monuments, and ethnography as exemplary records
of the past. But India’s classical epics would elude them. Until very
recently, Monier Monier-Williams’ Indian Epic Poetry (1863) remained
the only serious British work concerning the epics, one which quickly
yielded to work done by Americans, Dutch, French, Germans, Indians,
Russians, Scandinavians, and others.
Monier-Williams ties the 1862 Oxford lecture that forms the basis of
his study—delivered, let us note, in the immediate aftermath of 1857—
entirely to British imperial interests: ‘The Rāmāyaṇa and Mahābhārata,
unlike the Iliad and the Odyssey, are closely connected with the pres-
ent religious faith of millions; and these millions, be it remembered,
acknowledge British sway’ (1863: iii). ‘British India’ is now so close by
steam and electricity
that the duty of studying the past history of our Eastern empire, so far
as it can be collected from ancient Sanskrit literature, can no longer be
evaded by educated men. Hitherto the Indian epics, which, in the absence
of all real history, are the only guides to the early condition of our Hindu
fellow-subjects, have been sealed books to the majority of Englishmen
(Monier-Williams 1863: iv).
One easily appreciates the distinction between history and condition.
We need not detail Monier-Williams’ reliance on Orientalist tropes
or Homeric and biblical higher criticism. Suffice it to say that the San-
skrit epics, especially the Mahābhārata, were ‘tediously spun out,’ with
occasional ‘beautiful episodes’ (Monier-Williams 1863: iv–v). They
contrasted with the Homeric epics by their ‘gigantic scale,’ ‘Oriental lux-
uriance,’ and ‘confused congeries of geological strata’ (Monier-Williams
1863: 1, 17, 44; see Inden 1990: 85–89). Interesting is Monier-Williams’
insistence that Sanskrit epic poetry, like the Greek epics, ‘may be called
natural and spontaneous as distinguished from artificial’ (1863: 1n),
by which he means Sanskrit kāvya poetry on epic themes. The ‘spon-
taneous production of epic song’ about ‘stirring incidents of exagger-
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 573
ated heroic action’ is what ‘makes epos the natural expression of early
national life’ (Monier-Williams 1863: 3). Monier-Williams makes an
interesting move from ‘nature’ to ‘nation.’ He begins with the assump-
tion that Greeks and Vedic Indians shared with other ‘Indo-European
races’ in ‘worshipping the principal powers and energies of nature’
(Monier-Williams 1863: 48). Next he states that the ‘Aryan family’ car-
ried this ‘simple religion of nature’ with them when they separated,
providing them with
the germ of their subsequent mythological systems. Once settled down
in their new resting-places, simple elemental worship no longer satisfied
the religious cravings of these giant-races, awakening to a consciousness
of nascent national life. A richly peopled mythology arose in India and
Greece as naturally as epic poetry itself (Monier-Williams 1863: 48).
Monier-Williams thinks the epic songs were first
the property of the Kshatriya or fighting caste, whose deeds they cel-
ebrated; but the ambitious Brāhmans, who aimed at religious and
intellectual supremacy, would soon see the policy of collecting the rude
ballads which they could not suppress, and moulding them to their own
purposes[—for example, the portrayal of ] King Daśaratha at the seat of
his empire . . . surrounded by wise Brāhmans (1863: 10, 10n).
A reinvention of the Ksạ triya is thus accomplished through his appro-
priation and suppression: ‘Those ballads which described too plainly
the independence of the military caste . . . were modified, obscured by
allegory, or rendered improbable by monstrous mythological embel-
lish-ments’ (Monier-Williams 1863: 10–11).
All this anticipates ideas on oral—instead of written—origins of the
Indian epics, and some who advocate oral theory probably inherit these
ideas. It also presupposes the categories of natural versus revealed reli-
gions: ‘Soon the Hindu, like the Greek, unguided by direct revelation,
personified, deified, and worshipped not only the powers exhibited by
external nature, but all the internal feelings’ (Monier-Williams 1863:
48). Thus while the Sanskrit epic poets are ‘unrivalled’ in expressing
‘universal feelings and emotions which belong to human nature in all
time and in all places’ (Monier-Williams 1863: 58), certain feelings
are ‘natural’ only to Hindus. When the poet takes his account beyond
the Pāṇḍavas’ triumph—where a European poet would have left it—to
a final heavenly journey, he betrays ‘a deeper knowledge of human
nature, or at least of Hindu nature’ (Monier-Williams 1863: 28). And
whereas ‘to an extent, it is natural to all eastern nations’ to seclude
women and treat them as inferiors, ‘chivalry and reverence for the fair
574 chapter twenty
sex belonged only to European nations of northern origin’ (Monier-
Williams 1863: 55, 55n).
All this builds to Monier-Williams remarkable conclusion:
Until Asiatic women, whether Hindu or Muhammadan, are elevated and
educated, our efforts to raise Asiatic nations to the level of European
will be fruitless. Let us hope that when the Rāmāyaṇa and Mahābhārata
shall no longer be held as sacred repositories of faith and storehouses
of religious tradition, the enlightened Hindu may still learn from these
poems to honour the weaker sex; and that Indian women, restored to
their ancient liberty and raised to a still higher position by becoming
joint-partakers of Christ’s religion, may do for our Eastern empire what
they have done for Europe—soften, invigorate, and ennoble the character
of its people (1863: 59).
After Monier-Williams’ publication, British historians like Vincent
Smith and Frederick Pargiter would look to the epics only for the
extraction and sanction of royal genealogies. No matter that most of
this was invented as well; the British were determined to reinvent the
historical in it. Generally, British writers who took interest in India’s
regional martial oral epics rather than in its classical Sanskrit epics had
much the same concerns (see Burnell 1894, 1895, 1896; Elliot 1992;
Temple 1962; Waterfield and Grierson 1923).
Meanwhile, as the project of periodizing the epics went on apace,
many of the ideas that went into it were incorporated into the first
English translation of the Mahābhārata; translated by Kisari Mohan
Ganguli, and published by Pratap Chandra Roy. What is interesting is
not these two authors’ periodization of the Mahābhārata itself but the
periodization of their translation of it. J.A.B. van Buitenen discourages
non-Sanskritist readers of his own translation from bothering with it
at all: ‘The English is grating and refractory in the extreme, and does
not allow for comfortable reading even to one used to Victorian Eng-
ish’ (1973: xxvi). Granted that it ‘was by no means a careless job,’ only
the Sankritist need consider van Buitenen’s aside that ‘the reader who
patiently compares it with the vulgate text . . . may protest many ren-
derings, but still recognize that the attempt was a scholarly one. I have
of course consulted it often’ (1973: xxxvii). Those who compare both
translations with the Sanskrit texts will, I am afraid, often find that van
Buitenen should have consulted it more often. The Ganguli translation
still deserves more serious attention than it receives.26
26 What follows on this project restores my original discussion of it, shortened for
its journal publication.
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 575
The “Prefaces,” “Notices,” and “Appeals” in the fascicles of the first
edition describe the hardships that Roy undertook to publish not
only an English Mahābhārata, but three editions of a Bengali transla-
tion of it, and Sanskrit editions of the Mahābhārata, Harivaṃśa, and
Rāmāyaṇa. Roy was determined to distribute all copies of these books
gratis, not only in India but in Europe and America, through his home-
publishing venture, the “Datavya Bharata Karyalya.”27 This, he wrote,
is “no institution belonging to any private individual but is rather a
national concern supported by a nation’s patriotism” (1884a: 4). Once his
“only daughter had been disposed of in marriage and was happy with
her husband possessing a decent independence” (1884a: 7), Roy began
his venture with his modest savings as a former rent-collector and
bookseller (1884: 1). He supported it with arduous fund-raising tours
that undermined his health, and with repeated appeals for support—
from European and American scholars, from British government
officials in India, and from Indian princes to “the Zemindars and
merchant-princes of India, the vast body of my countrymen, and, I
am proud to say, my countrywomen” (1884c: 2). Roy assessed the
work toward funding as “pre-eminently one which suits a Rajah or a
mendicant. I am not a Rajah. I can, however, without shame, betake
myself to mendicancy” (1891: 4). This formulation was changed after
a donation by the Nizam of Hyderabad: “The Nizam is a Mahome-
dan prince. Any contribution coming from him in aid of a work like
the Mahābhārata could not but indicate His Highness’s enlightened
sympathy for literature in general, irrespective of the nation or creed
which that literature represents” (1893: 6–7). Henceforth, Roy would
say, “An enterprise like the one in which I am engaged is suited, by
its very nature, to an Emir or a Fakir. I am no Emir. I have, however,
that within me in consequence of which I can call myself a Fakir, for
like a Fakir I have renounced many of the vanities of the world, and
27 Roy was struck that “[t]he press of England . . . has been comparatively indifferent”
to his project, attributing this to the small number of Sanskritists there (the two he
cited, Max Müller and Reinhold Rost, Librarian of the India Office, were apparently
Germans; see 1884b, 1–2). In contrast, “As yet, of all countries, however, America—
enlightened and liberal and generous America,—with a heart brimful of sympathy
for everything that is humanising, has accorded me much encouragement” (1884c, 2).
American Sanskritists mentioned include Charles Lanman who visited the Roys with
what Mrs. Roy called “his angel of a wife,” Maurice Bloomfield, H. Reese of Westmin-
ster, Maryland, and W. E. Coleman of San Francisco (1888, 2; 1891, 5, 1993, 1; 1896c,
“Post-script,” 15–16).
576 chapter twenty
am prepared to beg from door to door for accomplishing the purpose
I have in view” (8; cf. 1896c: Post-script, 2).
Roy did not live to see “the dream of [his] life, viz., the comple-
tion of the Mahābhārata of Krishna-Dvaipāyana Vyasa into English!”
(1888: 2). After his death from complications of diabetes on January
11, 1895 at age fifty-three,28 his second wife Sundarī Bāla Roy, whom
he married in 1886 (Lal 1980: 393), remained dedicated to the project
after his deathbed appeal. Left only the house and a few volumes of
the Mahābhārata, and unable as a widow to go on tour, she sought
funds by appeals in the final six fascicles, while selling her last jewelry,
mounting up debts, and facing homelessness should she be reduced to
selling the house that had been home to the entire venture.29 Whereas
Roy took to scolding “Bengal millionaires” who showed indifference
to his project (1893: 3), Mrs. Roy named two Rajas who did not fulfill
their promises (1896b).
In launching the publication, Roy begins his first Preface by thank-
ing those in Europe who encouraged him, notably Max Müller, who
wrote, “I expect the time will come when every educated native will
be as proud of his Mahabharata and Ramayana as Germans are of
their Nibelunge, and Greeks, even modern Greeks, of their Homer”
(1884a: 1). Epics are treated as if by nature they are national epics.30
Moreover, they link nations with empire. Roy considers it “providen-
tial” that England with its dim past and bright present and future has
linked with India, implying a contrast with India’s epic imperial past
and present “dependency.” Although there are “lapses” of “repression”
by some who are “untrue to the traditions of Empire and the instincts
of their own better nature,” the “Queen-Empress . . . enunciates the
noblest principles of government, and confesses to her determina-
tion of founding her rule upon the love and gratitude of the people”
(1884a: 2). Roy’s appeal for divine and financial help through the epic-
like perils of publishing the forest-book begins, “Next to the slayer of
Madhu, on earth there is Her Gracious Majesty the Queen-Empress
of India, the incarnate Divinity on earth as my scriptures teach me”
28 1984a, “Notice” of K. M. Ganguli, 1; 1894b, “Notice” of Mrs. Roy, 1.
29 1894a, “Appeal”; 1894b, “Notice”; 1896a; 1896b. Roy’s widow’s “Appeal” dated
January 21, 1895 appears in 1894a. Similarly, 1894b contains Roy’s own last “Notice”
with a picture of him (1–7) and a further “Notice” by Mrs. Roy (1–4).
30 “The German epic was to be carried along on the campaign against the Ossian-
bearing Napoleon” in a “conflict between France and Germany, played out through
rival medieval epic poems” (Quint 1993: 356).
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 577
(1884c: 1). Near the end of his life, Roy mentions that, “Some years
ago I received permission to lay before Her Majesty, for her gracious
acceptance, a copy of the English translation” (1893: 5).31
In these circumstances, the publication of the Mahābhārata in Eng-
lish is undertaken so that, “instead of looking upon the conquered peo-
ple as . . . barbarians, those in authority over them” can follow up their
“sincere desire to enter into their [subjects’] feelings and understand
their aspirations . . . by a study of their national literature” (1884a: 2). The
availability of the Sanskrit epics in translation will thus be a “valuable
contribution to the cause of good government” (1884a: 3), just as it has
already been “drawn on” by “Aryan poets and prose-writers of succeed-
ing ages . . . as on a national bank of unlimited resources” (1884a: 3).
When pressed by “the orthodox,” who viewed “every attempt to trans-
late the Hindu scriptures into a foreign tongue as an act of impiety,” Roy
reiterated this defense (1891: 6).
For Roy, the Mahābhārata is “the grandest epic which the world
ever produced” (1889: 1); “the encyclopedia of the heroic age of the
Hindus”; “a repertory of innumerable legends more or less based on
facts” (1890: 2); “the great Hindu Epic” (1891, 5); and “a monument of
ancient Aryan genius” in which “[t]he Rishis always sought to inculcate
the awful idea of unending Eternity” (1893: 2–3). Roy hoped that the
epic’s publication in English would encourage the “patriotic hearts”
of his countrymen by deterring them from the “sensational literature
of the present day in which, under the pretence of improvement, the
plots and situations of fifth-rate French novels are introduced, vitiat-
ing the manly Aryan taste.” Rather, it should turn
them to contemplate the purity of Aryan society, the immutable truths
of Aryan philosophy, the chivalry of Aryan princes and warriors, the
masculine morality that guides the conduct of men even in the most
trying situations, etc. (Roy 1884a: 10)
The age is past when Indian students used to spout Byron over dishes of
beef with the glass circling round in quick succession. Under influences
more wholesome and due to a variety of reasons, the English-educated
native of India has learnt to respect his ancestors. (Roy 1884b: 2)
For Mrs. Roy—well informed of the epic’s political and astronomi-
cal contents (1896c: “Post-script,” 4–5)—completion of her husband’s
31 Lal (1980: 393) mentions that “in 1889 he was made, by Queen Victoria, a Com-
panion of the Order of the British Empire.”
578 chapter twenty
project became “this national enterprise” (1986c: Notice, 1). Her hus-
band’s “cause” as a “poor” Faqueer—“the cause of the diffusion of
Rishi-literature”—had been “the diffusion of the ancient intellectual
wealth of India over the whole civilised world” (1896c: “Post-script,”
2–3, 11).
Paradoxically, the Sanskrit epics are thus translated not only to
serve the national aspirations of Indians, but the British empire in
understanding those aspirations. Roy’s first Preface closes: “Homer
lived as much for Greeks, ancient and modern, as for Englishmen or
Frenchmen, Germans or Italians. Valmiki and Vyasa lived as much
for Hindus as for every race of men capable of understanding them”
(1884a: 5). National and imperial epic opens onto a global civilizing
mission.
Yet Rudyard Kipling, writing in 1886, typically belittles the Sanskrit
epics in their first English translations32 and particularly the Ganguli
translation of the Mahābhārata for ‘its monstrous array of night-
mare-like incidents, . . . its records of impossible combats, its lengthy
catalogues of female charms, and its nebulous digressions on points
of morality’ (Pinney 1986: 177). Kipling makes his trumps with typical
Orientalist cards: broad hints at an underlying theory that epics begin
with historical cores; that they can be riddled with interpolations and
fancifully embellished. To Orientalists, he concedes:
The two national epics have their own special value, as the Rig Veda has
for students of early forms of religious belief; but the working world has
no place for these ponderous records of nothingness. Young India, as we
have said, avoids them altogether . . . ; the bare outlines of their stories are
known and sung by the village folk of the country-side as love ditties;
but as living forces, they are surely dead and their gigantic corpses, like
whales stranded by the ebbing tide, are curiosities to be regarded from
a distance by the curious, and left alone by those who look for any solid
return from laborious reading (Pinney 1986: 177–78).
Although he makes it sound like he has full translations before
him, writing by 1886 Kipling could have read no further into the
Mahābhārata than its fifth book, the Udyogaparvan. For that is as far
as the Ganguli-Roy translation had proceeded by that point. Ganguli
anticipated such reaction in his ‘Translator’s Preface’ of 1884:
32 By Ganguli of the Mahābhārata, and Ralph Griffith of the Rāmāyaṇa (Pinney
1986: 177–78).
empire, invasion, and india’s national epics 579
In regard to translation from the Sanskrit, nothing is easier than to dish
up Hindu ideas so as to make them agreeable to English taste. But the
endeavor of the present translator has been to give in the following pages
as literal a rendering as possible of the great work of Vyāsa. To the purely
English reader there is much in the following pages that will strike as
ridiculous (1884a: 11).
Around the same time, Ravi Varma finds the two epics a storehouse of
images, using them to enthuse large audiences as poster art in homes,
museums, and royal courts across India. According to E.M.J. Venni-
yoor (1982: 27), Varma invented the saree as the national epic dress for
women and at the same time researched and painted the regional out-
fits of contemporary, especially rural, women, whom Kipling expected
to remember the two epics only as ‘love ditties.’ When the Gāekwāḍ of
Baroda commissioned fourteen Varma pictures in 1888, they were to
convey the drama of the two great texts of the Hindu religion, the
Rāmāyaṇa and the Mahābhārata; they should evoke the beatitudes of
Satyam, Sivam, Sundram, the True, the Good and the Beautiful, and
should proclaim to all the world the splendour of India’s heritage (Ven-
niyoor 1982: 27).
The seeming allusion to Plato is striking.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
ROLE, ROLE MODEL, AND FUNCTION: THE SANSKRIT EPIC
WARRIOR IN COMPARISON AND THEORY
Although things are always more complicated on the ground, let us
begin at the level of theory. In theory, or more exactly in a theory
generated in ancient and classical Sanskrit texts, Hindu society is or
should be composed of four ‘classes’ or varṇas. Brahmans, the priests
and literati, are at the top. Ksạ triyas or warriors are second only to
them, and have rank over those below them. That would include
Vaiśyas, who undertake trades and engage in agriculture, and Śūdras,
who are supposed to serve the three Ārya or ‘noble’ classes above them.
This theory slots no place for anyone else: all others would be avarṇa,
‘unclassified’, and are sometimes given that very designation.
The theoretical character of the Indian warrior class, our subject
here, is well brought to light in an intriguing remark by the Indian
Marxist historian/archaeologist D.D. Kosambi, In a letter to the French
anthropologist-historian Pierre Vidal-Naquet, dated 4 July 1964, and
quoted by the Delhi historian Romila Thapar (Thapar 1992, 106),1
Kosambi writes: ‘Don’t be misled by the Indian kshatriya caste, which
was more often than not a brahmanical fiction . . . .’ I believe we can
read Kosambi as telling us, or at least permitting us to understand,
that the Rāmāyaṇa and the Mahābhārata are brahmanical fictions that
reinvent the Vedic Ksạ triya both to project an image onto a glorious
mythic past of long ago ages, and to provide certain role models for
uneasy presents and uncertain futures.
The first part of this chapter will be concerned with ambiguities in
the ways the two epics construct such models, particularly with regard
to relationships between Ksạ triyas and Brahmans, and in connection
with what may be called a theory of Ksạ triya decline. The second will
consider ways in which the role of the ever-declining and, necessarily,
repeatedly reconstructed Ksạ triya has been reinvented in some spe-
cific medieval and recent historical circumstances. I will close with
some consideration of the notion of ‘role model’ as applied to such
subjects.
1 Thapar’s essay on Kosambi in this volume (1992, 89–113) is an appreciation.
582 chapter twenty-one
Old Ksạ triyas and New in the Sanskrit Epics
The Sanskrit epics’ noble heroes and heroines are known to be noble
even in their flaws. They can be taken as the role models that the
Sanskrit poets bequeath. With this in mind, we can follow literary
and media critic Purnima Mankekar’s account of a recent debate on
Indian national television and the follow-up poll in a ‘leading news
magazine’ that asked ‘which of the two better represented “the modern
Indian woman”,’ or ‘Indian womanhood’: the Mahābhārata’s fiery and
polyandrous Draupadī with her ‘rage’ or the Rāmāyaṇa’s gentle and
monogamous Sītā with her ‘resilience.’2 As Mankekar observes, the
debate turned towards an ‘Ideal Indian Womanhood’ that is, ‘con-
structed in terms of values deemed fundamentally womanly, and essen-
tially Indian: modesty, patience, and, above all, a strong sense of duty
towards the family, the community, and the nation.’ No surprise here:
Sītā wins (Mankekar, 1993, 552–3):3 ‘Draupadi was not considered a
role model for Hindu women in the same way Sita was’ (Mankekar
1999, 246). Yet these are uneasy conclusions. As Sanskritist Shalini
Shah observes, although various: classical ‘epic heroines . . . are seen as
the role models for women in this country, . . . these role models are
the products of and [are] fashioned by millennia of patriarchal norms’
(Shah, 1995, 2).4 Noting his use of this same term, ‘role model,’ we
can begin to ask why the Rajasthani folklorist Kamal Kothari argues
that classical epic heroes and heroines supply role models for Indian
society but heroes and heroines of vernacular regional oral epics do
not (1989, 115).
To my mind, one should begin by asking how the Sanskrit epic
poets have left the impression that their poems supply society with
such positive role models. To answer this, we must consider who the
poets were and how they situated their primary heroes and heroines.
2 Draupadī, chief heroine of the Mahābhārata, is married to its five chief heroes, the
Pāṇḍavas. Her rage at being treated abusively by the Pāṇḍavas’ cousins, the Kauravas,
motivates the plot toward its terrible war. Sītā, chief heroine of the Rāmāyaṇa, is the
single wife of that epic’s main hero, Rāma. Her exemplary resilience is shown when
she accompanies Rāma to the forest, withstands the abduction and captivity of the
demon Rāvaṇa, and maintains her composure when Rāma submits her not just once
but twice to public ‘tests’ of her chastity.
3 For fuller treatment, see Mankekar 1999, 165–266.
4 Shah mentions ‘Savitri, Gandhari, etc.’ Cf. 82 on Draupadī, who hears about Sītā
as a ‘role model’ during her forest exile.
the sanskrit epic warrior in comparison and theory 583
First of all, the two epics were composed by Sanskrit-knowing Brah-
mans in their aforementioned role as literati. These Brahmans placed
the Ksạ triya at the centre of their compositions as heroes and hero-
ines of a past these authors wanted to exalt. They made their Ksạ triya
characters into the ancient kings, queens, champions, and villains of
a freshly constructed classical world order that was in-all-but-the-
name Hindu. As a new genre in India, epic served as a medium in
which to coin and amplify such new normative terms as sanātana
dharma (‘the eternal law’), rājadharma (‘the king’s law’ or ‘king’s
duties’), dharmarāja (‘the just or lawful king’), dharmayuddha (‘just
war’), purusạ̄ rtha (‘the goals/meanings of human life,’ central among
which is dharma) and karmayoga (‘the discipline of action’). Through
an ingenious weave of narrative and didactic delivery, the poets gave
these norms shape and scale by confronting the heroes and heroines
with new conceptual distinctions or oppositions. Among these, those
with the greatest power and impact included the tension between
paurusạ (‘manliness’ or ‘heroism’) and daiva (‘submission to divinely
ordained fate’); pravṛtti (‘orientation toward this world’) and nivṛtti
(‘orientation toward liberation’); śruti (revelation, Veda ‘that which
is heard’) and smṛti (tradition, ‘that which is remembered’); āstikya
(‘orthodoxy’ or ‘those who say “It is” ’) and nāstikya (‘heresy’ or ‘those
who say “It isn’t” ’); and Ārya (the ‘noble’ as members of the upper
three classes) and mleccha (‘those who speak “mlecch” ’—i.e., barbar-
ians). If we assign the composition of these epics broadly to the period
between the two Buddhist emperors Aśoka and Kanisḳ a—that is, from
the third century B.C. to the second century A.D.—as current discus-
sions would seem to allow,5 then this new classical world order simply
could not have existed in the poets’ historical experience. Yet the epic
poets make their heroes and heroines the primary audiences for, as
well as the secondary exponents of, this new classical combination of
ideas, norms and values, which they combine with remodelled Vedic
ideas about varṇa and āśrama (class and life stage)—values that the
heroes and heroines also take on in the roles they play.
Note, however, that the epic Ksạ triyas are primary audiences but only
secondary exponents. The primary exponents in the epics are either
5 I argue more narrowly for a span from the mid-second century B.C. to the turn of
the millennium, and also (preliminarily) against a later Gupta touch-up, in Hiltebeitel
2001a, 1–31.
584 chapter twenty-one
Brahmans themselves or those who speak on their behalf. In the first
case the heroes and heroines encounter such Brahmans as the putative
authors of the epics, Vyāsa and Vālmīki, who pop in and out of their
text;6 or they meet Vedic Brahmans, usually in the forests—this with
special frequency in the Rāmāyaṇa; or they are visited by ‘new’ bhakti-
oriented Brahmans like Nārada and Mārkaṇḍeya, who make most of
their interventions in the Mahābhārata.7 In the second case, they hear
such values promoted by divine or Brahmanically inspired figures like
Krṣ ṇ ̣a and Bhīsṃ a, or, once educated by Brahmans in the course of the
story, they become the exponents of such values themselves, as with
Rāma and Yudhisṭḥ ira.8 The epics position such heroes and heroines
to learn these values, and then sometimes debate them. Typical are
the debates over paurusạ (heroism) versus daiva (submission to fate).
Junior heroes like Laksṃ aṇa and Bhīma stand for paurusạ , but the
exemplars of the highest values of the new Ksạ triya ideal—their older
brothers Rāma and Yudhisṭḥ ira—subordinate paurusạ to daiva. And
Arjuna and Karṇa, the two most virile heroes who advocate paurusạ
and test it to its limits, make their doing so heroic by realizing that
daiva, ultimately personified by Kṛsṇ ̣a, sets those limits.9 As Kṛsṇ ̣a says
to Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gītā (11.33), ‘Be thou the mere, instru-
ment . . . .’
This ‘new Ksạ triya ideal’ is constructed over against various intima-
tions within the epics of an alternate ‘old Ksạ triya ideal’ that the poets
deem to be now passé, or to have become en passant in the course
of the stories they tell about it, but which they construct the ‘new
Ksạ triya’ over and against. One way they have done this is through
what Sanskritist Robert P. Goldman has called ‘a kind of janapāda
nostalgia’.10 Janapāda, literally ‘foothold of the people’11 is a term used
for the old Vedic ‘republics’, and Goldman’s phrase captures a major
feature of the epic poets’ retrospective mood: a melancholic sentiment
6 See Hiltebeitel 2001a, 32–91, 278–322 on Vyāsa; 317–22 on Vālmīki.
7 Nārada appears at the beginning of the Rāmāyaṇa to inspire Vālmīki to compose
the poem and then flies off (1.1–1.2.3), and is otherwise barely mentioned (see 2.85.43);
Mārkaṇḍeya is not mentioned in the Rāmāyaṇa at all. In the Mahābhārata, this pair
plus Vyāsa are the main intervening Ṛsịs.
8 This is only to speak generally. There are also distinctions to be made in the ways
these two ‘kings of dharma’ do this: Yudhisṭḥ ira is more probing, questioning, and
anxiety-ridden, while Rāma is always more ready to be convinced.
9 On Karṇa, see Hiltebeitel forthcoming.
10 Personal communication, Pondicherry, January 1997.
11 Cf. Thapar 1993, 34: ‘where the tribe places its feet.’
the sanskrit epic warrior in comparison and theory 585
for what they recalled—no doubt in part historically—of pre-imperial
small Ārya kingdoms, sixteen known by name, that is, a nostalgia for
a time when there were direct ties between kings, lands, and peoples.
C.V. Vaidya, an early twentieth-century historian and Sanskritist, who
seems to be the only scholar to have combined skillful interpretation
of the epics with a study of Rajput history (1924, 1926), exemplifies
such janapāda nostalgia. He argues that the ‘Vedic’ societies that the
epics describe, in what he construes as their ‘original’ versions, were
in essentials like those of medieval Rajputs. Vaidya poignantly notes
that the Mahābhārata contains long, depressing segments that pre-
scribe the new Ksạ triya as an answer to Alexander the Great’s invasion
of northwest India in 327 B.C., and the subsequent rise of Mauryan
imperialism that culminated in the rule of the Buddhist emperor Aśoka
from Magadha in north-eastern India and the erasure of the ancient
janapādas. Vaidya’s feel for what the original epics contained posits an
actual ‘epic period’ that began when ‘the Indo-Aryans were . . . like all
young and free peoples energetic and active, truthful and outspoken’
(1907, 163 cf. [1905] 1966, 56–7). He finds lesser Rajput moments for
epic males, such as when royal lineages are recited at Rāma and Sītā’s
wedding in ‘true Rajput fashion’ (1907, 182), or when the Pāṇḍavas
demand only five towns to avoid the war ([1906] 1972, 94). But his
main Rajput moments come from epic women: ‘And what,’ he asks,
‘should we think when we are told that [Rāma’s mother] Kausalyā killed
by her own hands the sacrificial horse with three sword strokes . . . She
must have been very strong and a true Rajput lady indeed’ ([1906]
1972, 9).12 Similarly, Draupadī and her mother-in-law Kuntī speak and
act ‘in true Rajput fashion’—Kuntī, in her ‘stirring call to fight’ ([1905]
1966, 53), while Draupadī is ‘a Rajput woman with a Rajput’s bravery
and determination illuminating her face’ ([1905] 1966, 53). Vaidya
projects these anachronistic martial nostalgias mainly on heroines. Yet
he alerts us to ways the epic poets did something similar.
Along with nostalgia, however, there is also a bitter edge to epic
portrayals of the ‘old and new Ksạ triya.’ The Rāmāyaṇa makes the old
order only nascent by focusing on a remote golden age with but one
ideal king, only a few other realms in north India (either required for
the story by marriages, or founded by Rāma’s brothers), and the rest
12 Goldman translates, ‘Kauśalyā . . . . with the greatest joy cut [the horse] with three
knives’ (1984, 151; cf. 306).
586 chapter twenty-one
of South Asia ruled by kings who are monkeys or demons. But the
Mahābhārata vividly describes the old Ksạ triya order in the throes
of its passing. To take one example, James Fitzgerald sees Bhīsṃ a on
his bed of arrows as ‘the dying exemplar of the old Ksạ triya order’;
a ‘constant reminder . . . of the fratricidal and patricidal war’ just fin-
ished, who for a ‘new age’ promulgates ‘a new statement of all the
facets of dharma [that] has its ultimate source in Kṛsṇ ̣a’ (Fitzgerald
1980, 142, 364).13
Many epic passages also disparage the new Ksạ triya in the course of
explaining his expendability. When Yudhisṭḥ ira asks Bhīsṃ a about the
sorrow of the Ksạ triyas who gave up their lives in the epic battle, and
this seeming waste of human birth, Bhīsṃ a answers with the story of a
conversation between Vyāsa, the Mahābhārata’s Brahman author, and
some kind of biting worm (kītạ ).14 ‘Knowledgeable about the course of
every creature and understanding the language of animals’ (13.118.8),
Vyāsa asks this worm, whom he sees hastily crossing a busy road,
why it doesn’t prefer to die, being just a worm. The worm explains
how each creature finds its own life dear, and says he became a worm
because in his last life as a wealthy Śūdra he was, ‘unfavourable to
Brahmans (abrahmaṇya), cruel (nṛśaṃsa), stingy, a usurer’ (18), envi-
ous and vile in countless other acts ‘fraught with the quality of cruelty’
(25). Yet he honoured his mother; and he once honoured a Brahman:
that preserved his memory for him in this current life as a worm.
Vyāsa then reveals that he can rescue the worm by the sight of his own
person, and tells the worm this means that he can become a Brahman,
or any other status he prefers. But just then a chariot comes along, cuts
the worm to pieces, and, lo and behold, it turns it into—a Ksạ triya!
In gratitude, the new being exults at the difficulties he has overcome
to reach this birth: he now recalls that he had been a hedgehog, an
iguana, a boar, a deer, a bird, a dog-cooker (outcaste), a Vaiśya, a
Śūdra, and now a worm; now, he says, ‘having obtained wormhood, I
have become a Rājaputra!’ (119.11)—that is, a Ksạ triya. Vyāsa, how-
ever, now reveals that the worm has become only a Ksạ triya because
13 On this and other ‘old order Ksạ triyas’, see Hiltebeitel 2001a, 181–92.
14 On this story, see also Hiltebeitel 2001a, 197–9. A kītạ also bites or bores into
Karṇa’s thigh: in one version of the two versions of that story, Indra sends a kītạ that
Karṇa allows to do this boring while his preceptor Rāma Jāmadagnya sleeps with his
head on Karṇa’s lap (8.29.5). Only a Ksạ triya could endure such pain, says Rāma upon
waking, seeing through the disguise that Karṇa had hoped would allow him access to
Rāma’s knowledge of weapons. Kītạ can also be scorpion or a kind of insect.
the sanskrit epic warrior in comparison and theory 587
he has yet to destroy the sins of cruelty he committed as a Śūdra. But
Vyāsa holds out the higher hope: ‘Here, from the status of a Rājaputra,
you will obtain Brahmanhood, having offered up your own breaths for
the sake of cows or Brahmans, or on the battlefield’ (21). The newly
minted Ksạ triya will furthermore enjoy in heaven the imperishable
happiness of one who has attained the highest spiritual reality known
as brahman, showing that one may rise from the lowest animal to the
highest human and divine births (22–6). So, concludes Bhīsṃ a, just as
the worm obtained the ‘highest eternal brahman,’ you, Yudhisṭḥ ira,
should not grieve over the slain Ksạ triyas (120.13–14). This is one of
our epic poets’ most trenchant dismissals of Ksạ triyas, and one of their
clearest indications of the correlation between the law of karma and
what Arthur Lovejoy has called the great chain of being ([1936) 1960),
or in this case, beings. But it only restates a more famous passage of
the Mahābhārata. In the Bhagavad. Gītā, Kṛsṇ ̣a’s karmayoga teaching
of ‘disinterested action,’ or ‘action without the desire for its fruits,’ also
instructs Arjuna to be a disinterested warrior when it comes to worry-
ing about killing: for in truth, there is only the unaffected Self, which,
as Ralph Waldo Emerson caught on in his poem ‘Brahma,’ is neither
the slayer nor the slain.
The epics thus make their reinvention of the Ksạ triya a matter of
design. One sees this most clearly in two stories, both well developed
in each epic, that tell about two stalwarts of complementary but oppo-
site tendencies who are engendered when a woman and her daugh-
ter eat two bowls of porridge destined to make them pregnant, but
with each digesting the portion intended for the other. Thus one son,
Paraśurāma, is born a Brahman with martial tendencies, and the other,
Viśvāmitra, is born a Ksạ triya with eventual inclinations to Brahman-
hood (Mbh 3.115–16). Each of these mirror stories concerns the mis-
treatment by Ksạ triyas of a Brahman’s cow or calf.
In the first story, Paraśurāma—Rāma Jāmadagnya or Bhārgava Rāma
as he is first known in the epics—is the son of the Brahman Jamadagni,
and when Jamadagni’s cow is stolen by errant Ksạ triyas, who then
kill Jamadagni in the aftermath, it provokes Paraśurāma to annihi-
late the Ksạ triyas twenty-one times over.15 But to empty the earth of
Ksạ triyas twenty-one times means that the job is never complete. In the
15 Summarizing Mbh 3.116–17 (Kārtavīrya steals the calf); 12.49–50.4 (Kārtavīrya’s
cruel [nṛśaṃsāḥ] sons steal it). See Hiltebeitel 1999a, 458–62.
588 chapter twenty-one
Rāmāyaṇa when prince Rama meets Paraśurāma, the extermination
of the Ksạ triyas is something the latter did ‘long ago’ (Rām. 1.73.20;
74.24–6). Yet the royal Rāma, a scion of the solar dynasty and thus a
descendant of the Sun god, is a Ksạ triya who is still around. Rāma does
not press the matter of his dubious Ksạ triya ancestry. As we shall see
in a moment, such probing is left to Yudhisṭḥ ira. But Paraśurāma’s
appearance before Rāma has its own timely message. Paraśurāma
appears just after Rāma and Sītā’s wedding, and withdraws only after
he has learned from seeing Rāma’s prowess with the bow that this
new Rāma is no mere Ksạ triya but Visṇ ̣u (75.3–17). That he comes
just after Rāma and Sītā’s wedding, where it now becomes a question
of the resurgence of the solar dynasty, the most important Ksạ triya
lineage, suggests that had Rāma been just an ordinary Ksạ triya and
not an incarnation of Visṇ ̣u, Paraśurāma was ready to kill him as he
had killed his precursors.
As to the Mahābhārata, where Paraśurāma’s story recurs constantly,
Yudhisṭḥ ira, a scion of the lesser lunar dynasty, and thus a descendant of
the Moon god, hears the story twice: once in the forest, and the second
time after the war from Kṛsṇ ̣a, who tells it to deter Yudhisṭḥ ira from
disavowing his hard-won kingdom and giving the earth to Brahmans
all over again.16 Once Paraśurāma had exterminated the Ksạ triyas, says
Kṛsṇ ̣a (12.49.66–75), Śūdras and Vaiśyas united with Brahman women
to produce a kingless condition in which the strong ruled the weak.17
Unprotected by Ksạ triyas, the goddess Earth entered the netherworld,
until the Brahman Kaśyapa bore her on his thigh and listened to her.
She told him where she had concealed Ksạ triyas in strange places, and
implored him to reinstate them as kings to protect her. Ksạ triyas were
raised by cows, the Ocean, apes, and bears. The Ṛsị Parāśara (Vyāsa’s
father) nurtured some who were raised by cows in the forest, while
the Ṛsị Gautama helped with others on the bank of the Ganges who
were further raised by apes on the Vulture Peak.18 Of those protected
by the Ocean, some northern texts add that they lived among black-
smiths, goldsmiths, and such (vyokāra-hemakārādi). When the amazed
Yudhisṭḥ ira, upon hearing this, realizes how the very Ksạ triyas who
16 Goldman 1970 discusses contrasts between these two versions.
17 Mbh 12.49.61–2. The Southern Recension adds that Brahmans abandoned their
dharma and turned to heresies (pāsạ ṇḍān 111* line 4 following 49.62).
18 Grḍ hrakūta (12.49.73): the peak near Rājagrḥ a of Buddhist fame. The combination
of vulture, monkeys, and bears evokes the ‘warriors’ who rescued Sītā and Rāma.
the sanskrit epic warrior in comparison and theory 589
fought and died at Kuruksẹ tra, and the few still extant, had been so
regenerated in this only partial way, he responds: ‘Ah! This world is
rich indeed, and men on earth fortunate, where a feat so righteous as
this was performed by a Brahman’ (50.3–4). The regeneration of the
entire Ksạ triya class is thus accepted by Yudhisṭḥ ira as the work of the
goddess Earth, with Brahmans as her instruments of both holy terror
and miraculous nurture.
As to the second story, in the Rāmāyaṇa’s version, when the all-
conquering king Viśvāmitra carries away the Brahman Vasisṭḥ a’s cow
Kāmadhenu after he has just seen her feed his entire army, Kāmadhenu
obtains Vasisṭḥ a’s permission to retaliate. She routs Viśvāmitra’s hosts
by creating dreadful anachronistic19 Pahlavas, Śakas, Yavanas, and
Kāmbojas from her ‘roar’ or ‘bellow’ (1.54.17; 55.2); more weapon-
bearing Pahlavas then come from her udders, Yavanas from her vulva,
Śakas from her anus; Mlecchas, Haritas, and Kirātas from the pores of
her skin; and finally Vasisṭḥ a burns the remaining warriors to ashes
with the syllable ‘Hum.’20 The Mahābhārata makes it further clear that
the non-Aryans or Mlecchas are defined by what these orifices secrete.
The ‘cow of plenty’ (kāmadhugdhenu), here called Nandinī, retaliates
by creating Pahlavas from her tail or ‘arse’ (pucchāt), Śabaras and
Śakas from her dung, Yavanas from her urine, and Puṇḍras, Kirātas,
Siṃhalas, Barbaras, Daradas, and Mlecchas from the foam of her
mouth; but here, once the superiority of Brahman forbearance (ksạ ma)
is established over Ksạ triya strength (bala), Vasisṭḥ a confirms the for-
mer by letting all Viśvāmitra’s ‘foreign’ soldiers come back to life.21 As
is often the case, the Rāmāyaṇa’s tale reaches the stricter conclusion.
In brief, when Ksạ triyas default in their duties, violate their dharma,
oppose Brahmans, steal cows, and ravage the earth, Brahmans can
retaliate. The Paraśurāma and Viśvāmitra cow stories teach comple-
mentary lessons. Where ‘legitimate’ Ksạ triyas attack a Brahman
directly after stealing his cow, retaliation is swift, dire and unend-
ing in its repercussions. But where a Brahman’s cow is under attack
yet capable of defending herself, ‘prehistoric’ barbarian warriors are
19 These events are supposed to have taken place in the hoary past, not in any time
of contact with the peoples now mentioned.
20 See Rām 1.50–54, and 1.53.16–54.7; also Goldman 1984, 226–7.
21 Mbh 1.165.9–44, especially 34–5—to which the Southern Recension and certain
N{*NOT n}orthern texts add (as in the Rāmāyaṇa) Yavanas from her womb (yonideśāt;
1.1768*). Ksạ ma is a high Mahābhārata virtue of Yudhisṭḥ ira.
590 chapter twenty-one
only momentarily created for effect, as a lesson to the errant Indian
Ksạ triya. Meanwhile, whether exterminated by Paraśurāma or elevated
like Viśvāmitra to the rank of a Brahman,22 the ‘real’ Ksạ triya has for-
ever disappeared.
Thus were it not for the seminal intervention by Brahmans with
Ksạ triya widows after the extinction of the Ksạ triyas twenty-one times
over by Paraśurāma, Ksạ triyas would have been extinct even before
the time of prince Rāma, not to mention that of the Kauravas and
Pāṇḍavas. Put simply, all epic Ksạ triyas descend on their male sides
from Brahman ancestors, and are not of paternal descent from either
the Sun or Moon, or from the primal Ksạ triya (or more correctly,
Rājanya) born from the arms of the cosmic man known as Purusạ ,
from whose dismembered body parts come all four classes (it does not
say ancestors) that ‘originated’ in the taxonomy of Ṛg Veda 10.90.12,
the caste-‘chartering’ verse of the highly influential Purusạ Sūkta.
I suggest that the epics’ Brahman poets, writing during a period fol-
lowing the rise of the Magadhan metropolitan and imperial state and
the repeated incursions of such aggressive Mlecchas as the Greeks and
Iranians, considered contemporary Indian Ksạ triyas barely worth the
name and, in practical terms, to have been annihilated.23 The Ksạ triya
‘role model’ that runs through both epics via their chronology of prior
ages thus entails a theory that Ksạ triyas decline, have been effaced, and
can be regenerated only by Brahmans, who reserve for themselves the
authorship of the texts and the performance of the rituals that make
Ksạ triyas truly what they should want to be.
If, then, Kosambi’s remark helps us to see that the epic Ksạ triya is
‘oftener than not a brahmanical fiction,’ we may look briefly at some of
the uses to which this construct has been put, and consider the condi-
tions under which it has been activated. The topic is vast, and many
examples could serve. I will only touch on a few.
22 The Ksạ triya Viśvāmitra’s elevation to Brahman is, I believe, the sole example in
Indian literature of anyone succeeding in such a transformation. See now, however,
Brodbeck 2009, 139 and n. 24, correcting this, and citing Mbh 9.38.31–33, which men-
tions three others along with Viśvāmitra.
23 See Witzel 1997, 305 n. 6, 318; 327 on ‘the contempt for the Iksṿ āku as down-
trodden Ksạ triya’ already in the Brāhmaṇas; 308–21 on the mixed non-orthoprax
peoples associated with the Kosalas, Videhas, and Magadhas—the latter earlier shunned
by Brahmans. Witzel posits continuous Sanskritization in these lands ‘carried out by the
well-tested alliance of the Ksạ triyas and Brahmans’ (333–4), but the epics’ thematization
of Ksạ triya discontinuity suggests that continuity is not the whole story.
the sanskrit epic warrior in comparison and theory 591
The Ksạ triya Role Model in Post-Epic Histories
If we turn first to the medieval period (roughly the seventh to the six-
teenth centuries A.D.), we come to the problem of the ‘real historical
origins’ of the Rajputs, which, as the historian B.D. Chattopadhyaya
puts it, has become a ‘red herring . . . dragged about in historical writings
on early medieval and medieval India’ (1994, 161). There seem to have
been three equally one-sided solutions to this problem:24 the Rajputs
descend directly from Vedic and epic Ksạ triyas; they were originally
barbarian invaders slotted into Ksạ triya status; or they were originally
Brahmans who became kings and thus Ksạ triyas in troubled times. As
is now well known, however, the ‘ascribed’ rather than ‘achieved’ side
of Rajput culture, especially as it developed in what Dutch historian
Dirk H.A. Kolff (1990) calls the ‘Rajput great tradition’ of Rajasthan,
relied upon Brahmans to sanction their Ksạ triya-Rajput ascription by
according them Sanskritic descent from the Sun, Moon, or Fire gods.
Especially interesting are the so-called Fire-Lineage (or Agnivaṃśa)
Rajputs—most prominently, the north Indian Chauhāns, Caulukyas,
Paramarās and Pratihāras—who present the most innovative solution
to reinventing the Ksạ triya, since neither of the epics ever mentions
the Agnivaṃśa. Some, looking behind the myth in which Agnivaṃśa
Ksạ triyas are born to defend against demons, explain their creation
by a Brahman sage (either Vasisṭḥ a or Viśvāmitra) on Mount Abu in
Rajasthan as an allegory for the Agnivaṃśa’s alleged service against
Buddhists or Muslims. Alternately, the Bhavisỵ a Purāṇa’s version of
the Hindi martial epic, Ālhā, makes the Agnivaṃśa’s rise to imperial
status under Prithviraj Chauhan the very reason that Kṛsṇ ̣a agrees to
support the demon Kali and make it his divine game (līlā) to eliminate
the Agnivaṃśa and favour the Mleccha (Muslim and eventually Brit-
ish) intruders. According to Kṛsṇ ̣a, the Agnivaṃśins are little kings
and, as Ksạ triyas, degenerate and undifferentiable from Muslims (see
Hiltebeitel 1999a, 253–61, 265–8, 271, 276, 281–3).
Second, also in the medieval period, but from another direction,
the emergence of a low status ‘achieved,’ rather than ‘ascribed’, mobile
and highly disseminated ‘little Rajput’ culture found common fronts
with certain Muslims—particularly Afghans, Isma’ilis, and Sufis.
These ‘proto-Rajput,’ early little tradition Rajput and Rajput-Afghan
24 See Hiltebeitel 1999a, 439–45 for fuller discussion.
592 chapter twenty-one
cultures, which had south Indian counterparts (see Hiltebeitel 1999a,
439–75), also reinvented the Ksạ triya themselves by, among other
things, presenting their lifestyles through regional oral versions and
sometimes cultic adaptations of the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa, and
regional oral martial epics in which heroes and heroines reincarnate
figures from the orally known classical epics.25 Here, one could argue,
is a place where the construction of the Ksạ triya is by and large not a
brahmanical fiction, but rather the work of low-caste, and often Dalit
or Untouchable, bards. Indeed, such oral epics and their bards often
rather trenchantly reinvent the Brahman. In reinventing the Ksạ triya,
they also frequently give their heroes Muslim and Dalit sidekicks, and
define the culminating moment in the life of virtually every heroine
around the Rajput practice of satī. Draupadī, for instance, eventually
becomes a satī by being reborn as a north Indian Rajput princess in
the Hindi folk epic, Ālhā (see Hiltebeitel 1999a, 476–511). As the folk-
lorist Kamal Kothari observed, such oral epic heroes and heroines are
not ‘role models’ for society at large. We may now say that this is
because they are not ‘brahmanical fictions’.
Finally, for more recent times, let me just note two counter-
tendencies.26 One is that of Hindutva ideologues to use the ancient
Ksạ triya in general, the epics more particularly, and still more par-
ticularly Rāma, to reinvent a heavily Brahmanized Ksạ triya role model
for modern times. Here, to run things in sequence, I have in mind
Indian national television’s use of the epics for ‘national integration’
in the 1980s and early 90s (Mankekar 1993, 544);27 BJP leader (and
since mid-1998 Home Minister) L.K. Advani’s dressing up, a Brahman
himself, as Rāma bow-in-hand to ride a chariot to Ayodhya (Rāma’s
birthplace and the solar dynasty’s capital in the Rāmāyaṇa) in 1990 to
inspire construction there of a temple at Rāma’s supposed birthplace,
with the destruction of the Babri Masjid on 6 December 1992 as an
outcome; the new militant Rāma looking like Śiva against Ayodhya’s
red doomsday sky on new poster art for the decade; and such claims
that have been aired recently (though not only recently) that from
Vedic through to epic times, India knew the technology of nuclear
25 See Waterfield and Grierson 1923; J. D. Smith 1991; Roghair 1982; and Beck 1992
respectively, and Hiltebeitel 1999, 48–296.
26 Cf. also the debates over the Rāmāyaṇa between E. V. Ramasami and Rajago-
palachariar, astutely treated in Richman 1995.
27 Cf. Lutgendorf 1990; Mankekar 1999; Rajagopal 2001.
the sanskrit epic warrior in comparison and theory 593
weapons. As Dr Krishna M. Bhatta asked, for instance, in 1998, in his
BJP policy notice on National Security and Defence, intending to show
‘how Hindutva is our forgotten identity’:
Does [the] BJP believe in Peace? The answer is an emphatic yes. India
has always been a proponent for peace. All our ancient shastra[s] start
and end with Om Shanti, Shanti, Shanti. We do, however, say that we
do not believe in peace at any cost. More important to us than peace is
dharma and truth. More than likely, a deliberate de-arming occurred in
[the] Indian subcontinent after the Mahābhārata when high technology
was abandoned. We will fully support and comply with any plans to a
nuclear abolition policy (Bhatt 1998, 1).
More wonders of invention. Meanwhile, from the opposite side come
the highly polemical warnings of social historian Kancha Ilaiah, a Śūdra
in class terms, whose recent book Why I Am Not a Hindu argues that
Brahmans and merchants are deploying a Hindutva version of what
can be called the classical Ksạ triya role model to draw Śūdra landlord
populations into the aspiration to become ‘neo-Kshatriyas.’ In what is
perhaps Ilaiah’s best-argued chapter, he positions the neo-Ksạ triya on
the current power-faultlines between the upper Brahmanized castes
and those whom he dubs—using a combination of modern Dalit and
ancient Buddhist terms—Dalitbahujans, ‘the oppressed many-folk’:
politically and census-wise, the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes,
and Other Backward Classes over whom neo-Ksạ triyas seek ‘to lord
it.’ According to Ilaiah, ‘The neo-Kshatriyas have become the saviours
of Brahminism’; ‘they hang between democracy and dictatorship’; ‘to
acquire . . . new cultural status,’ they bring up ‘[t]heir male children . . . in
an artificial heritage of martial culture’ (1996, 38–9, 52–3).
Once again, Ksạ triyas are a renewable resource, even as fictions. As the
Purusạ Sūkta puts it for all times, the Rājanya is arms without a mouth.
Functional Fictions, Role Models, and Role Play for Real
One of my surprises in researching this chapter, which can only be
stated tentatively since I have hardly exhausted the literatures, is that
in the two disciplines—sociology and psychology—where I expected
to find it having some prominence, the concept of role model is only
episodically used, rarely indexed, and very minimally theorized. On
the contrary, the concept of role—beginning with Talcott Parsons’
emphasis on ‘the role of ideas in social action’ (Parsons [1949] 1964,
19–33; 1951, 326–83), and on to professional roles ([1949] 1964, 38),
594 chapter twenty-one
sex roles (89–103), sex role strain (Ravinder 1987, comparing India
and Australia), status roles, multiple roles, role-creating, role-making,
role-taking, role-framing, role-interaction, and role-conflict (Parsons
[1949] 1964, 244), is frequently used, richly indexed, and heavily theo-
rized.28 It would seem that while the term ‘role model’ has had lim-
ited use in such areas as gender studies, media criticism (on both, see,
e.g., Tuchman 1979), adolescent psychology (e.g., Muess 1996), and
the sociology of single-parent families, its greatest currency has been
in public and especially media discourses that popularize and over-
simplify these two social sciences. Perhaps one could trace the term’s
media surge in the USA to the mid-1990s when basketball maverick
Charles Barkley announced in a tongue-in-cheek Nike commercial, ‘I
am not a role model.’ The public debate soon thereafter raged around
Dennis Rodman, Bill Clinton, and Madonna: ‘What kind of role
model . . . ?’ It would seem that the US media has found the question
less pressing during a Republican administration. If so, the American
sample might suggest that it would be worth investigating how societ-
ies (or elements of society, like academics and the media) project and
resolve their role model anxieties.
Nonetheless, I am not unhappy at having used the term to describe
the Sanskrit epic Ksạ triya. Here I think we can build upon a use-
ful distinction between ‘role’ and ‘role model’ that emerges from a
prior distinction proposed by the sociologist Robert K. Merton, who,
according to New York Times reporter Patricia Cohen, ‘developed the
idea of role models’ (Cohen 1998, A19). The distinction is one between
‘reference individual’ and ‘role model.’ According to Merton, although
these latter two terms are often treated as ‘conceptually synonymous,’
that treatment:
obscures a basic difference in the matters to which they respectively refer.
The person who identifies himself with a reference individual will seek
to approximate the behavior and values of that individual in his several
roles. The concept of role model can be thought of as more restricted in
scope, denoting a more limited identification with an individual in only
one or a selected few of his roles. To be sure, a role model may become
28 See Outhwaite and Bottomore 1993, 554–6 on ‘roles’ in twentieth-century social
thought, with nothing on ‘role model’. Similarly Parsons [1949] 1967 and 1951, especially
201–427; Wallace and Wolff 1986, one of whose co-authors, my colleague Ruth Wallace,
indicated her shared sense that the term ‘role model’ is less academically theorized than
its public uses would lead one to expect (personal communication, June 1998).
the sanskrit epic warrior in comparison and theory 595
a reference individual as his multiple roles are adopted for emulation
rather than emulation remaining confined to the one role on the basis
of which the initial psychological relationship was established . . . (1957,
303; my italics and underscoring).
Merton observes that ‘patterns of social interaction . . . may set limits
upon the sheer possibility of selecting certain persons as reference
individuals. If the interaction is segmental and confined to certain
role relationships, this alone would allow the emergence only of a
role model rather than a more comprehensive reference individual
(except in fantasy)’ (303). These observations would apply to the way
the Ksạ triya is theorized within the limits of caste categories: those
who could widen the Ksạ triya ‘role model’ into a ‘reference individual’
could only be Ksạ triyas. But if Ksạ triyas were ‘oftener than not brah-
manical fictions,’ what we would expect to find would (in Merton’s
words) be ‘only one or a selected few’ Ksạ triya traits that would serve
society as Brahman spokespersons sought to define it. And we would
also expect a certain amount of legerdemain in determining who could
bear these traits legitimately. With vernacular epic heroes and hero-
ines, low-caste upstarts, foreigners, and Brahmans excluded, and with
Rajputs a medieval invention, the only real Ksạ triya role models left
would have to be both epical and Sanskritic.
Still more usefully, Merton’s theorizing about the restrictiveness of
the concept ‘role model’ sets it over and against the more elastic con-
cept of ‘role.’ One thing that comes across clearly about uses of this
more expansive term is that social scientists have done their theorizing
across the disciplines by drawing primarily from the domains of litera-
ture and drama (Outhwaite and Bottomore 1993, 554). Literature and
drama construct roles, characters are given roles, authors frame roles,
and role-conflict is certainly one of the things that makes literatures
like the Sanskrit epics, and dramatizations of them, interesting. More-
over, we should find the notion of role helpful in thinking about the
various uses that have been made of the Ksạ triya role: BJP activists are
certainly role-creators in inspiring landlords to become neo-Ksạ triyas;
such landlords in turn are willing role-takers; and L.K. Advani is cer-
tainly role-playing when he dresses up as Rāma. The term ‘role’ in its
elasticity is useful to the human sciences because it allows one to play
back and forth between society and the arts. Even if it is playing with
fictions, such role-creating and role-playing involves playing interac-
tively with other role-players, usually playing conflictually, and basi-
cally playing politics: that is, playing for real.
596 chapter twenty-one
Here too we should note the arena in which the concept of role
was most richly theorized—that is, by Talcott Parsons. Parsons sought
to assess ‘typical [national] character structure[s]’ (Parsons [1949]
1964, 238), most notably those of America, Germany, and Japan, in
the context of contributing to American understanding of the latter
two countries and their anticipated reconstruction after World War
II. This involved assessing the ‘structurally important roles’ of national
institutions, and theorizing ‘the problem of institutional change’ as it
differently affects the status and roles of both groups and individuals
(239, 244), Parsons was in favor of using redefined occupational roles
to change more deeply rooted family and gender roles (260). And at
the heart of his analysis of occupational roles were those centered on
the professions and business. Parsons sought to show that although ‘the
professional type is the institutional framework in which many of our
more important social functions are carried on, notably the pursuit
of science and liberal learning, and its practical application in medi-
cine, technology, law, and teaching’ (48), there is in American society
a diminishing difference between the claimed ‘disinterestedness’ of
the professions and the ‘self-interest’ that governs the world of busi-
ness (35–6). Parsons seemed to think such a diminishing differential
was a good thing not only for America, but for America to export to
post-war Germany and Japan (see, e.g. 296–7) to erode the institu-
tionally embedded roles and values typified by long-standing opposi-
tions between Junkers and Bureaucrats, or Samurai and Chonin. Thus
for Germany, Parsons concentrated on the role of ‘Prussian Junker
families’ in setting the ‘tone’ for the officer corps (106), in combining
‘a patriarchal type of authoritarianism with a highly developed for-
mal legalism’ reinforced by a Kantian sense of ‘duty’ (109), and in
supplying, ‘a heroic “ideal” of the fighting man . . . [that] could be pro-
pagandistically contrasted with the money-grubbing capitalist of the
“plutocracies”’ (122–3). And for Japan, he stressed ‘aristocratic classes
of the type which idealized the military virtues and a corresponding
code of honor . . . [that] looked with extreme contempt on the mer-
chant and tradesman’ (281). Building upon Max Weber’s comparativ-
ism, Parsons also sought to extend this inquiry to India and China, but
only in relation to oppositions between ‘professionalism’ and ‘com-
mercialism’ (162) and between ascribed versus achieved status (78).
Tellingly, he did not address the profession of the Indian Ksạ triya as
a parallel to the German or Japanese warrior.
the sanskrit epic warrior in comparison and theory 597
Such comparisons, however, were more interesting to Parsons’
contemporary Georges Dumézil. It was this French comparative
mythologist and historian of religions, and the Swedish historian of
religions Stig Wikander, who, in 1966, first interested me in India’s
Sanskrit epics. In 1939, Dumézil had developed his theory that Indo-
European societies had carried with them—across Eurasia from India
to Iceland—a ‘trifunctional ideology’ whose traces could be found in
Indo-European myths, rituals, legends, laws, philosophies, and social
structures. The three functions, in brief, were, from the top down: (1) a
sovereign sacerdotal and juridical function; (2) a warrior function; and
(3) an economic and fecundating function. By 1947, first Wikander
and then Dumézil had discovered that the heroes of the Mahābhārata,
the five Pāṇḍavas and their wife-in-common, Draupadī, could be inter-
preted as providing a striking articulation of these three functions (see
Dumézil 1948; Wikander 1948): the eldest Pāṇḍava, king Yudhisṭḥ ira,
has both sacerdotal and juridical traits; the next two brothers, Arjuna
and Bhīma, have pronounced warrior characteristics; and the twins
and Draupadī have associations, respectively, with pastoralism and
the earth’s fecundity. We now know that Dumézil’s project was not
unaffected by the wartime period in which he lived, and it seems as if
some of his enterprise was motivated by a wish to contrast German
society, which he saw as having truncated its trifunctional ideology
by leaving its warrior function unchecked by any superior sacerdotal/
juridical function, with other Indo-European societies that, he thought,
kept their trifunctional ideology more fully (see Lincoln 1991, 244–58;
1999, 121–40). This included French society which, in his view, had
inherited a transformation of the three functions, hierarchically intact,
into the medieval three estates and the subordination of kings to the
papacy (see Duby 1978). In this context, Dumézil developed the idea
that the Indo-European warrior’s traditional ‘function,’ which Ger-
manic traditions had intensified, was to subordinate himself to sacred
and juridical authority while defending that authority and protecting
the society’s economic resources. And he saw the warrior function
to be ‘split’ between a chivalric side exemplified by such heroes as
Achilles and Arjuna, and a brutal side exemplified by Heracles and
Bhīma—the latter more heightened in Germany than elsewhere. For
present purposes, what is important here is to observe that Dumézil’s
warrior function was pivotal to his trifunctional theory, and that the
theory was developed to make comparative points about modern and,
598 chapter twenty-one
in particular, German society and its uses of unchecked mass-techno-
logical warfare. Dumézil of course had no difficulty in seeing the four
Indian classes as another modification of the basic three hierarchical
and reciprocally ordered functions—this time by an addition at the
bottom rather than a subtraction from the top.
Dumézil’s theory of ‘function’ and Parsons’s theory of ‘role’ thus
emerge from the same period, and with similar purposes and designs.
Indeed, in puzzling through such questions about the social functions
and roles of warriors, Parsons is a liberal American counterpart to the
royalist Dumézil. It is also worth noting their different debts to Emile
Durkheim. But for Parsons, Indian Ksạ triyas had no Indo-European
allure; indeed, the role of the Indian Ksạ triya would not have been
likely to command his attention in the mid to late 1940s. As political
scientists Lloyd and Suzanne Rudolph have argued, the mainly Jain and
Vaiśya inspirations for Mohandas K. (Mahatma) Gandhi’s non-violent
civil disobedience campaigns made the Ksạ triya role superfluous for
the achievement of Indian Independence (Rudolph and Rudolph 1967,
155–249), and post-Independence India had not yet begun to reinvent
it. However, while it had no prominent Ksạ triyas, India had a long-
serviceable Ksạ triya role that, as we have seen, was only waiting to be
re-‘played’ and re-‘presented.’
If the concepts of role and function carry a surcharge of political
overtones, so all the more does the concept of role model, which is
inherently prescriptive. Following Merton, this latter concept invites
one to extract from the play of roles to single out one or just a few of
an individual’s roles for others to model themselves upon. The San-
skrit epic poets have indeed bequeathed Ksạ triya role models of this
type centered on such monochrome values as Rāma’s steadfastness
to truth, Sītā’s embodiment of pativratā (fidelity to a husband) and
Arjuna’s exemplification of karmayoga (disciplined desireless action).
Indeed, the ideal ‘disinterestedness’ of the Ksạ triya—whether male or
female, as seen in these three figures—is precisely the point of such
portrayals, which are constructed by the very inscribers and beneficia-
ries of this ‘professional’ Ksạ triya trait. Just think of poor Karṇa, ever
ready to give anything to a god, so long as the god disguises himself
as a Brahman.29 The Sanskrit epics carefully contrast such Ksạ triya role
29 This happens doubly: not only in the Sanskrit Mahābhārata, where Indra disguises
himself as a Brahman to trick Karṇa out of his earrings and gold-armoured birthday
the sanskrit epic warrior in comparison and theory 599
models with more ambiguous counterparts, such as Vālin, Sugrīva,
and Hanumān; or Draupadī, Bhīma and Yudhisṭḥ ira. And, as we have
seen, they further define them over and against more generalized
foils such as the ‘old Ksạ triya.’ To again borrow from Kosambi, such
Ksạ triya role models are a useful ‘Brahmanical fiction’; and where they
continue to be used, ‘oftener than not’ that is what they remain.
In closing, I realize that in showing how Brahmans have ‘constructed’
the Ksạ triya, I have come close, much too close, to an obvious danger:
that of essentializing the Brahman. To that extent, I too have sustained
a convenient fiction, and I am cognizant of its dangers. It has, how-
ever, been a useful one to make a point. All four of the Hindu varṇas
or classes are ascribed; they are not essences. Yet they become virtual
essences by the inscribed norms that are endorsed in Sanskrit texts, the
epics included. In the Sanskrit epics, at least, the difference between
Brahmans and other classes is that, whereas Brahmans ascribed a rich
variety of rewarding and often concealed roles for themselves, they
ascribed role models only to Ksạ triyas. There is no sustained treatment
of a Brahman role model in the Sanskrit epics,30 and the lower classes
are nearly entirely ignored.
In conclusion, I am not sure whether one can misuse a role model
any more than one can constrain the warrior ‘function’ by sacred and
juridical norms. Yet if pressed for a positive Indian role model that
one might use, why not, at a time when the Indian Council of Histori-
cal Research has (since early June 1998) been reconstituted by the BJP
with new members chosen to rewrite Indian history, and in particular
the history found in school textbooks, as Hindutva history, why not, I
repeat, consider a critical historian/archaeologist like D.D. Kosambi?
suit, but in Tamil Mahābhāratas where, at Karṇa’s death, Kṛsṇ ̣a disguises himself as a
Brahman to induce Karṇa to give him the very last thing he has: his merits—that is, his
assurance of heaven. See Shulman 1985, 389–92; de Bruin 1998, 233–7; 1999, 292–3.
30 Since the point could be developed, I make it only briefly. Martial Brahmans like
Droṇa, Kṛpa, and Paraśurāma are too flawed to be role models. Author Brahmans like
Vyāsa and Vālmīki are too remote. Consultant Brahmans like Dhaumya, Vasisṭḥ a,
and Agastya are too episodic. Bhakti Brahmans like Mārkaṇḍeya and Nārada are too
limited.

iv. apparatus

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adarkar, Aditya. 2001. “Karṇa in the Mahābhārata.” Ph.D. dissertation, University
of Chicago.
Akhtar, Jamna Das, ed. 1972. The Matsya Purāṇam. Delhi: Oriental Publishers.
Allan, J., Wolseley Haig and H. H. Dodwell. 1934. H. H. Dodwell, ed. The Cambridge
Shorter History of India. Cambridge: University Press.
Allchin, F. R. 1963. Neolithic Cattle Keepers of South India. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Allen, N. J. 1991. Review of The Cult of Draupadī. Mythologies: From Gingee to
Kuruksẹ tra, by Alf Hiltebeitel. Journal of the Anthropological Society or Oxford 21,
3: 327–28.
Alles, Gregory D. 1989. Reflections on Dating ‘Vālmīki.’ Journal of the Oriental Insti-
tute, Baroda 38,3–4: 217–44.
——. 1994. The Iliad, the Rāmāyaṇa, and the Work of Religion. University Park: Penn-
sylvania State University Press.
Alter, Robert 1981. The Art of Biblical Narrative. New York: Basic Books.
Apte, V. S. 1957–59. The Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary. 3 vols. Pune: Popular
Prakashan.
Asopa, Jai Narayan. 1976. Origins of the Rājpūts. Delhi: Bharatiya Publishing House.
Auerbach, Erich 1968. Mimesis: The Representation of Reality in Western Literature.
Willard Trask, trans. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Baden-Powell, B. H. 1899. Notes on the Origin of the ‘Lunar’ and ‘Solar’ Aryan Tribes
and on the ‘Rajput’ Clans. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society n.v.: 295–328, 519–63.
Bailey, Greg. 2003. The Mahābhārata as Counterpoint to the Pāli Canon, paper pre-
sented at the Conference on Religions in the Indic Civilization, Center for Develop-
ing Societies, New Delhi, December 18–21.
Bakhtin, M. M. 1981. The Dialogic Imagination. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist,
trans. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Bakker, Hans. 1986. Ayodhyā, Groningen: Egbert Forsten.
Barth, Auguste. [1979–81] 1963. The Religions of India. Varanasi: Chowkhamba.
Barthes, Roland. [1957] 1972. Mythologies. Annette Lavers, trans. New York: Hill and
Wang.
Bartholomae, Christian. 1904. Altiranisches Wörterbuch. Strassburg. K. J. Trübner.
Basham, Arthur. 1963. The Wonder That Was India. New York: Grove Press.
Beall, E. F. 2005/2006. Hesiod’s Treatise on Justice: “Works and Days” 109–380. The
Classical Journal 101,2: 161–82.
Beck, Brenda E. F. 1982. The Three Twins: The Telling of a South Indian Folk Epic.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
——, collector and trans. 1992. Elder Brothers Story. Aṇṇan̠mār Katai (An Oral Epic of
Tamil). 2 Parts. Folklore of Tamil Nadu Series, 4. Madras: Institute of Asian Studies.
Bedekar, V. M. 1962. The Legend of Cirakārin in the Skanda Mahāpurāṇa and the
Mahābhārata. Purāṇa 11,2: 210–228.
——. 1963. The Place of Japa in the Moksạ dharma Parvan (Mahābhārata 12.189–93)
and the Yogasūtras. Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 44: 63–74.
——. 1966. Moksạ dharma. In V. S. Sukthankar et al. (eds.), The Mahābhārata. For the
first time critically edited, XV: ccv–ccxlvii. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute.
Belvalkar, Shripad Krishna 1947. Samjaya’s “Eye Divine”. Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 27: 310–31.
604 bibliography
——, ed. 1954. Śāntiparvan, Part II: Āpaddharma and Concordances; Part III:
Moksạ dharma, B, with Appendix I and Critical Notes. In Mahābhārata: Critical
Edition, V. S. Sukthankar et al., eds. 24 vols. with Harivaṃśa. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute. 1933–70. Vol. 14.
Bhabha, Homi. K. K. 1984. Of Mimicry and Man: The Ambivalence of Colonial Dis-
course. October 28: 125–33 (= Bhabha 1994: 85–92).
——. 1991. A Question of Survival: Nations and Psychic States. In James Donald, ed., Psy-
choanalysis and Cultural Theory: Thresholds, 89–103. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
——. 1994. The Location of Culture. London: Routledge.
Bharadwaj, O. P. 1986. Studies in the Historical Geography of Ancient India. Delhi:
Sundeep.
Bhatt, G. H. ed. 1960. The Bālakāṇḍa: The First Book of the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa. Baroda
Critical Edition. Baroda: Oriental Institute.
—— and U. P. Shah, gen. eds. 1960–75. The Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa: Critical Edition.
7 vols. Baroda: University of Baroda.
Bhatta, Dr Krishna M. (1998): ‘Nuclear issue.’ BJP Policy Notice on National Security
and Defence. BJP website: http://www.bjp.org/major/nuclrkb-1.html.
Bhattacharya, Pradip. 2008. Bridging a Gap in Puranic History. “The Sampradaya
Sun. Independent Vaisnava News. Feature Stories.” http://www.harekrsna.com/
sun/ features/08–08/features1119.htm
Biardeau, Madeleine. 1971–72, 1975–81. “Comptes rendus of seminars on the Mahab-
harata.”. Annuaire de l’École Pratique des Hautes Études, Section 5, 79, 139–47; 84,
165–185; 85, 135–167; 87, 145–171; 88, 167–182; 89, 221–250.
——. 1976. Études de mythologie hindoue: 4. Bhakti et avatāra. Bulletin de l’école fran-
çaise d’Extrême Orient 63: 87–237.
——. 1978. Études de mythologie hindoue: 5. Bhakti et avatāra. Bulletin de l’école fran-
çaise d’Extrême Orient 65: 111–263.
——. 1980. Śakuntalā dans l’épopée. Indologica Taurinensia 7: 115–25.
——. 1981a. L’Hindouisme: Anthropologie d’une civilisation. Paris: Flammarion.
——. 1981b. Études de mythologie hindoue, 1 : Cosmogonies purāṇiques. Paris : École
Française d’Extrême Orient.
——. 1989. Histoires de poteux: Variations védiques autour de la déesse hindoue. Paris:
École Française d’Extrême Orient.
——. 1991. Nara et Nārāyaṇa. Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Sudasiens 35: 75–108.
——. 1997a. Some Remarks on the Links between the Epics, the Purāṇas and their
Vedic Sources. In Gerhard Oberhammer, ed. Studies in Hinduism: Vedism and Hin-
duism. 77–119. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
——. 1997b Un certain Kīcaka. In Siegfried Lienhard and Irma Piovano, eds. Lex et
Litterae: Studies in Honour of Professor Oscar Botto. 35–52. Alessandria: Edizioni
dell’Orso.
——. 1999. Le Rāmāyaṇa de Vālmīki. Paris: Gallimard.
——. 2002. Le Mahābhārata: Un récit fondateur du brahmanisme et son interprétation.
2 vols. Paris: Seuil.
——. 2004. Stories about Posts: Vedic Variations around the Hindu Goddess. Alf Hilte-
beitel, Marie-Louise Reiniche, and James Walker, trans. Hiltebeitel and Reiniche,
eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
—— and Charles Malamoud. 1976. Le sacrifice dans l’Inde ancienne. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.
—— and Jean-Michel Péterfalvi, trans. 1985–86. Le Mahābhārata. Vol. 1, Books 1–5,
Vol. 2, Books 6–18. Paris: Flammarion.
Bigger, Andreas. 1998. Balarāma im Mahābhārata. Beiträge zur Indologie 30. Wies-
baden: Otto Harrassowitz.
Blackburn, Stuart H. 1985. Death and Deification: Folk Cults in Hinduism. History of
Religions 24, 3: 255–74.
bibliography 605
——. 1988. Singing of Birth and Death: Texts in Performance. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
——. 1989. Patterns of Development for Indian Oral Epics. In Blackburn et al. 1989:
15–32.
—— and Joyce Burkhalter Flueckiger. 1989. Introduction. In Blackburn et al. 1989:
1–11.
Blackburn, Stuart, Peter J. Claus, Joyce B. Flueckiger, and Susan S. Wadley, eds. 1989.
Oral Epics in India. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Bloom, Harold. 1973. The Anxiety of Influence: A Theory of Poetry. New York: Oxford
University Press.
——. 1975. A Map of Misreading. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bodhi, Bhikkhu, trans. 2000. The Connected Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of
the Saṃyutta Nikāya. The Teachings of the Buddha. Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Booth, Wayne C. 1983. The Rhetoric of Fiction. Second ed. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Bosworth, A. B. 1896. Alexander and the East. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Bowles, Adam. 2004. “Dharma, Disorder and the Political in Ancient India: The
Āpaddharmaparvan of the Mahābhārata.” Ph.D. dissertation. La Trobe University.
——. 2007. Dharma, Disorder and the Political in Ancient India: The Āpaddharmaparvan
of the Mahābhārata. Leiden: Brill.
Bracey, Robert. 2005. The Azes Era: A New Discovery and a New Problem. http://
www.kushan.org/essays/chronology/azesvikrama.htm
Brereton, Joel. 2002. The Race of Mudgala and Mudgalānī. Journal of the American
Oriental Society 122: 224–34.
Brockington, John L. 1969. A Note on Mrs. Sen’s Article about the Rāmāyaṇa. Journal
of the American Oriental Society 89: 412–414.
——. 1981. The Sacred Thread: Hinduism in its Continuity and Diversity. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
——. 1998. The Sanskrit Epics. Handbuch der Orientalistik, Zweite Abteilung, Indien,
Vol. 12. J. Bronkhorst, ed. Leiden: Brill.
——. 1999a, Formulae in the Rāmāyaṇa—An Index of Orality? In M. Brockington and
Schreiner 1999: 121–131.
——. 1999b. Issues in the Shift from Oral to Written Transmission of the Epics: A
Workshop Report. In: M. Brockington and Schreiner 1999: 131–138.
——. 2000a. Epic Threads: John Brockington on the Sanskrit Epics. Greg Bailey and
Mary Brockington, eds. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
——. 2000b. The Structure of the Moksạ -dharma-parvan of the Mahābhārata. In Piotr
Balcerowicz and Marek Mejor, eds., On the Understanding of Other Cultures. Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Sanskrit and Related Studies to Com-
memorate the Centenary of the Birth of Stanislaw Schayer (1899–1941). 71–82.
Warsaw: Oriental Institute, Warsaw University.
——. 2002. Review of Hiltebeitel 2001a. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African
Studies 65,3: 600–02.
——. 2006. Epic Svayaṃvaras. In Raghunath Panda and Madhusudan Mishra eds.
Voice of the Orient (A Tribute to Upendranath Dahl). 35–42. Delhi: Eastern Book
Linkers.
Brockington, Mary. 2002. Review of Hiltebeitel 2001a. Indo-Iranian Journal 45:
361–65.
—— and Peter Schreiner, eds. 1999. Composing a Tradition: Concepts, Techniques and
Relationships. Proceedings of the First Dubrovnik International Conference on the
Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas, August 1997. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Arts and
Sciences.
Brodbeck, Simon Pearse. 2006. Ekalavya and Mahābhārata 1.121–28. International
Journal of Hindu Studies 10: 1–34.
606 bibliography
——. 2009. The Mahābhārata Patriline: Gender, Culture, and the Royal Hereditary.
Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing.
—— and Brian Black, eds. 2007. Gender and Narrative in the Mahābhārata. London:
Routledge.
Bronkhorst, Johannes. 2007. Greater Magadha. Studies in the Culture of Early India.
Handbook of Oriental Studies, Section 2: India; vol. 19. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Brown, W. Norman. 1933. The Story of Kālaka. Oriental Series 1. Washington DC:
Smithsonian Institute, Freer Gallery of Art.
——. 1942. The Creation Myth of the Rg̣ Veda. Journal of the American Oriental Society
62: 95–98.
——. 1965. Theories of Creation in the Ṛg Veda. Journal of the American Oriental
Society 85: 23–34.
——. 1972. Duty as Truth in Ancient India. Proceedings of the American Philosophical
Society 116: 252–68.
Bühler, Georg. 1873. Pushpamitra or Pushyamitra. Indian Antiquary 2: 362–63.
——, trans. [1886] 1969. The Laws of Manu. New York: Dover.
Burgess, Ebenezer. 1860. Sūrya Siddhānta: A Textbook on Hindu Astronomy. New
Haven CT: American Oriental Society.
Burnell, A. E. 1894. The Devil Worship of the Tuluvas: The Song of Koti and Chan-
nayya. Indian Antiquary 23: 29–49, 85–91.
——. 1895. The Story of Koti and Channayya. Indian Antiquary 24: 114–21, 141–53,
211–15, 242–44, 267–72.
——. 1886. The Devil Worship of the Tuluvas: The Origin of the Beiderlu (Mr. Män-
ner’s. variants). Indian Antiquary 25: 295–310, 328–42.
Chadwick, H. Munro. 1912. The Heroic Age. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Chatterjee, Asim Kumar. 1980. Political History of Pre-Buddhist India. Calcutta:
Indian Publicity Society.
Chattopadhyaya, B. D. 1994. The Emergence of the Rājpūts as Historical Process in
Early Medieval Rajasthan. In Karine Schomer, Joan L. Erdman, Deryck O. Lodrick,
and Lloyd I. Rudolph, eds., The Idea of Rajasthan: Explorations in Regional Identity,
161–91. Delhi: Manohar and American Institute of Indian Studies.
Clay, Jenny Strauss. 2003. Hesiod’s Cosmos. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cohen, Patricia. (1998): ‘An Eye for Patterns in the Social Fabric: Patriarch of Soci-
ology Sees his insights Become Just What Everyone Knows’. New York Times,
31 October, pp. A19–20.
Colebrooke, H. T. 1809. On the Indian and Arabian Divisions of the Zodiack. Asiatic
Researches 9: 523–76.
Collins, Steven. 1993. The Discourse on What is Primary (Aggañña Sutta). An Anno-
tated Translation. Journal of Indian Philosophy 21: 301–93.
Conze, Edward. 1960. The Prajñāpāramitā Literature. The Hague: Mouton.
Couture, André. 1977. “Kṛsṇ ̣a-Gopāla. Avatāra de Visṇ ̣u.” Ph.D. dissertation. Paris.
——. 1996. The Harivaṃśa: A Supplement ot the Mahābhārata. Journal of Vaisṇ ̣ava
Studies 4,3: 127–38.
——. 2001. From Visṇ ̣u’s Deeds to Visṇ ̣u’s Play, or Observations on the Word Avatāra
as a Designation for the Manifestations of Visṇ ̣u. Journal of Indian Philosophy 29:
313–26.
Cribb, J. 2005. The Greek Kingdom in Bactria, Its Coinage and Collapse. In Osmund
Bopearachchi and Marie-Françoise Boussac, eds. Afghanistan, Ancien Carrefour
entre l’est et l’ouest. Indicopleustoi: Archaeologies of the Indian Ocean, 3. 207–25.
Turnhout: Brepols.
Cross, Tom Peete and Clark Harris Slover, eds. 1969. Ancient Irish Tales. New York:
Barnes and Noble.
Custodi, Andrea. 2004. “Dharma and Desire: Lacan and the Left Half of the
Mahābhārata.” Ph.D. Dissertation. George Washington University.
bibliography 607
Dahlmann, Joseph 1895. Das Mahābhārata als Epos und Rechtsbuch. Ein Problem aus
Altindiens Cultur- und Literaturgeschichte. Berlin: Felix L. Dames.
Dandekar, R. N. 1966. Anusāśanaparvan. Introduction and apparatus. Vol. 17 of
V. S. Sukthankar et al., eds. 1933–70. Mahābhārata: Critical Edition. 24 vols. with
Harivaṃśa. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.
Dange, Sadashiv Ambadas. 1969. Legends in the Mahābhārata. Delhi: Matilal
Banarsidass.
Dani, Ahmad Hasan. 1963. Indian Paleography. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dayal, Naina. 2004. The “Cooking” Time (review of Hiltebeitel 2001a). The Book
Review (Delhi). January: 8–9.
De Bary, W. Theodore, ed. 1958. Sources of Indian Tradition, vol. 1. New York:
Columbia University Press.
de Bruin, Hanne M. 1998. Karṇa’s Death: A Play by Pukalentippulavar. Publications
of the Department of Indology, 87. Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry,
École Française d’Extrême Orient, and International Institute of Asian Studies
——. 1999. Katṭạ ikkūttu. The Flexibility of a South Indian Theatre Tradition. Gronin-
gen: Egbert Forsten.
Defourny, Michel. 1973. “Le mythe de Yayāti dans la littérature épique et purāṇique.”
Ph.D. dissertation. University of Liège.
——. 1976. Note sur le symbolisme de la corne dans le Mahābhārata et la mythologie
brahmanique classique. Indo-Iranian Journal 18: 17–23.
——. 1978. Le mythe de Yayāti dans la littérature épique et purānique. Étude de
mythologie hindoue. Paris: Société d’Edition “Les Belles Lettres”.
Derrida, Jacques. 1997. Politics of Friendship. George Collins trans. London: Verso.
Deshpande, Madhav M. 1993. Sanskrit and Prakrit: Sociolinguistics Issues. Delhi:
Motilal: Banarsidass.
Deussen, Paul. 1966. The Philosophy of the Upanishads. New York: Dover.
De Vries, Jan. 1963. Heroic Song and Heroic Legend. B. J. Timmer trans. London.
Oxford University Press.
Dhand, Arti. 2004. The Subversive Nature of Virtue in the Mahābhārata: A Tale about
Women, Smelly Ascetics and God. Journal of the American Academy of Religion
72,1: 33–58.
Dharma, P. C. 1941. The Rāmāyaṇa Polity. Mylapore: Madras Law Journal Pless.
Dillon, Myles. 1947. The Hindu Act of Truth in Celtic Tradition. Modern Philology
44: 137–40.
——, 1963. Celt and Hindu. Vishveshvaranand Indological Journal 1: 203–23.
——. 1969. The Archaism of the Irish Tradition. Reprints from the American Commit-
tee for Irish Studies, No. 5. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——. 1973 .The Consecration of Irish Kings. Celtica 10: 1–8.
Dimmitt, Cornelia & J. A. B. van Buitenen, tras. 1978. Classical Hindu Mythology. A
Reader in the Sanskrit Purāṇas. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Doniger, Wendy. 1995. Begetting on the Margin: Adultery and Surrogate Pseudomar-
riage in Hinduism. In Lindsey Harlan and Paul B. Courtright, eds. From the Mar-
gins of Hindu Marriage: Essays on Gender, Religion, and Culture. 160–83. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
——. 1998. The Implied Spider: Politics and Theology in Myth. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Dubuisson, Daniel. 1978a. La déesse chevelue et la reine coiffeuse. Recherches sur un
thème épique de l’Inde ancienne. Journal Asiatique 166: 291–310.
——. 1978b L’équipment de l’Inauguration royale dans l’Inde Védique et en Irlande.
Revue de l’Histoire des Religions 193: 153–64.
——. 1978c. Le Roi indo-européen et la synthèse des trois fonctions. Annales Econo-
mies Sociétés Civilisations 33: 21–34.
——. 1979. Trois thèses sur le Rāmāyaṇa. Annales Economies Sociétés Civilisation 34:
464–89.
608 bibliography
Duby, Georges. 1978. The Three Orders: Feudal Society Imagined. Arthur Goldham-
mer, trans. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dumézil, Georges. 1948. Jupiter, Mars, Quirinus, IV: Explications de Textes Indiens et
Latins. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
——. 1954. Karṇa et les Pāṇḍava. Orientalia Suecana 3: 60–66.
——. 1968. Mythe et épopée. Vol. 1. L’Idéologie des trois fonctions dans les épopées de
peuples indo-européens. Paris: Gallimard.
——. 1970. The Destiny of the Warrior. Alf Hiltebeitel trans. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
——. 1971. Mythe et épopee, 2: Types épiques indo-européens : un héros, un sorcier, un
roi. Paris: Editions Gallimard.
——. 1973a. The Destiny of a King. Alf Hiltebeitel, trans. University of Chicago Press.
——. 1973b. From Myth to Fiction: The Saga of Hadingus. Derek Coulter, trans. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
——. 1973c. Gods of the Ancient Northmen. Einar Haugen, ed. Los Angeles: University
of California Press.
——. 1974. Mythe et épopée, I: L’Idéologie des trois fonctions dans les épopées des peu-
ples indo-européens. 2nd ed. Paris: Gallimard.
Dumont, P.-E. 1927. L’Aśvamedha: Description du sacrifice solonnel du cheval dans le
culte védique d’après les textes du Yajurveda blanc. Paris: Paul Guethner.
Dunham, Deborah and James W. Fernandez. 1991. Tropical Dominions: The Figura-
tive Struggle over Domains of Belonging and Apartness in Africa. In Fernandez,
ed., Beyond Metaphor: The Theory of Tropes in Anthropology, 190–210. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Dutt, M. N., trans. 1895–1905. A Prose English Translation of the Mahabharata. Cal-
cutta: H. C. Dass.
Edgerton, Franklin, ed. 1944. Sabhāparvan. Introduction and Apparatus. Pune: Bhan-
darkar Oriental Research Institute.
——, trans. 1952. The Bhagavad Gītā Translated and Interpreted, Part 1: Text and
Translation. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Egan, Charles 2000. Were Yūeh-fu Ever Folk Songs? Reconsidering the Relevance of
Oral Theory and Balladry Analogies. Chinese Literature: Essays, Articles, Reviews
22: 31–66.
Eliade, Mircea. 1960. Dimensions religieuses du renouvellement cosmique. Eranos-
Jahrbuch (Zurich) 28: 241–75.
——. 1963. Myth and Reality. New York: Harper and Row.
Elliot, C. A. 1992 [1881]. Ālhakhaṇḍa. Microfilm London: British Oriental Library
and India Office.
Elliot, Sir Walter. 1821–1860. Aboriginal Caste Book. 3 Handwritten vols. London:
India Office Library.
Embree, A. T., ed. 1988. Sources of Indian Tradition. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Emeneau, Murray B. 1958. Oral poets of South India—The Todas. Journal of American
Folklore 71: 312–324.
Emerson, Ralph Waldo. 1903. ‘Brahma’ in his Poems. New and Complete Copyright
Edition of the Works of Ralph Waldo Emerson, vol. 9, Riverside edition. 170–71.
London: Weaverly Book Co.
——. Encyclopaedia of Tamil Literature. Vol. 1, Introductory Articles. Thiruvanmiyur,
Madras: Institute of Asian Studies.
Eschmann, Anncharlott, Hermann Kulke, and Gaya Charan Tripathi, eds. 1978.
Jagannāth and the Regional Tradition of Orissa. New Delhi: Manohar.
Esnoul, Anne-Marie. 1979. Nārāyaṇīya Parvan du Mahābhārata. Paris: Société
d’Edition.
Falk, Harry. 1993. Schrift im alten Indien. Ein Forschungsbericht mit Anmerkungen.
Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag.
bibliography 609
Filliozat, Jean. 1967–68. Agastya et le propagation du brahmanisme au Sud-Est Asia-
tique. Adyar Library Bulletin, 5: Raghavan Felicitation Volume 31–32: 442–49.
Fitzgerald, James L. 1980. “The Moksạ Anthology of the Great Bhārata: An Initial
Survey of Structural Issues, Themes, and Rhetorical Strategies.” Ph.D. Dissertation.
Chicago: University of Chicago.
——. 1991. India’s Fifth Veda: The Mahābhārata’s Presentation of Itself. In Arvind
Sharma, ed. Essays on the Mahābhārata. 150–70. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
——. 1999. Manuscript of article “Mahābhārata.” See now Fitzgerald 2004b.
——. 2001. Making Yudhisṭḥ ira the King: The Dialectics and the Politics of Violence
in the Mahābhārata. Rocznik Orientalistyczny 54,1: 63–92.
——. 2002. The Rāma Jāmadagnya “Thread” of the Mahābhārata: A New Survey of
Rāma Jāmadagnya in the Pune Text. In Mary Brockington, ed. Stages and Transi-
tions: Temporal and Historical Frameworks in Epic and Purāṇic Literature. Proceed-
ings of the Second Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and
Purāṇas. 89–132. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Arts and Sciences.
——. 2003a. The Many Voices of the Mahābhārata. Review of Hiltebeitel 2001a. Jour-
nal of the American Oriental Society 123,4: 803–18.
——. 2003b. The Position of Brahmins in the Mahābhārata: New Perspectives on the
Development and Growth of the Epic Between the Empires. Paper presented at the
“Between the Empires” Conference, University of Texas at Austin, April. See now
Fitzgerald 2006.
——. 2003c. Bhīsṃ a’s Instructions of Yudhisṭḥ ira in the Mahābhārata: New Perspec-
tives on the Development and Growth of the Epic “Between the Empires” (another
advance version of Fitzgerald 2006).
——. 2004a. trans. and ed. The Mahābhārata, vol. 7: 11, The Book of the Women; 12,
The Book of Peace, Part One. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——. 2004b. Mahābhārata. In Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby, eds. The Hindu World.
52–74. New York: Routledge.
——. 2006. Negotiating the Shape of “Scripture”: New Perspectives on the Develop-
ment and Growth of the Mahābhārata between the Empires. In Patrick Olivelle,
ed. Between the Empires: Society in India 300 B.C.E. to 400 C.E. 257–86. New York:
Oxford University Press.
——. 2007. No Contest between Memory and Invention: The Invention of the Pāṇḍava
Heroes of the Mahābhārata. Paper presented at the 4th International Veda Confer-
ence, Austin TX. Courtesy of the author.
——. In press (as of 2003; a precursor of Fitzgerald 2003b and 2006).
Flood, Gavin. 1996. An Introduction to Hinduism. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Foucault, Michel 1979. What is an Author? In Josué V. Harari, ed. Textual Strate-
gies: Perspectives in Post-structuralist Criticism. 141–60. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press.
Franco, Eli. 2004. The Spitzer Manuscript: The Earliest Philosophical Manuscript in San-
skrit. 2 vols. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Frasca, Richard Armando. 1990. The Theatre of the Mahābhārata: Terukkūttu Perfor-
mances in South India. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Fraser, J. 1915. The First Battle of Moytura. Eriu 1: 1–63.
Freud, Sigmund. [1900] 1961. The Interpretation of Dreams. James Strachey, trans.
New York: John Wiley.
Friedrich, Paul. 1973. Defilement and Honor in the Iliad. Journal of Indo-European
Studies 1: 119–126.
Frye, Richard N. 1983. History of Ancient Iran. Munich: Beck.
Ganguli, Kisari Mohan, trans. and Pratap Chandra Roy, publisher. [1884–96] 1970.
12 vols. The Mahabharata. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Gehrts, Heino. 1975. Mahābhārata: Das Geschehen und seine Bedeutung. Bonn: Bou-
vier Vlg. Herbert Grundmann.
610 bibliography
Genning, V. F. 1979. The Cemetery at Sintashta and the Early Indo-Iranian Peoples.
Trans. by W. A. Brewer. Journal of Indo-European Studies 7: 1–29.
Gerow, Edwin. 1971. A Glossary of Indian Figures of Speech. The Hague: Mouton.
Gethin, Rupert. 1992. The Buddhist Path to Awakening: A Study of the Bodhi-Pakkhiyā
Dhammā. Brill’s Indological Library 7. Leiden: Brill.
——. 1997. Cosmology and Meditation: From the Aggañña Sutta to the Mahāyāna.
History of Religions 36,3: 183–217.
——. 2006. Mythology as Meditation: From the Mahāsudassana Sutta to the
Sukhāvatīvyūha Sūtra. Journal of the Pali Text Society 28: 63–112.
Ghosh, Aurobindo [Sri Aurobindo] 1991. Notes on the Mahābhārata. In: Sri Aurob-
indo, On the Mahābhārata: 1–83. Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram. [Written
shortly after September 1901 but not then published.]
Ghurye, G. S. 1972. Two Brahmanical Institutions: Gotra and Charana. Bombay:
Popular Prakashan.
Gode, P. K. 1945. Studies on the History of Hindu Festivals: Some Notes on the His-
tory of the Dīvālī Festival (between ca. A.D. 50 and 1945). Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute. 26: 216–62.
Goldman, Robert P. 1970. Akṛtavraṇa vs. Śrīkṛsṇ ̣a as narrators of the Legend of
Bhārgava Rāma: À Propos. Some observations of Dr. V. S. Sukthankar. Annals of
the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 53: 161–73.
——, trans. 1984. The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki, vol. 1: Bālakāṇḍa. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
——. 1978. Fathers, Sons, and Gurus: Oedipal Conflict in the Sanskrit Epics. Journal
of Indian Philosophy 6: 325–92.
——. 1993. Transsexualism, Gender, and Anxiety in Traditional India. Journal of the
American Oriental Society 113,3: 374–401.
——. 1995. Goldman, 1995. Gods in Hiding: The Mahābhārata’s Virāta Parvan and
the Divinity of the Indian Epic Hero. In S. P. Narang, ed. Modern Evaluation of
the Mahābhārata (Prof. P. K. Sharma Felicitation Volume. 73–100. Delhi: Nag
Publishers.
—— and Sally J. Sutherland Goldman, trans. 1996. The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki, Vol. 5:
Sundarakāṇḍa. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Goldman, Sally J. Sutherland. 2001. The Voice of Sītā in Vālmīki’s Sundarakāṇḍa.
In Paula Richman, ed. Questioning Rāmāyaṇas: A South Asian Tradition. 223–38,
390–95. Berkeley: University of California Press.
——. 2004. Gendered Narratives: Gender, Space, and Narrative Structures in Vālmīki’s
Bālakānda. In Mandakranta Bose (ed.), The Rāmāyaṇa Revisited. 47–85. New York:
OUP.
Gombach, Barbara. 2000. “Ancillary Stories in the Sanskrit Mahābhārata.” Ph.D. dis-
sertation. 2 parts. Columbia University.
Gombrich, Richard 1985. The Vessantara Jātaka, the Rāmāyaṇa and the Dasaratha
Jātaka. Journal of the American Oriental Society 105.3: 427–37. Special Issue. Indo-
logical Studies Dedicated to Daniel H. H. Ingalls.
Gonda, Jan. Gonda, Jan. 1968. The Hindu Trinity. Anthropos 63: 212–25.
——. 1969a. Aspects of Early Visṇ ̣uism. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
——. 1969b. Ancient Indian Kingship from the Religious Point of View. Leiden: E. J.
Brill.
——. 1971 The Vedic Mitra and the Epic Dharma. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
120–133.
González-Reimann, Luis. 2002. The Mahābhārata and the Yugas: India’s Great Epic
Poem and the Hindu System of World Ages. New York: Peter Lang.
——. 2003. “Time” in the Mahābhārata, and the Time of the Mahābhārata. Panel on
“Rethinking the Mahābhārata,” 32nd Annual Conference on South Asia, Madison
WI. Courtesy of the author.
bibliography 611
——. 2006. Visṇ ̣u as Fish: The Growth of a Story, from the Brāhmaṇa to the Purāṇas.
Journal of Vaisṇ ̣ava Studies 15.1: 221–38.
——. 2008. Kalpas in the Mahābhārata: The Days and Nights of Brahmā. Presenta-
tion at the American Oriental Society Annual meeting, Chicago. Courtesy of the
author.
——. 2009. Cosmic Cycles, Cosmology, and Cosmography. Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hin-
duism vol. I: 411–428.
Greer, Patricia Meredith. 2002. “Karṇa within the Net of the ‘Mahābhārata’: Reading
the Itihāsa as Literature.” Ph.D. dissertation. University of Virginia.
Grünendahl, Reinhold. 1997. Chapters in Schreiner 1997a: 30–73 (Zur Textkritik des
Narāyaṇīya), 197–240, 296–378.
——. 2002. On the Frame Structure and ‘Sacrifice Concept’ in the Nārāyaṇīya and
Tīrthayātrā Sections of the Mahābhārata, and the Craft of Citation. Zeitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 152, 2: 309–340.
Gupta, N. and K. S. Ramachandran, eds. 1976. Mahābhārata: Myth and Reality: Dif-
fering Views. Delhi: D. K. Publishers’ Distributors.
Gupta, P. L. 1968. Ekānaṃśā and Her Images. Bihar Research Society Journal 54:
229–44.
Gupte, B. A. 1903. Divali-Folklore. Indian Antiquary 32: 237–39.
Hacker, P. 1961. Zur Methode der geschichtlichen Erforschung der anonymen San-
skritliteratur des Hinduismus. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesell-
schaft 111: 483–92.
Halbfass, Wilhelm. 1988. India and Europe: An Essay in Understanding. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Handelman, Susan A. 1982. The Slayers of Moses: The Emergence of Rabbinic Interpre-
tation in Modern Literary Theory. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Harbison, Peter. 1971. The Old Irish ‘Chariot.’ Antiquity 45: 171–77.
Hardy, Friedhelm. 1983. Viraha-Bhakti: The Early History of Kṛsṇ ̣a Devotion in South
India. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Hart, George L. 1975. Poems of Ancient Tamil, Their Milieu and their Sanskrit Coun-
terparts. Berkeley: University of California Press.
——. and Hank Heifitz, trans. and eds. 1999. Four Hundred Songs of War and Wis-
dom: An Anthology of Poems from Classical Tamil: The Puṟaṉṉāṉūṟu. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Härtel, Herbert. 2007. The Pre-Kusạ̄ ṇa and Early Kusạ̄ ṇa Levels at Sonkh. In Srini-
vasan 2007: 319–50.
Hatto, A. T. 1973. On the Excellence of the ‘Hildebrandslied’: A Comparative Study
in Dynamics. Modern Language Review 68: 820–38.
Hegarty, James M. 2006. Encompassing the Sacrifice: On the Narrative Construc-
tion of the Significant Past in the Sanskrit Mahābhārata. Acta Orientalia Vilnensia
7,1–2: 77–118
Held, Garrett Jan. 1935. The Mahābhārata: An Ethnological Study. London: Kegan
Paul, Trench, Trübner and Company.
Hiltebeitel, Alf. 1975. Review of Mythe et épopée, by Georges Dumézil. History of Reli-
gions 15,1: 90–100.
——. 1976. The Burning of the Forest. In Bardwell L. Smith, ed. Hinduism: New Essays
in the History of Religions. 208–24. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
——. 1977a. Nahusạ in the Skies: A Human King of Heaven. History of Religions 16.4:
329–350.
——. 1977b. Review of Gehrts 1975. Erasmus 29, 3–4: 86–92.
——. 1978. The Indus Valley “Proto-Śiva”, Reexamined through Reflections on the
Goddess, the Buffalo, and the Symbolism of vāhanas. Anthropos 73: 767–97.
——. 1979a. Kṛsṇ ̣a and the Mahābhārata (A Bibliographical Essay). Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 60: 65–107.
612 bibliography
——. 1979b. Ṛsịs and Rāksạ sas: At Home and Abroad in the Indian Epics. Presenta-
tion. New York: American Academy of Religion annual meeting.
——. 1980a. Draupadī’s Garments. Indo-Iranian Journal 22: 97–112.
——. 1980b. Śiva, the Goddess, and the Disguises of the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī. His-
tory of Religions 20: 147–74.
——. 1980c. Rāma and Gilgamesh: The Sacrifices of the Water Buffalo and the Bull of
Heaven. History of Religions 19: 187–223.
——. 1980–81. Sītā Vibhūsịtā: The Jewels for Her Journey. Ludwik Sternbach Com-
memoration Volume. Indologica Taurinensia 8–9: 193–200.
——. 1981. Draupadī’s Hair. In Madeleine Biardeau, ed., Autour de la déesse hindoue,
Purusạ̄ rtha 5: 179-214.
——. 1982a. Brothers, Friends, and Charioteers: Parallel Episodes in the Irish and
Indian Epics. In Edgar Polomé, ed. Homage to Georges Dumézil. Journal of Indo-
European Studies, Monograph No. 3. 85–112.
——. 1982b. Sexuality and Sacrifice: Convergent Subcurrents in the Fire-walking Cult
of Draupadī. 72–111. In Fred W. Clothey, ed. Images of Man: Religion and Histori-
cal Process in South Asia. Madras: New Era Publications.
——. 1984. The Two Kṛsṇ ̣as on One Chariot: Upanisạ dic Imagery and Epic Mythol-
ogy. History of Religions 24: 1–26.
——. 1988. The Cult of Draupadī, vol. 1: Mythologies: From Gingee to Kuruksẹ tra.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——. 1989. Kṛsṇ ̣a at Mathurā. In Doris M. Srinivasan, ed., Mathurā: The Cultural
Heritage. 92–102. New Delhi: American Institute of Indian Studies.
——. [1976] 1990, The Ritual of Battle: Krishna in the Mahābhārata. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
——. 1991a. The Cult of Draupadī, vol. 2: On Hindu Ritual and the Goddess. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
——. 1991b. The Folklore of Draupadi: Sārīs and Hair. In Arjuna Appadurai, Frank
J. Korom, and Margaret A. Mills, eds., Gender, Genre and Power in South Asian
Expressive Traditions. 395–427. Philadelphia University of Pennsylvania Press.
——. 1994. Epic Studies: Classical Hinduism in the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa.
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 74: 1–62.
——. 1995. Religious Studies and Indian Epic Texts. Religious Studies Review 21, 1:
26–32.
——. 1998a. Empire, Invasion, and India’s National Epics. International Journal of
Hindu Studies 2,3: 387–421.
——. 1998b. Conventions of the Naimisạ Forest. Journal of Indian Philosophy 26:
161–71.
——. 1999a. Rethinking India’s Oral and Classical Epics: Draupadῑ among Rajputs,
Muslims, and Dalits. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——, 1999b. Reconsidering Bhṛguization. In Mary Brockington and Peter Schreiner,
eds. Composing a Tradition: Concepts, Techniques, and Relationships. 155–68.
Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and the Arts.
——. 1999c. Fathers of the Bride, Fathers of Satī: Myths, Rites, and Scholarly Practices.
Thamyris 6, 1: 65–92.
——. 1999d. Two Ways to Tell a Story: Ālhā in the Bhavisỵ a Purāṇa. In Jackie Assayag,
ed. The Resources of History: Tradition, Narration and Nation in South Asia. 95–112.
Études thématiques. Paris and Pondicherry: École Pratique des Hautes Études.
——. 2001a, Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education of the
Dharma King. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——. 2001b. Bhīsṃ a’s Sources. In Klaus Karttunen and Petteri Koskikallio, eds.
Vidyārṇavavandanam: Essays in Honour of Asko Parpola. Studia Orientalia 94.
261–78. Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society.
——. 2003a. India’s Epics: Writing, Orality, and Divinity. In Arvind Sharma ed. The
Study of Hinduism. 114–38. Columbia SC: University of South Carolina Press.
bibliography 613
——. 2003b. Authorial Paths through the Two Sanskrit Epics, Via the Rāmopākhyāna.
Paper Presented at the 14th World Sanskrit Conference, Helsinki. See Hiltebeitel
2009.
——. 2003c. The Primary Process of the Hindu Epics. International Journal of Hindu
Studies 4, 3: 269–88.
——. 2003d. The Nārāyaṇīya: Ongoing Problems in Dating the Sanskrit Epics. Paper
presented at the “Between the Empires” Conference, University of Texas at Austin,
April. See Hiltebeitel 2006a.
——. 2004a. Role, Role Model, and Function: The Sanskrit Epic Warrior in Compari-
son and Theory. In Jacqueline Suthren Hirst and Lynn Thomas, eds. Playing for
Real: Hindu Role Models, Religion, and Gender. 27–50. New Delhi: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
——. 2004b. Mapping bhakti through Friendship in the Sanskrit Epics. Paper pre-
sented at the Annual Meeting of the American Oriental Society, San Diego, March
2004. See in press-a.
——. 2004c. More Rethinking the Mahābhārata: Towards a Politics of Bhakti. Indo-
Iranian Journal 47: 203–27.
——. 2004d. The Emergence of kāvya out of the Two Sanskrit Epics. International
Seminar on the Origins of Mahākāvya, Università degli Studi di Milano, June 4–5.
——. 2005a. Not Without Subtales: Telling Laws and Truths in the Sanskrit Epics.
Journal of Indian Philosophy 33: 455–511.
——. 2005b. Buddhism and the Mahābhārata: Boundary Dynamics and Textual Prac-
tice. In Federico Squarcini, ed. Boundary Dynamics and Construction of Traditions
in South Asia. 107–31. Florence: University of Florence Press and Munshiram
Manoharlal.
——. 2005c. Weighting Orality and Writing in the Sanskrit Epics. In Petteri Koskikal-
lio, ed., Epics, Khilas, and Purāṇas: Continuities and Ruptures. Proceedings, 3rd
Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas, Sept. 2002.
Gen. ed. Mislav Jezic. 81–111. Zagreb: Croatian Acedemy of Sciences and Arts.
——. 2005d. On Reading Fitzgerald’s Vyāsa. Journal of the American Oriental Society
125, 2: 241–61.
——. 2006a. The Nārāyaṇīya and the Early Reading Communities of the Mahābhārata.
In Patrick Olivelle, ed. Between the Empires: Society in India 300 B.C.E. to 400 C.E.
227–55. New York: Oxford University Press.
——. 2006b. Mahābhārata, Rāmāyaṇa. In Stanley Wolpert ed., Encyclopedia of India,
4 vols. 3: 82–93, 390–99. Detroit: Carl Scribner’s Sons and Thompson Gale Cor-
poration.
——. 2006c. Aśvaghosạ ’s Buddhacarita: The First Known Close and Critical Reading of
the Brahmanical Sanskrit Epics. Journal of Indian Philosophy 34: 229–86.
——. 2007a. Among Friends: Marriage, Women, and Some Little Birds. In Brodbeck
and Black 2007: 110–43.
——. 2007b. Krishna in the Mahabharata: The Death of Karna. In Edwin F. Bryant, ed.
Krishna: A Sourcebook. 23–76. New York: Oxford University Press.
——. 2009. Authorial Paths through the Two Sanskrit Epics, Via the Rāmopākhyāna.
In Robert P. Goldman and Muneo Tokunaga, eds. Epic Undertakings. Papers from
the Epics Section of the 12th World Sanskrit Conference, Helsinki, July 2003,
Vol. 2. Petteri Koskikallio and Asko Parpola, gen. eds. 169–214. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
——. 2010. Dharma. Asian Spiritualities Series. Henry Rosemont, ed. Honolulu: Uni-
versity of Hawai’i Press.
——. In press-a. Mapping Bhakti through Friendship in the Sanskrit Epics. In Sheldon
Pollock, ed. Epic and Argument in Sanskrit Literary History: Essays in Honor of
Robert P. Goldman. 91–116. New Delhi: Manohar.
——. In press-b. Mapping Bhakti through Hospitality and Friendship in the Sanskrit
Epics. In John Brockington, ed. Battles, Bards, Brāhmans. Papers from the Epics
614 bibliography
Section of the 13th World Sanskrit Conference, Edinburgh, July 2006, Vol. 2. Petteri
Koskikallio and Asko Parpola, gen. eds. 113–38. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
——. In press-c. The Southern Recension’s “Śakuntalā” as a First Reading: A Window on
the Original and the Second Reading by Kālidāsa. In Saswati Sengupta and Deepika
Tandon, eds. Revisiting Kālidāsa’s Abhijñāna-śākuntalam: Land, Love, Languages:
Forms of Exchange in Ancient India. New Delhi: Orient Blackswan.
——. Forthcoming. Dharma: Its Early History in Law, Religion, and Narrative. South
Asia Research Series, Patrick Olivelle, ed. New York: Oxford University Press.
——. N.d. Mapping = Mapping the Sanskrit Epics: Poetry, Dharma, and Devotion. Pro-
jected book title in 2004 “More Rethinking,” since abandoned.
—— and Randy Kloetzli. 2004. Kāla. In Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby, eds. The
Hindu World. 553–86. London: Routledge.
Holtzmann, Adolf (the elder), ed. and trans. [1845–47 and 1854] 1921. Indische Sagen.
Moriz Winternitz reeditor. Jena: Eugene Diederichs Verlag.
Holtzmann, Adolf. 1878. Indra nach den Vorstellungen des Mahābhārata. Zeitschrift
der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 32: 290–340.
——. 1880. Der heilige Agastya nach den Erzählungen des Mahābhārata. Zeitschrift
der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 34: 589–96.
——. 1892–95. Das Mahābhārata und seine Theil. 4 vols. Kiel: C. F. Haesler.
Hopkins, Edward Washburn. 1882. On the Professed Quotations from Manu Found
in the Mahābhārata. Journal of the American Oriental Society 11: 239–75.
——. 1926. The Original Rāmāyaṇa. Journal of the American Oriental Society 46:
209–19.
——. 1930. Allusions to the Rāma-story in the Mahābhārata. Journal of the American
Oriental Society 50: 85–103.
——. [1901] 1969a. The Great Epic of India: Its Character and Origin. Calcutta: Punthi
Pustak.
——. [1915] 1969b. Epic Mythology. New York: Biblo and Tannen.
——. [1889] 1972 The Social and Military Position of the Ruling Caste in Ancient
India as Represented by the Sanskrit Epic. Varanasi: Bharat-Bharati.
Hopkins, Thomas J. 1971. The Hindu Religious Tradition. Encino: Dickinson.
Horsch, Paul. 1966. Die vedische Gāthā-und Śloka-Literatur. Bern: Franke Verlag.
Hudson, Dennis. 1977. Śiva, Mīnāksị̄, Visṇ ̣u—Reflections on a Popular Myth in
Madurai. Indian Economic and Social History Review 14: 107–18.
——. 1996. “Arjuna’s Sin: Thoughts on the Bhagavad Gita in its Epic Context.” Journal
of Vaisṇ ̣ava Studies 43: 65–84.
Hudson, Emily. 2006. “Disorienting Dharma: Ethics and the Poetics of Suffering in
the Mahābhārata.” Ph.D. Dissertation, Emory University.
Ilaiah, Kancha. 1996. Why I Am Not a Hindu: A Śū̇ dra Critique of Hindutva Philoso-
phy, Culture and Political Economy. Delhi: Samya.
Inden, Ronald. 1990. Imagining India. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
——. 2000. Imperial Purāṇas: Kashmir as Vaisṇ ̣ava Center of the World. In R. Inden,
Jonathan Walters and Daud Ali. Querying the Medieval: Texts and the History of
Practices in South Asia. 29–98. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ingalls, Daniel H. H. 1968. The Harivaṃśa as a Mahākāvya. Mélanges d’Indianisme à
la memoire de Louis Renou. 381–94. Paris. Éditions E. de Bocard.
—— and Daniel H. H. Ingalls, Jr. 1991. The Mahābhārata: Stylistic study, computer
analysis, and concordance. In: Arvind Sharma, ed. Essays on the Mahābhārata.
19–56. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Jacobi, Hermann. 1924–27. Agastya. In James Hastings, ed. Encyclopaedia of Religion
and Ethics. 1: 181. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark.
——. 1960. The Rāmāyaṇa: Das Rāmāyaṇa of Dr. Hermann Jacobi. Trans. by S. N.
Ghoshal. Baroda: Oriental Institute. [First German edition: Bonn: Friedrich Cohen,
1893.]
bibliography 615
Jamison, Stephanie. 1996. Sacrificed Wife, Sacrificer’s Wife: Women, Ritual, and Hos-
pitality in Ancient India. New York: Oxford University Press.
Jarow, E. H. Rick. 1999. The Letter of the Law and the Discourse of Power: Karṇa and
the Controversy of the Mahābhārata. Journal of Vaisṇ ̣ava Studies 8,1: 59–76.
Jong, J. W. de 1975. Recent Russian Publications on the Indian Epic. Adyar Library
Bulletin 39: 1–42.
Joshi, N. P. 1967–68. Ekānaṃśā in Early Kusạ̄ ṇa Art. Journal of the Indian Society of
Oriental Art, N.S. 34–36.
——. 1979. Iconography of Balarāma. New Delhi: Abhinav Publications.
Jowett, B., trans. N.d. The Works of Plato. New York: Dial Press.
Kakar, Sudhir. 1978. The Inner World: A Psychoanalytic Study of Childhood and Soci-
ety in India. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Kane, Pandurang Vaman. 1962–75. History of Dharmaśāstra (Ancient and Medieval
Religious and Civil Law in India). 5 Vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute.
Kangle, R. P. [1972] 2003. Kautịlya’s Arthaśāstra. Part 2: English Translation with
Explanatory Notes. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Kantawala, S. G. 1995. The Legend of Aṇī Māṇḍavya. In S. P. Narang, ed. Modern
Evaluation of the Mahābhārata (Prof P. K. Sharma Felicitation Volume). 101–109.
Delhi: Nag Publishers.
Katre, Sadashiva L. 1932, 1933. Kṛsṇ ̣a and Jarāsaṃdha. Indian Historical Quarterly 8:
500–8; 9: 854–65.
——. 1960. Kṛsṇ ̣a, Gopas, Gopīs, and Rādhā. In H. L. Hariyappa and M. M. Patkar,
eds. Professor P. K. Gode Commemoration Volume. Part 3. 83–85. Pune: Oriental
Book Agency.
Katz, Ruth Cecily. 1989. Arjuna in the Mahābhārata: Where Krishna Is, There is Vic-
tory, Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.
Kermode, Frank. 1967. The Sense of an Ending: Studies in the Theory of Fiction. Lon-
don: Oxford University Press.
Kern, Hendrik, trans. [1865] 1869. The Bṛhat-Saṃhitā, or, Complete System of Natural
Astrology of Varāhamihira. London: Trübner.
King, Henry C. 1957. The Background of Astronomy. London: Watts.
Kinjawadekar, Ramachandra, ed. 1929–33. Mahābhāratam with the Commentary of
Nīlakaṇtḥ a. 6 vols. Poona: Chitrashala Press.
Kinsella, Thomas, trans. The Tain, Translated from the Irish Epic Tain Bo Cuailnge.
London: Oxford University Press.
Kipling, Rudyard. 1986 [1886]. The Epics of India, 24 August 1886. In Thomas Pin-
ney, ed., Kipling’s India: Uncollected Sketches 1884–88, 175–78. Houndsmills: Mac-
millan.
Kirfel, Willibald. 1927. Das Purāṇa Pañcalaksạ ṇa: Versuch einer Textgeschichte. Bonn:
K. Schroeder Verlag.
Kloetzli, W. R. 1983. Buddhist Cosmology (From Single World System to Pure Land:
Science and Theology in the Images of Motion and Light). Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
——. 1985. Maps of Time—Mythologies of Descent: Scientific Instruments and the
Purāṇic Cosmograph. History of Religions. 25,2: 116–147.
——. 1987. Buddhist Cosmology, Hindu and Jain Cosmologies. In M. Eliade, ed. The
Encyclopedia of Religion. 16 vols. Vol. 4: 113–19, 109–10. New York: Macmillan.
——. 2000. E-mail exchanges, November 13 and 15.
Knipe, David M. 1977. Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa. The Hindu Rite of Entry into Heaven. In Frank
E. Reynolds and Earle H. Waugh, eds. Religious Encounters with Death. 111–24.
University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Kolff, Dirk H. A. 1990. Naukar, Rajput, and Sepoy: The Ethnohistory of the Mili-
tary Labour Market in Hindustan, 1450–1850. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
616 bibliography
Kothari, Kamal. 1989. In Blackburn et al. 1989: 102–17.
Kramrisch, Stella. 1975. The Indian Great Goddess. History of Religions 14: 235–65.
Krappe, Alexander H. 1942. The Sovereignty of Erin. American Journal of Philology
43: 444–54.
Kripal, Jeffrey J. 1995. Kālī’s Child: The Mystical and the Erotic in the Life and Teach-
ings of Ramakrishna. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lacan, Jacques. [1966] 1977. Écrits: A Selection. Alan Sheridan, trans. New York:
W. W. Norton.
Lakoff, George and Mark Turner. 1989. More than Cool Reason: A Field Guide to
Poetic Metaphor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lal, P. 1980. The Mahabharata of Vyas. New Delhi: Vikas.
Lamotte, E. 1988. History of Indian Buddhism. Sara Webb-Boin, trans., Louvain-la-
Neuve: Institut Orientaliste.
Lassen, Christian. [1839–40] 1968. Indisches Altertumskunde. Osnabrück: Otto Zeller.
Lath, Mukund. 1990. “The Concept of Ānṛśaṃsya in the Mahābhārata.” In R. N. Dan-
dekar, ed. The Mahābhārata Revisited. 113–19. New Delhi; Sahitya Akademi.
Lefeber, Rosalind, trans. 1994. The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki, Vol. 4: Kisḳ indhā-kāṇḍa.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Leslie, Julia. 1998. A Bird Bereaved: The Identity and Significance of Vālmīki’s Krau-
ñca. Journal of Indian Philosophy 26: 455–87.
Lévi, Sylvain. 1918–20. Tato Jayam Udirayet. L. G. Khare, trans. Annals of the Bhan-
darkar Oriental Research Institute 1: 13–20.
Lincoln, Bruce. 1991. Death, War, and Sacrifice: Studies in Ideology and Practice. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
——. 1999. Theorizing Myth: Narrative, Ideology, and Scholarship. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Lingat Robert. 1973. The Classical law of India. J. Duncan M. Derrett, trans. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Lipner, Julius. 1994. Hindus: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices. London: Routledge.
Lord, Albert B. 1960. The Singer of Tales. Harvard Studies in Comparative Literature,
24. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Lovejoy, Arthur O. [1936] 1960. The Great Chain of Being: A Study in the History of
an Idea. New York: Harper and Brothers.
Lubotsky, Alexander. 1997. A Ṛgvedic Word Concordance. 2 Parts. American Oriental
Series, Vol. 82. New Haven: American Oriental Society.
Lüders. Heinrich. 1929. Review of The Mahābhārata for the first time critically edited
by Vishnu S. Sukthankar, vol. 1. Deutsche Literaturzeitung 24: 1137–1146.
Lutgendorf, Philip. 1990. Ramayan: The Video. The Drama Review 34: 2: 127–76.
——. 1991. The Life of a Text: Performing the Rāmcaritmānas of Tulsidas. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
——. 2001. Dining out at Lake Pampa: The Shabari Episode in Multiple Ramayanas.
In Paula Richman, ed. Questioning Rāmāyaṇas: A South Asian Narrative Tradition.
119–36. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Macdonell, A. A., ed. 1886. Kātyāyana’s Sarvānukramaṇī of the Rig Veda. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
——. [1988] 1974. Vedic Mythology. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
—— and Arthur Berriedale Keith. [1912] 1962. Vedic Index of Names and Subjects.
2 vols. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Mac Dowell, David W. 2007. Numismatic Evidence for a Chronological Framework
for Pre-Kusạ̄ ṇa Art, from Kalchayan to Gandhāra. In Srinivasan 2007: 95–118.
——. 2007. Coinage from Iran to Gandhara with Special Reference to Divinities as
Coin Types. In Srinivasan 2007: 233–65.
McGrath, Kevin. 2001. “The Sanskrit Hero: Karṇa in Epic Mahābhārata.” Ph.D. dis-
sertation, Harvard University.
bibliography 617
Magnone, Paolo. 2004. Rāmo Rāmam udaiksạ ta: The Encounter of the Two Rāmas
between itihāsa and kāvya. International Seminar on the Origins of Mahākāvya,
Università degli Studi di Milano, June 4–5, 2004.
Magrath, William T. 1975. The Athenian King List and Indo-European Trifunctional-
ity. Journal of Indo-European Studies 3: 173–98.
Mahadevan, Thennilapuram P. 2003. Brahmans and the Sanskrit Epics: Their Migra-
tions to the South. Paper Presented to the University Seminar on South Asia,
George Washington University.
——. 2008. On the Southern Recension of the Mahābhārata, Brahman Migrations,
and Brāhmī Paleography. Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies 15, 2: 1–143.
——. 2009. Textual Support for Early Integrity of the Mahābhārata from Its Southern
Recension. Paper presented to the 14th World Sanskrit Conference, Kyoto.
Majumdar, Bimanbehari. 1969. Kṛsṇ ̣a in History and Legend. 49–57. Calcutta. Uni-
versity of Calcutta.
Malamoud, Charles, 1996. Cooking the World: Ritual and Thought in Ancient India.
David White, trans. Delhi: Oxford University Press (= Cuire le monde. Rite et pensée
dans l’Inde ancienne. Paris: Éditions la découverte, 1989).
——. 2002. Le Jumeau solaire. Paris: Éditions du Seuil.
Malinar, Angelika. 1997. Chapter in Schreiner 1997a: 241–295.
——. 2007a. Arguments of a Queen: Draupadī’s Views on Kingship. In Brodbeck and
Black 2007, 79–96.
——. 2007b. The Bhagavadgītā: Doctrines and Contexts. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Mangels, Annette 1994. Zur Erzähltechnik im Mahābhārata. Hamburg: Verlag
Dr. Kovač.
Mankekar, Purnima. 1993. National Texts and Gendered Lives: An Ethnography of
Television Viewers in a North Indian City. American Ethnologist 20, 3: 543–63.
——. 1999. Screening Culture, Viewing Politics: An Ethnography of Television, Woman-
hood, and Nation in Postcolonial India. Durham: Duke University Press.
——. Manual of the Administration of the Madras Presidency. 1893. Vol. 3: Glossary.
Madras: Government Press.
Marstrander, J. S. and E. G. Quin, gen. eds. 1913–1975. Dictionary of the Irish Lan-
guage. Dublin: Royal Irish Academy.
Masson, J. L. Moussaieff. 1975. Fratricide among the Monkeys: Psychoanalytical
Observations on an Episode in the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa Journal of the American
Oriental Society 95, 4: 672–78.
Matilal, Bimal Krishna. 1991 [2002]. “Kṛsṇ ̣a: In Defense of a Devious Divinity.” In
Arvind Sharma, ed., Essays on the Mahābhārata. 401–18. Leiden: Brill. [also in Jon-
ardon Ganeri, ed. Ethics and Epics: The Collected Essays of Bimal Krishna Matilal.
91–108. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.]
Mayrhofer, Manfred. 1953. Kurzgefasstes etymologisches Wörterbuch der Altindischen.
Heidelburg: Carl Winter, Universitätsverlag.
McGrath, Kevin. 2001. “The Sanskrit Hero: Karṇa in Epic Mahābhārata.” Ph.D. dis-
sertation, Harvard University.
Mehta, J. L. 1990. Dvaipāyana, Poet of Being and Becoming. In R. N. Dandekar, ed.
The Mahābhārata Revisited: 101–111. New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi.
Mehta, Mahesh M. 1971 and 1972. The Mahābhārata—A Study of the Critical Edition
with Special Reference to the Suparṇākhyāna of the Ādiparvan. Bhārātīya Vidyā
31: 67–118; 32: 3–72.
Merton, Robert K. 1957. Social Theory and Social Structure. Glencoe: Free Press.
Metcalf, Thomas R. 1995. Ideologies of the Raj. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Meyer, Johann Jacob. 1937. Trilogie Altindischer Mächte und Feste der Vegetation, part 2,
Bali. Zurich: Max Niehaus.
618 bibliography
Miller, Barbara Stoller. 1991. Karṇabhāra: The Trial of Karṇa. In Arvind Sharma, ed.
Essays on the Mahābhārata. 57–68. Leiden: Brill.
Miller, Jeanine. 1974. The Vedas: Harmony, Meditation, Fulfillment. Bombay: B. I.
Publications.
Minkowski, Christopher Z. 1989. Janamejaya’s sattra and Ritual Structure. Journal of
the American Oriental Society 109,3: 401–20.
——. 1991. Snakes, sattras, and the Mahābhārata. In Arvind Sharma, ed. Essays on the
Mahābhārata. 384–400. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Mitchener, John E. 1982. Traditions of the Seven Rṣịs. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
——. 1986. The Yuga Purāṇa: Critically Edited with an English Translation and a
Detailed Introduction. Bibliotheca Indica Calcutta: The Asiatic Society.
——. 1990. The Yuga Purāṇa: A Footnote. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and Afri-
can Studies 53,2: 320–22.
——. 2002. The Yuga Purāṇa. Critically Edited, with an English Translation and a
Detailed Introduction. Rev. ed. Kolkata: Asiatic Society.
Moghe, Bapu Shastri, ed. 1892. Yājñavalkyasmṛti or the Institutes of Yājñavalkya with
the Commentary Mitāksạ rā of Vijñāneśvara. Bombay: Janārdan Mahadev Gurjar,
Remwadi.
Molé, Marijan. 1960. Deux notes sur le Râmâyaṇa. In Hommages à Georges Dumézil.
Collection Latomus 45: 140–50.
Monier-Williams, Monier (= MW). [1899] 1964. A Sanskrit-English Dictionary.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Monius, Anne E. 2001. Imagining a Place for Buddhism. Literary Culture and Religious
Community in Tamil-speaking South India. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mori, Masaka 1997. Epic Grandeur. Toward a Comparative Poetics of the Epic. Albany:
State University of New York Press.
Morson, Gary Saul 1994. Narrative and Freedom. The Shadow of Time. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Muess, Rolf E. (1996): Theories of Adolescence. 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Narayana Rao, Velcheru 1993. Purāṇa as Brahmanic ideology. In Wendy Doniger, ed.
Purāṇa Perennis. Reciprocity and Transformation in Hindu and Jaina Texts. 85–100.
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Nattier, Jan. 1991. Once Upon a Future Time: Studies in a Buddhist Prophecy of Decline.
Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press.
——. 2000. The Realm of Aksọ bhya: A Missing Piece in the History of Pure Land Bud-
dhism. Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 23, 1: 71–102.
——. 2003. The Indian Roots of Pure Land Buddhism: Insights from the Oldest Chi-
nese Version of the Larger Sukhāvatīvyūha. Pacific World. Journal of the Institute
of Buddhist Studies. Third Series, No. 5: 175–201.
——. [2003] 2005. A Few Good Men: The Bodhisattva Path according to The Inquiry of
Ugra (Ugraparipṛcchā). Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Neelis, Jason. 2002. La Vielle Route Reconsidered: Alternative Paths for Early Trans-
mission of Buddhism Beyond the Borderlands of South Asia. Bulletin of the Asia
Institute n.s. 16: 143–64.
——. 2007. Passages to India: Śaka and Kusạ̄ ṇa Migrations in Historical Context. In
Srinivasan 2007: 55–94.
——. 2008a. Review of Bronkhorst 2007. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Series 3,
18,3: 381–83.
——. 2008b. As the Dharmacakra Turns: Historical Memory in Buddhist Narratives
of the Past. “Thinking, Recording, and Writing History in the Ancient World.”
Ancient Studies conference in Comparative History, Brown University, December
12–14. Courtesy of the author.
——. 2009. Saka Religious and Literary Patronage Networks in Early South Asian His-
tory. Presentation draft for American Oriental Society meeting, Albuquerque NM,
3/16/09. Courtesy of the Author.
bibliography 619
Neusner, Jacob. 1979. Map without Territory: Mishnah’s System of Sacrifice and Sanc-
tuary. History of Religions 19: 103–27.
Oberlies, T. 1997. Chapters in Schreiner 1997: 75–118, 119–38, 139–58.
——. 1998. “Die Ratschläge der Sehers Nārada: Ritual an und unter der Oberfläche des
Mahābhārata.” In New Methods in the Research of Epic = Neue Methoden der Epen-
forschung, Hildegard L. C. Tristram, ed. 125–41. Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag.
Obeyesekere, Gananath. 1984. The Cult of the Goddess Pattini. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
——. 1990. The Work of Culture: Symbolic Transformation in Psychoanalysis and
Anthropology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
O’Brien, Steven. 1976. Indo-European Eschatology: A Model. Journal of Indo-E uropean
Studies 4: 295–320.
O’Flaherty, Wendy Doniger. 1973. Asceticism and Eroticism in the Mythology of Śiva.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——. 1976. The Origins of Evil in Hindu Mythology. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
——. 1981. The Rig Veda. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Olivelle, Patrick, trans. 1998. The Early Upanisạ ds: Annotated Text and Translation.
New York: Oxford University Press.
——, trans. 1999. Dharmasūtras. The Law Codes of Ancient India. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
——. 2004a. The Semantic History of Dharma The Middle and Late Vedic Periods.
Journal of Indian Philosophy 32, 5–6: 491–511.
——, trans. 2004b. The Law Code of Manu. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——, trans. and ed. 2005a. Manu’s Code of Law: A Critical Edition and Translation of
the Mānava-Dharmaśāstra. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——. 2005b. Language, Texts, and Society: Explorations in Ancient Indian Culture and
Religion. Florence: University of Florence Press and Munshiram Manoharlal.
O’Rahilly, Cecil, ed. and trans. 1970. Táin Bó Cúalnge from the Book of Leinster. Dub-
lin Institute of Advanced Studies.
——. 1976, ed. and trans. Táin Bó Cúailnge: Recension I. Dublin: Institute for Advanced
Studies.
Outhwaite, William and T. B. Bottomore. 1993. The Blackwell Dictionary of Twentieth-
Century Social Thought. Oxford: Blackwell.
Pande, G. C. 1990. The Socio-Cultural Milieu of the Mahābhārata: An Age of Change, In
R. N. Dandekar, ed. The Mahābhārata Revisited. 121–37. Delhi: Sahitya Akademi.
Pargiter, F. E. 1913. The Purāṇa Text of the Dynasties of the Kali Age. London: Oxford
University Press. [Reprint Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1962].
——. 1922. Ancient Indian Historical Tradition. London: Oxford University Press.
Parida, Sarat Chandra. 2004. Hospitality in Changing Indian Society: Vedic Age to
Puranic Age. Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan.
Parpola, Asko 1994. Deciphering the Indus Script. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Parsons, Talcott. [1949] 1967. Essays in Sociological Theory. Rev. ed. New York: Free
Press.
——. 1951. The Social System. Glencoe: Free Press.
Pathak, Shubha. 2005. “Comparing the Rāmāyaṇa and the Mahābhārata: ‘Epic’ and Met-
aphor.” Ph.D. dissertation chapter. University of Chicago. Courtesy of the author.
Patton, Laurie L. 1992. Letter of May 19, 1992.
——. 1996, Myth as Argument: The Bṛhaddevatā as Canonical Commentary. Berlin:
Waller de Gruyter.
——. 2005. Bringing the Gods to Mind: Mantra and Ritual in Early Indian Sacrifice.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Peabody, Norbert, 1996. Ted’s Rajasthan and the Boundaries of Imperial Rule in
Nineteenth-Century India. Modern Asian Studies 30,1: 185–220.
620 bibliography
Philips, C. H., ed.. 1961. Historians of India, Pakistan, and Ceylon. London: Oxford
University Press.
Piggott, Stuart. 1950. Prehistoric India to 1000 B.C. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Pingree, David. 1963. Astronomy and Astrology in India and Iran. Isis 54,2: 229–46.
——, ed., trans, and commentator. 1978. The Yavanajātaka of Sphujidhvaja. 2 vols.
Harvard Oriental Series 48. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
——. 1990. The Purāṇas ad Jyotiḥśāstra: Astronomy. Journal of the American Oriental
Society 110,2: 274–80.
Pinney, Thomas. 1986. Kipling’s India: Uncollected Sketches 1884–88. Houndmills:
Macmillan Press.
Pollock, Sheldon I. 1984. Ātmānam mānusạ ṃ manye: Dharmākūtam on the Divinity
of Rāma. Journal of the Oriental Institute of Baroda 33: 505–28.
——, trans. 1986, 1991. The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki: An Epic of Ancient India, vol. 2:
Ayodhyākāṇḍa; vol. 3: Araṇyakāṇḍa. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
——. 1990. From Discourse of Ritual to Discourse of Power in Sanskrit Culture. Jour-
nal of Ritual Studies 4: 315–45.
——. 1994, Deep Orientalism? Notes on Sanskrit and power beyond the Raj. In Carol
A. Breckenridge and Peter van der Veer, eds., Orientalism and the Postcolonial Pre-
dicament, 76–133, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Polomé, Edgar. 1978–1979 A Few Thoughts About Reconstructing Indo-European
Culture and Religion. In Suniti Kumar Chatterji Memorial Number. Journal of the
Department of English; University of Calcutta, 14: 45–62.
Poole, Fitz John Porter. 1986. Metaphors and Maps: Towards Comparison in the Anthro-
pology of Religion. Journal of the American Academy of Religion 54,3: 411–57.
Prentiss, Karen Pechilis. 1999. The Embodiment of Bhakti. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Prescott, William H. 1843. History of the Conquest of Mexico: With a Preliminary View
of the Ancient Mexican Civilization and the Life of the Conqueror, Hernando Cortes.
London: R. Bentley.
Pritchett, F. W. 1980. Prthivraj Raso: A Look at the Poem Itself. Indian Literature
23,5: 56–75.
Pusalkar, A. D. 1963. Studies in the Epics and Purāṇas. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya
Bhavan.
Quint, David. 1993. Epic and Empire: Politics and Generic Form from Virgil to Milton.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Radhakrishnan, S., ed. and trans. 1953. The Principal Upanisạ ds. London: George
Allen and Unwin.
Raghavan, V. 1973. The Greater Ramayana. Varanasi; All-India Kashiraj Trust.
Raghunathan, N., trans. 1981. Srimad Vālmīki Ramayana, vol. 2: Aranya Kānda, Kish-
kindha Kanda, Sundara Kānda. Madras: Vighneswara Publishing House.
Rahurkar, V. G. 1964. The Seers of the Ṛg Veda. Pune: University of Poona.
Rajagopal, Arvind. 2001. Politics after Television: Hindu Nationalism and the Reshap-
ing of the Public in India. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ramanujan, A. K. 1991a. Repetition in the Mahābhārata. In Arvind Sharma, ed.,
Essays on the Mahābhārata, 419–43. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
——. 1991b. Three Hundred Rāmāyaṇas: Five Examples and Three Thoughts on
Translation. In Richman 1991. 22–49. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ravinder, Shashi. 1987. An Empirical Investigation of Garnet’s and Pleck’s Sex Role
Strain Analysis. Sex Roles 15: 165–79.
Raychaudhuri, Hemchandra C. 1923. The Political History of Ancient India: From the
Accession of Parikshit to the Extension of the Gupta Dynasty. Calcutta: University
of Calcutta.
Redfield, James. 1975. Nature and Culture in the Iliad: The Tragedy of Hector. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
bibliography 621
Reich, Tamar Chana. 1998. “A Battlefield of a Text: Inner Textual Interpretation in the
Sanskrit Mahābhārata.” Ph.D. Dissertation. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Reiniche, Marie-Louise. 1979. Les dieux et les hommes : Études de cultes d’un village
du Tirunelveli Inde du Sud. Paris: Mouton.
Rhys Davids, T. W. 1904. Note on the Middle Country of Ancient India. Journal of
the Royal Asiatic Society 194: 83–93.
Richman, Paula, ed. 1991. Many Rāmāyaṇas: The Diversity of a Narrative Tradition in
South Asia. Introduction, 3–21. Berkeley: University of California Press.
——. 1995. Epic and State: Contesting Interpretations of the Rāmāyaṇa. Public Culture
7: 631–45.
Ricoeur, Paul. 1970. Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
——. 1985. Time and Narrative. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Roghair, Gene. H. 1982. The Epic of Palnāḍu. A Study and Translation of Palnātị Vīrula
Katha, a Telugu Oral Tradition from Andhra Pradesh, India.. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Roy, Protap Chundra (or, from 1889 on, variously Pratāp[a] Chandra Rāy) publisher
and distributor, named with his widow Sundari Bālā Roy from 1895–96, and Kisari
Mohan Ganguli, trans. 1883–96. The Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa
Translated into English Prose. Calcutta: Bharata Press.
——. 1884a = Adi Parva Sections 12–end;
——. 1884b = Sabha Parva;
——. 1884c = Vana parva;
——. 1888 = Drona Parva;
——. 1889 = Karna Parva;
——. 1890 = Çanti Parva up to Mokshadharma;
——. 1891 = Çanti Parva, Mokshadharma;
——. 1893 = Anuçasana Parva to section 150;
——. 1894a = Anuçasana Parva to end;
——. 1894b = Açvamedha Parva;
——. 1896a = Mausala Parva;
——. 1896b = Mahaprasthanika Parva;
——. 1896c = Svargarohanika Parva.
Ruben, Walter. 1944. Krishna: Konkordanz und Kommentar der Motive seines Helden-
lebens. Istanbuler Schriften, 17. Istanbul.
——. 1968. Fighting against Despots in Old Indian Literature. Annals of the Bhan-
darkar Oriental Research Institute 48–49: 111–18.
Rudolph, Lloyd I., and Suzanne Hoeber Rudolph. 1967. The Modernity of Tradition:
Political Development in India. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sachau, E. C. 1964. Alberuni’s India. 2 vols. in 1. Delhi: S. Chand & Co.
Salomon, Richard. 1978, The Three Cursed Rivers of the East, and Their Signficance
for the Historical Geography of Ancient India. Adyar Library Bulletin 42: 31–60.
——. 1995. On the Origin of the Early Indian Scripts. Journal of the American Oriental
Society 115,2: 271–79.
——. 1998. Indian Epigraphy. A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit,
and Other Indo-Aryan Languages. New York: Oxford University Press.
——. 2005. The Indo-Greek Era of 186/5 B.C. in a Buddhist Reliquary Inscription.
In Osmund Bopearachchi and Marie-Françoise Boussac, eds. Afghanistan, Ancien
Carrefour entre l’est et l’ouest. Indicopleustoi: Archaeologies of the Indian Ocean,
3. 378–83. Turnhout: Brepols.
——. 2007. Dynastic and Institutional Connections in the Pre- and Early Ku.ā.a Period:
New Manuscript and Literary Evidence. In Srinivasan 2007: 267–86.
Sax, William S. 2000. In Karṇa’s Realm: An Ontology of Action. Journal of Indian
Philosophy 28: 295–324.
622 bibliography
——. 2002. Dancing the Self Personhood and Performance in the Pāṇḍav Līlā of Garh-
wal. New York: Oxford University Press.
Scheuer, Jacques. 1982. Śiva dans le Mahābhārata. Bibliothèque de l’École des Haute
Études, Sciences Religieuses, vol. 56. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Schlinghoff, Dieter. 1969. The Oldest Extant Parvan-list of the Mahābhārata. Journal
of the American Oriental Society 89: 334–38.
Schomer, Karine. 1989. Paradigms for the Kali Yuga: The Heroes of the Epic and their
Fate. In Blackburn et al. 1989: 140–54.
Schreiner, P., ed. 1997a. Nārāyaṇīya-Studien. Purāṇa Research Publications—Tübin-
gen, Vol. 6. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
——. 1997b. Chapters in Schreiner 1997a: 1–29, 159–196.
——. 2003. Review of Hiltebeitel 2001a. Journal of Religion 83,2: 332–34.
Sen, Nabaneeta 1966. Comparative Studies in Oral Epic Poetry and the Vālmīki
Rāmāyaṇa: A report on the Bālākaṇḍa. Journal of the American Oriental Society
86: 397–409.
Shah, Shalini. 1995. The Making of Womanhood: Gender Relations in the Mahābhārata.
New Delhi: Manohar.
Shah, U. P., ed. 1975. The Uttarakāṇḍa: The Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa. G. H. Bhatt and
Shah, gen. eds. The Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa: Critical edition, Vol. 7. Baroda: University
of Baroda.
Sharma, Arvind, ed. 1991. Essays on the Mahābhārata. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Sharma, R. K. 1964. Elements of Poetry in the Mahābhārata. University of California
Publications in Classical Philology, 20. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Shastri, Hari Prasad, trans. 1969. The Ramayana of Valmiki, II; Aranya Kanda, Kish-
kindha Kanda, Sundara Kanda. London: Shanti Sadan.
Shastri, J. L., ed. 1970. The Śiva Purāṇa, Part 2. Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythol-
ogy Series, vol. 2. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
——. 1970. The Liṅga Purāṇa, Part 1. Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology Series,
vol. 5. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Sherring, M. A. 1872. Hindu Tribes and Castes as Represented in Banaras. London:
Trubner.
Shulman, David Dean. 1985. The King and the Clown in South Indian Myth and
Poetry. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
——. 2001. Toward a Historical Poetics of the Sanskrit Epics. Chapter 1 of: The Wisdom
of Poets: Studies in Tamil, Telugu, and Sanskrit. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Sidhanta. N. K. 1930. The Heroic Age of India: A Comparative Study. New York: Alfred
A. Knopf.
Simson. Georg von 1990. Text layers in the Mahābhārata. In R. N. Dandekar, ed. The
Mahābhārata Revisited. 37–60. New Delhi: Sahitya Akedemi.
Singh, R. B. 1964. History of the Chāhamānas. Varanasi: Nand Kishore.
——. 1975. Origins of the Rājpūts. Buxipur: Sahitya Sansar Prakashan.
Singh, Sarva Daman. 1965. Ancient Indian Warfare, With Special Reference to the
Vedic Period. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Sinha. Binod Chandra. 1977. History of the Śuṅga Dynasty. Varanasi: Bharatiya.
Sircar, D. C. 1967. Cosmography and Geography in Early Indian Literature. Calcutta:
Indian Studies: Past and Present.
——. 1969. Ancient Malwa and the Vikramāditya Tradition. Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal.
Sivaraja Pillai, K. N. n.d. Agastya in the Tamil Land. Myapore: University of Madras.
Smith, Frederick M. 2006. The Self-Possessed: Deity and Spirit Possession in South
Asian Literature and Civilization. New York. Columbia University Press.
Smith, John D. 1980. Old Indian: The two Sanskrit epics. In A. T. Hatto, ed. Traditions
of Heroic and Epic Poetry, I: The Tradition. London: Modern Humanities Press.
bibliography 623
——. 1987. Formulaic language in the epics of India. In: Bo Almqvist, Seamus Ô
Catháin & Pádraig Ô Héalai (eds.), The Heroic Process: Form, Function, and Fantasy
in Folk Epic: 591–611. Dublin: Glendale Press.
——. 1989. Scapegoats of the Gods: The Ideology of the Indian Epics. In Blackburn
et al. 1989: 176–94.
——. The Epic of Pābūjī. A Study, Transcription, and Translation. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Smith, Mary Carol. 1972. “The Core of India’s Great Epic.” Ph.D. dissertation, Har-
vard University.
——. 1992. The Warrior Code of India’s Sacred Song. New York: Garland.
Smith, Jonathan Z. 1990. Drudgery Divine: On the Comparison of Christianities and
the Religions of Late Antiquity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Smith, Ronald M. 1955. The Story of Ambā in the Mahābhārata. Brahmavidyā, The
Adyar Library Bulletin 19,1–2: 85–171.
Smith, Vincent A. 1961. The Oxford History of India. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Sohnen-Thieme, Renate 1999. On the Composition of the Dyūtaparvan in the
Mahābhārata. In M. Brockington and Schreiner 1999: 139–54.
Sörensen, S. 1963. An Index to the Names in the Mahābhārata. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. 1988. In Other Worlds: Essays in Cultural Politics. New
York: Routledge.
Srinivasan, Doris. 1981. Early Kṛsṇ ̣a Icons: The Case at Mathurā. In Joanna G. Wil-
liams, ed. Kalādarśana: American Studies in the Art of India. 127–36. Delhi: Oxford
and IBH in collaboration with American Institute of Indian Studies.
——, ed. 2007. On the Cusp of an Era: Art in the Pre-Kusạ̄ ṇa World. Brill’s Inner Asian
Library vol. 18. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Staal, Frits. [1990] 1996. Ritual and Mantras: Rules without Meaning. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
——. Forthcoming. Three Mountains and Seven Rivers. In Shoun Hino and Toshihiro
Wada, eds. Indian Culture and Buddhism: Felicitation Volume for Professor Masachi
Tachikawa. Delhi. Manuscript courtesy of the author.
Stein, Otto. 1936. The Number 18. Poona Orientalist 1: 1–37.
Stietencron, Heinrich von. 2005. Purāṇic Genealogies and the Date of the Buddha.
Srilata Müller, trans. In H. Bechert, ed. When Did the Buddha Live? 221–49. Delhi:
Sri Satguru Publications, 1995. [Chapter 4, Hindu Myth, Hindu History: Religion,
Art, and Politics. New Delhi: Permanent Black.]
Strachan, J. 1904. An Old Irish Metrical Rule. Ériu, 1: 191–208.:191–208.
Strong, John. 1979. The Transforming Gift: An Analysis of Devotional Acts of Offer-
ing in Buddhist Avadāna Literature. History of Religions 18,3: 221–37.
——. 1983. The Legend of King Aśoka: A Study and Translation of the Aśokāvadāna.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Stuart, Heather. 1977. Cúchulainn and the ‘Vater-Sohn-Kampf’ Motif. Journal of the
Australasian Universities Language and Literature Association 47: 5–17.
Sukthankar, Vishnu S. 1933. Ādiparvan. Introduction and Apparatus. In The Mahab-
harata for the First Time Critically Edited, edited by Vishnu S. Sukthankar and S. K.
Belvalkar, vol. 10. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.
——. 1936. Epic Studies, 6: The Bhṛgus and the Bhārata: A Text-Historical Study.
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 18,1: 1–76.
——. 1939. The Nala Episode and the Rāmāyaṇa. In S. M. Katre & P. K. Gode, eds.
A Volume of Eastern and Indian Studies Presented to Professor F. W. Thomas. 294–
303. Bombay; Karnatak Publishing House.
——. 1941. The Rāma Episode (Rāmopākhyāna) and the Rāmāyaṇa. In S. M. Katre
& P. K. Gode, eds. A Volume of Studies in Indology Presented to Prof. P. V. Kane.
472–487. Poona: Oriental Book Agency.
624 bibliography
——. 1957. On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata. Bombay: The Asiatic Society of
Bombay.
—— and S. K. Belvalkar, eds. 1933–70. Mahābhārata: Critical edition. 24 vols. with
Harivaṃśa. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.
Sullivan, Bruce M. 1990. Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana Vyāsa and the Mahābhārata: A New Inter-
pretation. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Sutton, N. 1997. Aśoka and Yudhisṭḥ ira: A Historical Setting for the Ideological Ten-
sions of the Mahābhārata. Religion 27,4: 333–41.
——. 2000, Religious Doctrines in the Mahābhārata. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Szczurek, Przemyslaw. 2002. Some Remarks on the So-called Epic Layer of the Bhaga-
vad Gītā. In Mary Brockington, ed. Stages and Transitions: Temporal and Historical
Frameworks in Epic and Purāṇic Literature. Proceedings of the Second Dubrovnik
International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas. 55–72. Zagreb: Croa-
tian Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Tadpatrikar, S. N. 1929. The Kṛsṇ ̣a Problem. Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 10: 269–320.
Temple, R. C. 1962 [1884–1900]. Legends of the Punjab. 3 vols. Bombay: Education
Society Press.
Thapar, Romila. 1978a. Ancient Indian Social History: Some Interpretations. Delhi:
Orient Longmans.
——. 1978b. Exile and the Kingdom: Some Thoughts on the Rāmāyaṇa, Bangalore: The
Mythic Society.
——. 1979. The Historian and the Epic. Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute 60: 199–213.
——. 1989. Epic and History: Tradition, Dissent, and Politics in India. Past and Pres-
ent 25: 3–26.
——. 1991. Genealogical Patterns as Perceptions of the Past. Studies in History 7, 1.
n.s.: 1–36.
——. [1984] 1993. From Lineage to State: Social Formations in the Mid-first Millen-
nium B.C. in the Ganga Valley. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
——. 1994. Society and Historical Consciousness: The Itihāsa-purāṇa Tradition. Chap-
ter 6 of Interpreting Early India. 137–73. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
——. 1996. Time as a Metaphor of History: Early India. Delhi: Oxford.
——. 1997. Linear Time in Historical Texts of Early India. In Dick van der Meij,
ed., India and Beyond: Aspects of Literature, Meaning, Ritual, and Thought. Essays
in Honour of Frits Staal. 562–73. London: Kegan Paul and Leiden: International
Institute for Asian Studies.
——. 1998. Aśoka and the Decline of the Mauryas, Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Thomas, Lynn 1996. Paraśurāma and Time. In Julia Leslie, ed. Myth and Myth- making.
63–85. Richmond, Surrey: Curzon.
Thurneysen, Rudolf. 1921. Die irische Helden- und Königsage bis zum siebzehnten Jah-
rhundert. Halle: Verlag von Max Niemeyer.
Tod, James. [1829–32, 1920] 1990. Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan or the Central
and Western States of India (ed. William Crooke). Delhi: Low Price Publications.
Tokunaga, Muneo. [1991] 1994. Machine-Readable Text of the Mahaabhaarata Based
on the Poona Critical Edition, First revised version Kyoto.
——. 2009. Vedic Exegesis and Epic Poetry: A Note on atrāpyudāharanti. In Petteri
Koskikallio, ed. Parallels and Comparisons. Proceedings of the 4th Dubrovnik Inter-
national Conference on the Epics and Purāṇas, September 2005. 21–30. Zagreb:
Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts.
Tsuchida, R. 1991. Two Categories of Brahmins in the Early Buddhist Period. The
Memoirs of the Toyo Bunko 49: 51–95.
Tubb, Gary A. 1991. Śāntarasa in the Mahābhārata. In Sharma 1991: 171–203.
Tuchman, Gaye. 1979. Women’s Depictions by the Mass Media. Signs 4: 528–42.
bibliography 625
Turner, Terence. 1991. ‘We are Parrots,’ ‘Twins are Birds’: Play of Tropes as Oper-
ational Structure. In James W. Fernandez, ed., Beyond Metaphor: The Theory of
Tropes in Anthropology. 121–58. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Turner, Victor. 1974. Dramas, Fields, and Metaphors: Symbolic Action in Human Soci-
ety. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Türstig, Hans-Georg. 1985. The Indian Sorcery Called abhicāra. Wiener Zeitschrift für
die Kunde Sudasiens 29: 69–117.
Underhill, M. M. 1921. The Hindu Religious Year. Calcutta: Association Press.
Vaidya, Chintaman Vinayak. [1905] 1966. The Mahābhārata: A Criticism. Bombay:
Bombay Book Depot and Delhi: Meher Chand Lachhman Das.
——. [1906] 1972. The Riddle of the Rāmāyana. Delhi: Meherchand Lacchmandas.
——. 1907. Epic India, or India as Described in the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa.
Bombay: Mrs. Radhabai Atmaram Sagoon.
——. 1924. History of Medieval Hindu India, vol. 2, Early History of the Rajputs (750
to 1000 A.D.). Poona: Oriental Book-Supplying Agency.
——. 1926. History of Medieval Hindu India, vol. 3, Downfall of Hindu India (c. 1000
to 1200 A.D.). Poona: Oriental Book-Supplying Agency.
Vaidya, Parashuram Lakshman, ed. 1954. The Karṇaparvan. 1954. In The Mahab-
harata for the First Time Critically Edited, edited by Vishnu S. Sukthankar and
S. K. Belvalkar, vol. 10. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.
——, ed. 1971. The Yuddhakāṇḍa. The Sixth Book of the Vālmīki-Rāmāyaṇa. The
National Epic of India. The Vālmīki- Rāmayaṇa Critically Edited for the First Time,
II. Baroda: Oriental Institute.
Van Buitenen, J. A. B. 1967–68. Some Notes on the Uttara-Yāyāta. Festschrift for
V. Raghavan. Adyar Library Bulletin 31–32: 617–35.
Van Buitenen, J. A. B. 1972. On the Structure of the Sabhāparvan of the Mahābhārata.
In J. Ensink and P. Gaeffke, eds., India Maior: Congratulatory Volume Presented to
J. Gonda. 68–84. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
——. 1973, 1975, 1978. The Mahābhārata, vols. I: 1. The Book of Beginnings; II: 2.
The Book of the Assembly Hall; 3. The Book of the Forest; III: 4. The Book of Virātạ ;
5. The Book of the Effort. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Van Nooten, Barend A. 1971. The Mahābhārata. Twayne’s World Authors Series. New
York: Twayne Publishers.
Vanstiphout, Herman 2003. Epics of Sumerian Kings. The Matter of Aratta. Atlanta:
Society of Biblical Literature.
Vassilkov, Yaroslav 1995. The Mahābhārata’s Typological Definition Reconsidered.
Indo-Iranian Journal 38: 249–56.
——. 1999. Kālavāda (the Doctrine of Cyclical Time) in the Mahābhārata and the
Concept of Heroic Didactics. In M. Brockington and Schreiner 1999: 17–34.
——. 2002. The Mahābhārata Similes and the Significance of Comparative Epic Stud-
ies. Rocznik Orientalistyczny 4.1: 13–31.
——. 2004. First assessment letter for Hiltebeitel 2005c, discussing an earlier draft in
fulfillment of the editorial policy for the volume.
Vaudeville, Charlotte. 1968. Aspects du mythe de Kṛsṇ ̣a-Gopāla dans l’Inde ancienne.
Mélanges d’Indianisme à la mémoire de Louis Renou. 727–62. Paris: Éditions E. de
Bocard.
——. 1976. Braj, Lost and Found. Indo-Iranian Journal 18: 195–213.
Venniyoor, E. M. J., script by. 1982. Raja Ravi Varma. Trivandrum: Museums and
Zoos and Art Gallery.
Veyne, Paul 1988. Did the Greeks Believe in Their Myths? An Essay on the Constitutive
Imagination. Paula Wissing, trans. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Viramma, Josiane Racine & Jean-Luc RACINE 1997. Viramma: Life of an Untouch-
able. London: Verso.
Vyas, Shantikumar N. 1967. India in the Rāmāyaṇa Age. Delhi: Atma Ram.
626 bibliography
Wallace, Ruth A. and Alison Wolf. 1986. Contemporary Sociological Theory: Continu-
ing the Classical Tradition: 2nd. ed. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Ward, Donald. 1973. On the Poets and Poetry of the Indo-Europeans. Journal of Indo-
European Studies 11: 127–44.
Waterfield, William, trans. and George Grierson, ed. 1923. The Lay of Ālhā: A Saga
of Rajput Chivalry as Sung by the Minstrels of Northern India. London: Oxford
University Press.
Watkins, Calvert 1995. How to Kill a Dragon. Aspects of Indo-European Poetics.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Webb, E. J. 1952. The Names of the Stars. London: Nisbet & Co.
West, E. W., trans. 1895. Pahlavi Texts, 3. Sacred Books of the East, vol. 24. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.
White, Hayden. 1978. Tropics of Discourse: Essays in Cultural Criticism. Baltimore:
John Hopkins University Press.
Whitney, William Dwight. [1889] 1960. Sanskrit Grammar. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Wikander, Stig. 1947. Pāṇḍava-sagen och Mahābhārata mytiska forutsattningar. Reli-
gion och Bibel 6: 27–39.
——. 1948. La légende des Pāṇḍava et la substructure mythique du Mahābhārata.
Georges Dumézil, trans. In Dumézil 1948.
——. 1950. Sur le fonds commun indo-iranien des épopées de la Perse et de l’Inde. La
Nouvelle Clio 1: 310–29.
——. 1960a. Från Bråvalla till Kurukshetra. Arkiv för Norisk Filologi 75: 183–93.
——. 1960b. Germanische und Indo-Iranische Eschatologie. Kairos 2: 83–88.
Wilson, H. H., trans. [1840] 1972. The Vishnu Purāṇa. Calcutta: Punthi Pustak.
Winternitz, Moriz 1908–22. Geschichte der indischen Literatur, I-III. Leipzig: C. F. Ame-
langs Verlag. (English translations: A History of Indian Literature. Calcutta: The Uni-
versity of Calcutta, 1927–33; New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, rev. ed. 1981–85).
——. 1933–34. The Criticial Edition of the Mahābhārata: Ādiparvan. Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 1933–34: 159–75.
Witzel, Michael. 1984. Sur le chemin du ciel. Bulletin des études indiennes 2: 213–79.
——. 1986. JB Paulpūlanī: The Structure of a Brāhmaṇa Tale. In M. D. Balasubrahma-
nian, ed. Dr. B. R. Sharma Felicitation Volume. 189–216. Tirupati: Kendriya San-
skrit Vidyapeetha.
——. 1987. On the Localization of Vedic Texts and Schools. In Gilbert Pollet, ed.,
India and the Ancient World: History, Trade, and Culture before A.D. 650. 173–213.
Leuven: Department Oriëntalistiek, University of Leuven.
——. 1995. Early Sanskritization: Origins and Development of the Kuru State. Unpub-
lished manuscript.
——. 1997. The Development of the Vedic Canon and its Schools: The Social and
Political Milieu. In Michael Witzel, ed. Inside the Texts—Beyond the Texts: New
Approaches to the Study of the Vedas. Harvard Oriental Series Opera Minora, vol. 2.
257–345. Cambridge: Department of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, Harvard.
——. 1999. The Pleiades and the Bears Viewed from Inside the Vedic Texts. Electronic
Journal of Vedic Studies 5,2: 10–18.
——. 2005. The Vedas and the Epics: Some Comparative Notes on Persons, Lineages,
Geography, and Grammar. In Petteri Koskikallio, ed. 2005. Epics, Khilas, and
Purāṇas: Continuities and Ruptures. Proceedings of the Third Dubrovnik Interna-
tional Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas, September 2002. Pp. 21–80.
Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts.
Woods, Julian F. 2001. Destiny and Human Initiative in the Mahābārata. Albany:
State University of New York Press.
Wulff Alonso, Fernando. 2008. Grecia en Ia India: El reportorio griego del Mahābhārata.
Madrid: Ediciones Akal.
bibliography 627
Yardi, M. R. 1986. The Mahābhārata: Its Genesis and Growth. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute.
Younger, Paul. 2002. Playing Host to Deity: Festival Religion in the South Indian Tradi-
tion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zaehner, Robert C. 1963. Utopia and Beyond: Some Indian Views. Eranos-Jahrbuch
32: 281–309.
Zimmer, Heinrich. 1962. Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civilization. New
York: Harper and Row.
Zoller, Claus Peter. 1993. On Himalayan Ball Games, Head Hunting, and Related Mat-
ters. In Heidrun Brückner, Lothar Lutze, and Aditya Malik, eds. Flags of Fame:
Studies in South Indian Folk Culture, 201–39. South Asian Studies, 27. South Asia
Institute, New Delhi Branch: Heidelberg University.

INDEX
1. List of Sanskrit terms and notable words/concepts
Abhicāra 421, 448 n. 165 Arjuna; absences of; and Aśvatthāman;
Abhimanyu 204 n. 38, 354, 355 n. 52, and Draupadī; and Indra; and Karṇa;
398 n. 47, 446 n. 149, 540 n. 17, 557 and Kṛsṇ ̣a; and Śiva; and Vyāsa;
Ābhīras 538 as eunuch; as Nara; disguise of; on
Achilles 597 Draupadī’s question 56, 57 n. 28,
Adhyāya, lesson, reading, chapter 19, 158–159, 230, 251, 253, 262 n. 11, 281
26, 69 n. 83, 77 n. 7, 127, 135, 138, n. 8, 317, 348, 413, 414 n. 12, 462,
168, 192, 208, 215, 223 n. 6, 228 465–466, 481, 496, 469–471, 478–479,
n. 20, 297–299, 305 n. 60, 308, 340, 500, 508–509, 511–512, 584
344–345, 355, 357, 360–362, 411, 451 See also Bhagavad Gītā; Yudhisṭḥ ira
n. 178, 456 n. 207, 498, 510, 531 19, 371–372, 462 n. 1, 471–472, 477,
n. 38, 590 480
Agni, sacrificial fire 113–114, 151 Arthaśāstra 79 n. 12, 80 n. 14, 124
n. 47, 158, 230, 234, 235 n. 40, n. 11, 141
236–238, 254, 301, 383, 391–392, 395, Ārya 273, 316, 461, 519, 521, 581, 583,
405, 415, 437, 441 n. 122, 446 n. 152, 585
447 nn. 160, 162, 454 n. 189, 491–492, Aryaman 273
501–502 Aśoka Maurya; and his son
Ahiṃsā, nonviolence 200 Kunāla 336
Ājīvikas 515 Āstika (“Vedic”) 77 n. 7, 139, 147
Alexander the Great 126, 585 Āstīka 77 n. 7, 139, 147
Allusion; to Buddhism; Vedic 13, 25, Aśvamedha, horse sacrifice 15, 19
142 n. 27, 272, 278, 383, 413, 456 n. 44, 66 n. 68, 67, 75, 96 n. 50, 139
n. 202, 457 n. 210, 560 n. 18, 153–154, 161, 167, 170, 177,
Ambikā and Ambālikā 259, 269, 179, 209, 213 n. 64, 215, 248, 251,
274–275 254, 259–261, 263–273, 274 n. 57,
Āṅgirasas 448 275–278, 281, 290, 329, 347, 349, 359,
Animals; language of 586 374, 391, 392, 395, 398 n. 47, 516
Aṇīmāṇḍavya 143, 156, 225 n. 11 n. 10, 531, 556 n. 6, 561, 565, 567
See Māṇḍavya Āśvamedhikaparvan 167, 229, 363
Ānṛśaṃsya; noncruelty; and anukrośa n. 74
233, 426 Aśvatthāman 95, 191 n. 11, 228 n. 20,
Antaram 248 253, 281 n. 8, 288, 447 n. 159, 453
See Interval n. 183, 499 n. 39, 515 n. 7
Antioch 11, 74 Atharva Veda 438 n. 96
Anuśāsanaparvan/Anuśāsana Parvan Ātman, self; unperfected 244 n. 59,
xxviii, xxix, 91, 96 n. 49, 129, 135 254 n. 92, 325, 358 n. 58, 421, 469,
n. 15, 351, 432 487, 488, 498, 499 n. 39, 507–508,
añjalika weapon 448 n. 164, 168, 483 520, 524
Aparaśīkhā 51 n. 12, 127, 218–219, Author; absentee; and characters; and
312–313 deity; and son; cruelty and noncruelty
Apsaras 288, 438 n. 98, 549, 557 of; function; omniscient; penis of;
Āpaddharma 96 n. 49, 106, 163, 240, yogic authorship 21–22, 62, 81
334, 340, 343 n. 25, 344, 340, 344 n. 19, 93, 168–169, 233, 307, 373
nn. 25, 27–28, 355 n. 53, 362–364 n. 29, 425–426, 454 n. 190, 516,
Aravān̠ 41 n. 15 586–587
630 index
See also Frames; Grace 12, 26–27, 298–299, 313 n. 79, 319, 323, 324 n. 1,
43, 53, 61–63, 76, 80 n. 15, 112, 134, 342, 349 n. 35, 381, 389 n. 12, 427, 435,
136–137, 139, 141, 148, 155, 175, 181, 437, 443, 450–451, 456, 506, 522, 531,
189–191, 194, 198, 206, 212, 214 560, 565
n. 67, 215, 218 n. 79, 230, 272 n. 50, Bhārata-Sāvitrī 3, 18, 51 n. 9, 57, 77,
296, 323, 341–342, 345, 351, 371–372, 82 n. 19, 85 n. 22, 96 n. 49, 110, 123,
374, 415, 456 n. 207, 459, 482 133–134, 135 n. 15, 143–144, 151
Authority 53, 63, 79, 181, 195 n. 18, n. 47, 152 n. 55, 153, 155, 156 n. 63,
198, 202, 214–215, 285–286, 320, 339, 159–160, 171–172, 177–178, 180–181,
350, 369, 370 n. 11, 409, 577, 597 183, 197, 230, 238, 240, 260, 261 n. 7,
Avatāra, avatar, ava-tṛ 50, 55, 57, 271 n. 43, 272, 280, 282 n. 4, 288, 290,
69–70, 304, 489 n. 12, 490 n. 17, 505 293, 298–299, 313 n. 79, 319, 323, 334
n. 56, 523 n. 20, 526, 527 n. 26, 536 n. 1, 342, 349 n. 35, 381, 389 n. 12,
n. 4, 539–540, 541 n. 18, 544, 546, 551 427, 435, 437, 443, 450–451, 456, 506,
Ayodhyā 85 n. 22, 99, 121, 122 n. 7, 522, 531, 560, 565, 575
140, 170, 176–177, 290, 293, 307, 318, Bhārgava Rāma 134 n. 13, 171 n. 91,
571, 592 288, 291, 302 n. 53, 481, 489, 587
See Rāma Jāmadagnya
Baka, crane 117, 137, 160, 163–164, Bhārgavas, Bhṛgus 143 n. 28, 150
323, 363 n. 75 n. 44, 287, 389 n. 12
Baka (Vaka) Dālbya 117 Bhavisỵ a Purāṇa 78, 85 n. 21, 591
Bālakāṇḍa Bhīma 169, 171 n. 91 Bhīma, Bhīmasena 21, 95, 158, 229
Balarāma 70, 95 n. 47, 157, 253, 489, n. 24, 249, 255, 262, 284, 310 n. 72,
517, 520, 523, 536, 541, 544, 546 320, 349–351, 354 n. 47, 358, 388
n. 36, 551 n. 6, 396, 426–427, 432 n. 56, 433,
Bard, bards 7, 13, 19 n. 44, 31, 52, 124, 434 n. 64, 435, 445 n. 145, 457 n. 214,
137, 147, 181 n. 107, 189, 308–309, 459, 479, 492, 519, 524, 542 n. 21, 546
372–373, 473, 559, 592 n. 36, 548, 584, 597, 599
See also Sūta 95, 192, 211 n. 55, 218 Bhīsṃ a 462
n. 78, 282 n. 9, 372–373, 415, 432 Bhṛgu 285, 369, 389–390, 395, 399
n. 56, 436 n. 85, 444 n. 138, 468, 470, n. 45
473–474, 477, 503 Bhṛguization 133 n. 11
Bhagavad Gītā (Gītā) 53, 56, 74, 82, Bible 13, 44 n. 24
123, 141, 176, 188, 255 n. 93, 324, Big Dipper; Great Bear; Seven Ṛsịs,
336–337, 346–347, 352–354, 356–357, Seven Sages 131, 172, 286–291,
423 n. 34, 427 n. 46, 434 n. 63, 458 293–294, 299, 301–302, 305, 313, 379
n. 220, 470, 473, 486, 489 n. 12, 498, n. 41, 397, 402–403
499 nn. 39–40, 507–508, 526, 551, Birds 8, 106, 158, 232–233, 237, 245,
584, 587 254–255, 288, 436, 469, 476, 520, 533
Bhāgavata Purāṇa 211 n. 54, 403 n. 65 n. 44
Bhakti 14, 21–22, 26, 28, 50–51, 54–58, See also Parrot 232
63, 65–66, 69–70, 123–125, 127, 128 Blink, wink, twinkle 22, 253, 408
n. 19, 169, 181, 216, 220, 232, 247, See also Nimisạ , nimesạ 22, 66
252, 255–256, 272, 279 n. 2, 304–305, Brahmā 18, 52, 69, 117 n. 4, 132, 136,
315–319, 325–326, 330–331, 336–337, 138–139, 142, 151 n. 47, 153, 157,
342–348, 356–357, 371, 373, 412, 423, 162, 173, 178–179, 194–200, 202–203,
456 n. 207, 461, 485–488, 489 n. 12, 211–214, 230, 242 n. 56, 299–302,
490, 517–518, 526, 532, 536 n. 4, 542, 304, 310–312, 323, 326, 370, 374, 378,
545, 551, 552 n. 57, 599 n. 30 390, 394–395, 413–415, 429, 435, 440
Bhārata xii–xxx, 3, 18, 51 n. 9, 57, 77, 82 n. 106, 443 n. 133, 444, 446, 469, 481,
n. 9, 85 n. 22, 110, 123, 133–134, 135 487, 490, 500–507, 509, 512, 531, 587
n. 151, 153, 155, 156 n. 63, 171–172, Brahmacarya, brahmacārin 274 n. 57,
177–178, 180–181, 183, 197, 238, 240, 407–408
260–261, 271 n. 43, 272, 288, 290, 293, Brahmaloka 179, 213
index 631
Brahmans; and bards; and Ksạ triyas; 32–34, 36, 40, 43, 44 n. 24, 45, 50,
and Śūdras; as kings; as śisṭạ s; 52–56, 59–60, 62, 65–66, 69, 74, 77,
Brahmanicide; Kuru Brahmans; 79–80, 82 n. 19, 96, 114–116, 119, 131,
unworthy Brahman (brahmabandhu). 134 n. 13, 135 n. 15, 136, 139–142,
See also Bhārgavas; Epic, oral; Orality; 145, 147, 149, 153–155, 165, 182–184,
Vrātya; Writing 7–8, 13–15, 17, 51, 188–189, 190 n. 6, 191, 194, 199, 202,
54, 56 n. 26, 58, 64, 74, 107, 108 n. 75, 204–205, 209–210, 224, 229 n. 25, 251,
109 n. 76, 113, 134 n. 13, 143 n. 28, 260, 263–265, 266 n. 26, 267 n. 32,
150 n. 44, 151, 157, 159, 168, 174 268, 272 n. 47, 274–275, 277–278, 282,
n. 98, 195, 241–242, 260, 287–290, 287–288, 297, 303–304, 308, 313, 316,
297, 309, 310 n. 72, 312–313, 338, 343 321–322, 327, 329, 333–336, 338, 342,
n. 25, 347, 353, 361, 368 n. 2, 445, 344, 358 n. 63, 363 n. 74, 369, 372,
503, 515–516, 521, 523–524, 528–532, 374, 386–389, 396, 398 n. 47, 399–400,
548, 549 n. 49, 554 n. 2, 561, 573, 581, 408, 411, 417, 421 n. 28, 432, 461–463,
583–584, 586–591, 593, 595, 599 468, 474, 477, 479–480, 485–486,
Brahmaśiras weapon 415, 444, 446, 491–493, 496, 503, 505–506, 515, 517,
502 n. 49 529, 535, 538, 542, 545, 553, 555–556,
Bṛhannaḍā 511–512 558–559, 563, 565, 569, 574, 583
Brothers, elder and younger 21, 26, 57 Cruelty 421, 586–587
n. 28, 77, 95, 116, 117 n. 4, 118, 122, See also Ānrṣ́aṃsya; Author, cruelty
140, 148, 154, 158, 160, 170, 172–173, and noncruelty of 3 n. 1, 4, 21–23,
222, 224 n. 8, 226, 229, 231, 246, 33, 56, 58, 60–63, 67 n. 75, 69 n. 81,
255–256, 260, 261 n. 5, 269, 288–290, 77, 86, 90, 97 n. 53, 103, 106, 113, 131,
294 n. 36, 298, 306 n. 64, 318, 321, 133 n. 11, 134, 139, 148, 154–155, 158,
328, 344 n. 27, 345–346, 353, 355 168–169, 181, 194, 214–216, 218 n. 78,
n. 53, 358 n. 64, 359, 383–384, 397 228, 233, 252, 254, 256, 259, 264, 269,
n. 45, 403 n. 67, 417, 420, 423–426, 275, 280–281, 284 n. 15, 297, 302,
428, 448 n. 164, 457 n. 214, 458–459, 304, 310 n. 72, 352, 357, 367–368,
467–469, 483, 485 n. 2, 494 n. 25, 495 372 n. 28, 373 n. 29, 384, 408 n. 89,
nn. 26–27, 505 n. 56, 506 n. 57, 507 414, 421, 430 n. 54, 458 n. 221, 426,
n. 58, 510, 519, 521, 535 n. 3, 547, 489, 514 n. 2, 516, 558, 586–587, 599
564, 584–585, 597 n. 30
Buddhi 320–321, 325, 346, 350, 428, Curses 156–157, 168, 225 n. 11, 228
431, 469, 488, 497–499, 507–508 n. 21, 256, 327, 378, 395, 399, 415,
Buddhism, Buddhists, Buddha 11, 53 416 n. 15, 427
n. 15, 56 n. 27, 58, 67 n. 75, 90, 109,
128, 132, 225, 513–515, 516 n. 9, Daksịṇās 266 n. 26
517–519, 522–526, 530 n. 36, 531, Daksịṇāyaṇa 399, 405, 407–408
533–534, 548–549, 551, 554, 560, 566 Damayantī 159, 161, 230, 234 n. 39,
244 n. 60
Candravaṃśa, lunar dynasty 155, 266 Dānadharmaparvan 164 n. 76, 166,
n. 25, 287, 378, 381, 383, 388–389, 231, 334, 339, 360, 363
397–398, 408, 588 Dānava 122 n. 8, 173, 213, 295, 548
Caves 68 Daṇḍaka/Daṇḍaka Forest 117 n. 4, 122,
Chāndogya Upanisạ d 142 n. 26, 152, 173, 177 n. 102, 289 n. 25, 294, 300
409 Darśana 206, 216 n. 73
China, Chinese 4 n. 2, 74, 515, 596 Dāruka 95, 319
Chronotope 374 Dasyus 340 n. 19, 343 n. 25, 531, 549
Citrāṅgadā 264, 520 Dawn 5, 7, 103, 177, 276 n. 62, 379,
Committees, composite authorship, 383, 396
composite artistry 12, 216 n. 74, 310 Death, deaths 10 n. 18, 17, 24, 26–27,
Conventions, as gatherings; narrative, 32, 35, 41–42, 46, 54, 70, 78, 87,
poetic, and literary; ritual; scholarly 115–116, 124, 129, 136, 146 n. 33,
4–7, 9 n. 17, 13 n. 28, 22–24, 28, 156–158, 162–163, 165–166, 174–175,
632 index
179, 191 n. 11, 200, 236, 240, 256, n. 75, 420 n. 25, 457, 459, 516–517,
277, 284, 294, 302 n. 53, 319, 326, 533, 583
329, 352–354, 356, 359, 363, 384, 396, See Rāma; Yudhisṭḥ ira
408 n. 89, 411, 414–415, 421–423, Dharmāraṇya 163, 363
427, 429–431, 433, 441–442, 443 Dharmic hunter, dharmavyādha 43, 80
n. 133, 448, 453, 454 n. 194, 456–458, n. 15, 90 n. 35, 92, 98–99, 108, 281,
462–463, 467, 470, 475–476, 479, 342 n. 23, 347, 471, 504, 516 n. 9
481–483, 492, 496 n. 29, 497–499, 502 Dhṛsṭạ dyumna 457
n. 49, 516–517, 520–521, 523–526, Dhṛtarāsṭṛa; king of Kāśī; son of
540 n. 17, 541, 546 n. 36, 550, 557, Īravat 156, 273 n. 53, 474, 522
570, 576, 599 n. 29 Dhruva, Pole Star 286, 397 n. 453, 509
See also Mrṭyu; Time 78, 95, 151 Dice, dicing, gambling 88 n. 30, 112,
n. 47, 165, 166 n. 80, 179, 213, 272 158, 160, 166, 173, 232, 234, 246, 251,
n. 52, 294 n. 36, 352, 357–359, 404, 263, 277, 280 n. 4, 282 n. 9, 283, 320,
429, 443 n. 133, 501, 526, 541, 324, 416, 422, 423 n. 36, 430, 431
549–551 n. 54, 455 n. 144, 446, 458
Deccan 97, 109 Dīksạ̄ , consecration 178, 261, 268, 511,
Deer 112, 175, 269 n. 34, 294, 298 540 n. 16
n. 43, 329, 451, 478, 586 Dīpavamsa 11 n. 21
Deification, divinization 14, 32, 35, 41, Disguise, incognito 121, 160, 163, 168,
45, 136, 303, 538, 545, 552 253, 255, 280, 301, 321, 416, 510–512,
Devayāna 286, 405, 497, 409 524, 540–541, 542 n. 21, 586
Dharma, the god; and Yama; disguises Distinction, distinctions 18, 19 n. 49,
of 25, 54, 156, 163, 277, 335, 516 23, 25, 40, 45, 134, 141, 147, 152, 166,
See also Vidura; Yudhisṭḥ ira 14, 125 198, 206, 218 n. 78, 279 n. 2, 308,
n. 15, 156, 225 n. 11, 256, 273 n. 53, 325, 343 n. 25, 346 n. 29, 469, 479,
282 n. 9, 288, 344 n. 27, 355 n. 53, 512, 533, 535 n. 1, 568, 572, 583, 584
371–372, 423, 459, 462 n. 1, 471–472, n. 8, 594
477, 480, 497 Divine eye 22–23, 141, 173, 226, 339,
Dharma; āryadharma; dasyu-dharma; 372–374, 386, 422 n. 33
gṛhasthadharma; highest; Divine plan 77 n. 8, 81 n. 19, 115–116,
ksạ̄ tra-dharma; moksạ dharma; of four 119, 121, 125, 289, 322, 324
lifestages; rājadharma; svadharma; Divine stories 26, 458
varṇāśra-madharma; wheel of 54, Dogs 57, 168, 230, 255, 343 n. 25,
57, 60 n. 42, 63, 74, 76, 79, 83, 89 345–346, 350, 370, 378
n. 32, 92, 101 n. 61, 105–106, 107 Draco (Constellation) Trailokya 403
n. 71, 110, 119, 121, 124, 127, 131, Draupadī; and time; as a paṇḍitā, scholar;
151 n. 47, 156–160, 163–166, 168, as Pāñcālī; as Yājñasenī; boons of;
173 n. 95, 176, 181, 183–184, 191, disrobing of; her puppet speech; her
196, 200–202, 210, 218, 223–224, question; polyandry of; stripping. See
227, 232–233, 235 n. 42, 242 n. 56, also Arjuna; Yudhisṭḥ ira 16, 20–21,
245–248, 255–256, 261, 267, 271–272, 24–27, 31–32, 34, 40, 41 n. 15, 47
273 n. 53, 277, 281–282, 294 n. 36, n. 29, 55 n. 23, 56–57, 63, 70, 94,
297, 300, 302, 304–306, 308, 313 111–119, 120 n. 6, 121, 145 n. 31,
n. 78, 316–324, 328–330, 334–335, 147–148, 157–162, 166, 168, 221–222,
338, 341 n. 20, 357, 360, 362–364, 224–225, 227–234, 240, 243 n. 57,
367–369, 373–374, 385, 388 n. 9, 389, 245–247, 249–257, 261–264, 273
394, 403, 407, 416, 418 n. 18, 425, n. 55, 276 n. 61, 280–284, 289, 291,
427, 443–447, 453, 458–459, 461, 462 297–298, 301, 304, 317, 319–326, 330,
n. 1, 491, 515–517, 531, 547, 550, 564 343, 349, 361 n. 69, 371–372, 398
n. 18, 583, 584 n. 8, 586, 588 n. 17, n. 47, 416–417, 419 n. 22, 421 nn. 29,
589, 593 31, 462, 471–472, 477, 480, 540, 545
Dharmarāja 26–27, 54, 117, 119, 157, n. 31, 551, 556 n. 6, 559 n. 12, 582,
160, 233, 246, 283–284, 297–298, 363 585, 592, 597, 599
index 633
Draupadī cult and temples; Śrī Emperor; saṃrāj; cakravartin 87, 519,
Tiraupatātēvi Mān̠miyam or 527–528, 556–557
“Glorification of Draupadī,”; Empire, dynasty; Gupta; Kāṇva; Maurya;
Draupadī cult Mahābhārata 31, 34, Nanda; Śuṅga 51, 86 n. 27, 87–88,
40, 41 n. 15, 145 n. 31, 227, 228 n. 22, 97, 100–102, 337, 560–561
421 n. 31 Encyclopedia 33, 132, 133 n. 10, 394
Droṇa 17, 95, 113–114, 162 n. 73, 236, n. 27, 513, 558–559, 577
254 n. 89, 262 n. 10, 282 n. 9, 288, Epic, epics; and empire; Aristotle on; as
292 n. 35, 355 n. 52, 416 n. 15, 418, genre; classical; “epic age” or “epic
421, 432 n. 56, 433, 466, 468, 499 period,”; folk; history and; martial;
n. 39, 515, 520, 599 n. 30 mythic; oral; performance; romantic;
Drupada 95, 113–114, 117 n. 4, 118, 120 Sanskrit 3 n. 1, 6–7, 9–11, 13, 17,
n. 6, 125, 148, 157, 162 n. 73, 222, 228, 21, 23, 25 n. 60, 28, 29 n. 73, 32
251, 254 n. 89, 468 n. 3, 489, 564 n. 18 n. 2, 34–37, 39 n. 12, 40–44, 46–47,
Duḥśāsana 247 n. 65, 445, 479, 494 51 n. 12, 52 n. 15, 53 nn. 15–16, 55
Durgā 274 n. 22, 57 n. 28, 59 n. 36, 62 n. 48, 64
Durvāsas 159, 168, 179, 269 n. 34, 277, n. 61, 69 n. 81, 108, 111 n. 1, 123,
290 n. 28, 294 n. 36, 421 n. 30 125, 131, 222, 225, 228 n. 22, 229, 232
Duryodhana; and Kali; called Suyodhana n. 30, 279–280, 312 n. 78, 313, 315,
17, 42 n. 18, 76, 81 n. 19, 83–85, 319, 337 n. 10, 368, 412 n. 3, 462,
87–88, 92–94, 96–97, 103–105, 107, 502, 507, 522 n. 19, 523 n. 20, 530,
109, 115, 117, 145, 147–148, 150, 156, 535, 553, 554 n. 3, 555, 558, 561–562,
159 n. 68, 161–162, 168, 181, 228, 565–570, 572–574, 577–578, 582, 585,
224 n. 8, 248 n. 66, 256, 282 n. 9, 284, 591–592, 594–595, 597–599
298 n. 44, 343, 349, 396, 415–416, See also Homer; Mahābhārata;
420–423, 422 n. 32, 432 n. 56, 433 Rāmāyaṇa 3–25, 28, 31–36, 38,
n. 59, 437, 445, 450–451, 453, 456, 40–41, 43, 50–54, 57–58, 60–62, 64
465, 470–472, 477, 483, 493–494, n. 60, 65 n. 64, 69–70, 73–77, 79–82,
499 n. 39, 502 n. 49, 503–506, 514, 84, 86, 89–94, 96–97, 98 n. 54,
520–523, 527, 545, 546 n. 37, 547, 555 100–102, 104–113, 116–117, 119,
n. 4, 570, 591 121–127, 129, 131–143, 146–149,
Dvaipāyana Lake 181 151–155, 157, 160, 166–174, 176,
Dvāpara Yuga 42 n. 18, 76, 92 n. 39, 179–181, 183–184, 187, 196 n. 19,
93, 107, 565 197, 209, 214–215, 219–222, 224, 227,
See Yuga 230–231, 233, 242–246, 248 n. 68,
Dvārakā 161, 168, 319, 418–420, 525, 251, 253, 255, 259–260, 267, 269–270,
537, 543–545, 547, 549, 551 271 n. 43, 272–273, 277, 279, 283,
287, 311, 315–318, 320, 324, 326,
Earth, Earth goddess; opens for Sītā 333–337, 341–344, 346–349, 362, 364,
26, 54, 69–70, 77, 81 n. 19, 95–96, 97 368–369, 371, 374, 387–389, 392, 397,
n. 52, 107, 113–114, 116–117, 120, 407, 411–412, 413 n. 6, 414, 417, 420
125 n. 15, 138–139, 151 n. 47, 155, n. 35, 421 n. 31, 422 n. 32, 425
177–178, 208, 213, 247–248, 256, 261, n. 42, 433 n. 58, 434 nn. 66, 72, 443
264, 268, 274 n. 56, 281, 283, 287, n. 134, 447 n. 159, 461–464, 467, 469,
302, 304, 308–309, 328–330, 345, 349, 471–472, 474, 477, 480, 483, 485–486,
372, 374, 381, 383 n. 48, 384, 386 487 n. 8, 488–489, 491, 497, 498
n. 54, 388 n. 9, 390, 395–398, 415, nn. 37–38, 499, 500 n. 42, 501 n. 44,
418–420, 422–423, 432–434, 436–437, 502 n. 49, 503 nn. 50–51, 505–507,
439–445, 446 n. 154, 448–455, 511, 512 n. 76, 513–539, 543–551, 553,
458–459, 469–470, 480, 488, 496 n. 29, 556–561, 564–565, 568–572, 574–579,
501, 509, 516, 521, 526, 530–531, 539 581–582, 584–589, 592–593, 597
n. 14, 541, 543, 545, 557, 576, 587–589
Echoes 45, 120, 242, 310 n. 72, 324, Fate, destiny 10 n. 18, 157, 227 n. 18,
353, 356, 390 n. 14, 533 n. 45, 544 245, 250, 262 n. 11, 297, 358, 378,
634 index
381, 403, 409, 415, 426, 429–431, 445, Ganġ ā, Ganges; Ākāśa Ganġ ā, celestial
446 n. 154, 450, 459 n. 228, 502 n. 49, Gaṅgā; Mandā-kinī 23, 76–77,
544, 583–584 110, 151 n. 47, 154 n. 61, 156–157,
Fiction 14, 22, 60, 62, 183 n. 114, 372, 167–168, 182 n. 110, 212 n. 59, 213,
554, 563 n. 17, 581, 590, 592, 599 281 n. 8, 287, 374, 378–386, 405, 424,
Fire, birth from; firesticks 20, 113–116, 565, 588
137–138, 159, 173, 176, 184, 223 n. 4, Gavāmayana 265 n. 19, 271 n. 38
234 n. 37, 235–238, 240, 253–254, 267, Ghatọ tkaca 416, 426–430, 447 n. 159,
283, 296, 306–307, 322, 367, 405, 415, 454 n. 194, 523
439–440, 441 n. 122, 443 n. 133, 444, Gift, gifting 17, 164, 166, 168–169, 339,
446–447, 449, 454–455, 479, 491, 499 351, 361, 363 n. 74, 383, 399, 416,
n. 39, 502, 591 420, 424, 454, 473, 532, 533 n. 44
See also Agni 113–114, 151 n. 47, Gingee vii n. 2, xv n. 31, xxxiii
158, 230, 234, 235 n. 40, 236–238, Gleaners, gleaning, uñchavṛtti 14, 63,
254, 301, 383, 391–392, 395, 405, 415, 145 n. 31, 159, 164, 165 n. 78, 168,
437, 446 n. 152, 447 nn. 160, 162, 169 n. 88, 277–278, 362
491–492, 501–502 Gopīs 318, 524, 538 n. 10
Five Former Indras 58 n. 32, 222 Grace, prasāda; of author; of Kṛsṇ ̣a 27,
Frames; authorial; cosmological; frame 206, 214 n. 67, 456
stories; genealogical; historical; inner; Great Bear, Ursa Major 286, 379, 397,
interior; of Balarāma’s pilgrimage; 402, 406 n. 79, 407
of Bhīsṃ a’s oration; of Saṃjaya’s war See Big Dipper
narrative; outer; outermost; receding; Great chain of beings 587
upanisạ dic 10, 22, 28, 29 n. 71, Greece, Greek, Greeks 10–11, 23, 74,
35, 43 n. 22, 46, 51 n. 10, 52–53, 59, 81, 82 n. 19, 89 n. 32, 97 n. 51, 98–99,
62, 66, 69 n. 83, 70, 74–75, 77 n. 8, 101 n. 61, 102, 103 n. 65, 108–109,
81–82, 93, 96, 108–109, 112, 124, 110 n. 77, 125, 514, 496, 549, 553,
127–128, 134, 137–141, 147–148, 555, 560–561, 568, 570, 572–573, 576,
153–155, 178, 189–194, 196–197, 198 578, 590
n. 26, 203, 207–208, 212, 216–220, Gṛhapati, kulapati, sthāpati 203
229, 230 n. 26, 272 n. 47, 280, Grief, grievance, śoka 77, 137–139,
297–299, 304 n. 59, 311, 341, 163, 178, 225 n. 12, 247, 248 n. 68,
343–344, 357 n. 56, 371–373, 386, 254, 307, 318, 328, 334. 344 n. 28,
421, 461, 469, 500, 595 345, 350, 353, 355, 357 n. 57, 384,
See also Author; Janamejaya; 450, 453
Mountains, backs of; Naimisạ , Forest;
Ugraśravas; Vaiśampāyana 7, 14–15, Hair; Draupadī’s 246, 284, 489
18, 19 n. 44, 22, 52–53, 63, 66, 69, 75, n. 11, 551 n. 56
85, 89, 94, 96–97, 109, 124, 127, 134 Hanumān 115, 117 n. 4, 126, 136,
n. 13, 137–139, 140 n. 20, 147–148, 153–154, 174–177, 301, 305 n. 61, 306
150, 157, 159, 163 n. 75, 167, 178–179, n. 64, 307, 310 n. 72, 325, 329–330,
182 nn. 109, 111, 183–184, 189–190, 455 nn. 196, 199, 599
192–197, 201–212, 214–215, 218, 224, Harivaṃśa 96 n. 50, 135, 240 n. 53,
229, 232–233, 236, 238, 240, 248–249, 388, 418 n. 20, 419, 454 n. 192, 485,
251–254, 260 n. 4, 272, 297, 304 n. 59, 521–522, 524, 535–550, 552, 575
308–309, 343, 345–346, 350–351, 354, Hāstinapura 85 n. 22, 309 n. 72, 319,
356–357, 361, 370–371, 373, 384, 419 416 n. 15, 520, 536 n. 4, 541
n. 22, 421–422, 459, 531 n. 38, 543, Hayaśiras 18, 151 n. 47, 212, 213 n. 62,
565–566 214, 272
Helen xliv
Gāndhārī 156, 225 nn. 10, 12, 226, Hero, heroes, heroines; heroic age; real
244, 275, 339 n. 17, 459, 282 n. 4 hero 24–26, 40 n. 14, 42 n. 18, 46,
Gaṇeśa 18, 142, 210–311 59, 61, 69, 82 n. 19, 108, 111–117, 119,
index 635
120 n. 6, 134, 136, 139, 147, 154–156, Jackals 340 n. 19, 355, 478, 522
160, 224, 230, 234 n. 39, 250, 280–284, Jaimini 126 n. 17, 197
286–287, 288 n. 24, 297, 302, 304–305, Jains, Jainism 88, 90 n. 35, 350 n. 39,
313 n. 78, 319–320, 330–331, 347, 502 n. 47, 515, 525
353, 385, 396, 398, 413, 416, 422, 424 Jamadagni 167–168, 171, 231, 285, 286
n. 40, 431, 434 , 436–437, 438 n. 98, n. 20, 287, 291 n. 32, 292, 294, 385,
439 n. 104, 441, 443 n. 133, 444–445, 394 n. 31, 587
449–451, 453–455, 456 n. 206, Janaka 114, 120–121, 170, 243 n. 57,
457–458, 469, 479, 481, 489, 491–492, 266 n. 24, 291 n. 31, 292, 350, 370
494–495, 502, 537, 539 n. 13, 550, Janamejaya 15, 18, 52, 61, 62 n. 49, 65
558–560, 577, 582–585, 592, 595, 597 n. 63, 94, 96–97, 127, 137, 139,
Heron 160 147–148, 167, 183, 189–190, 193,
Homer 25 n. 59, 125–126, 403 n. 66, 195–197, 201–202, 203 n. 37,
576, 578 204–206, 209–212, 214–215, 229,
Huns, Hūṇas 11, 74 233, 240, 272, 297, 309, 370, 543,
564–566
Iliad 125 nn. 12–13, 126, 414, 554, 572 Janapada 338, 584–585
Indra 16 n. 36, 25–27, 58 n. 32, 69 Jarāsaṃdha xxx n. 83, 15, 86, 95, 110,
n. 83, 96 n. 50, 117 n. 4, 119, 132, 151, 254 n. 92, 518, 521, 524, 546 n. 34,
157–159, 161, 170, 174 nn. 97–98, 204, 556
206 n. 41, 222, 230–231, 233, 250 Jaratkāru 147 n. 35, 408 n. 90
n. 77, 256, 260, 265 n. 19, 276, 283, Jaya 75 n. 5, 141, 249, 262, 490, 506
287, 291, 298, 301, 304 n. 59, 309 Jayadratha 41 n. 15, 95, 159, 230, 283,
n. 72, 317, 337 n. 11, 343, 351, 373, 284 n. 12, 297
389–393, 395–397, 400–405, 407, 409, Jewels 172, 293, 296, 299, 301,
413–417, 419–421, 426, 428–429, 433 439–440, 442, 452
n. 59, 434 nn. 70–71, 435 n. 80, 438 Jisṇ ̣u 441, 490, 495, 504, 509
nn. 98–99, 439 n. 105, 440, 442, 443 Joins 12, 19, 33, 59–60, 166, 191 n. 12,
nn. 132–133, 444, 447, 448 n. 168, 450 232, 414, 447 n. 159, 452, 483
n. 174, 451, 455 n. 195, 456 nn. 202,
206, 209, 457–459, 466–467, 472, Kadrū 288
481–482, 490, 492–493, 502, 505–508, Kaikeyī 116, 172 n. 94, 261, 267, 273
536 n. 4, 542, 586 n. 14, 598 n. 29 n. 55
See also Five Former Indras 58 Kali, yuga demon 42, 76, 81, 83, 85,
n. 32, 222 87–88, 92–94, 96–97, 103–105, 107,
Indraprastha 158, 536 n. 4, 564–565 109, 396, 422 n. 32, 488, 522–523, 591
Inset tales 32 Kaliṅga 88, 98 n. 54, 102, 432 n. 56,
Interpolation 12, 14, 19, 32, 35, 50, 59 520–523, 525, 528 n. 33
n. 37, 63, 69 n. 83, 75, 128, 142, 143 Kāma 151, 313 n. 78
n. 27, 152, 155 n. 62, 171, 180, 187, Kaṃsa 419 n. 22, 524–525, 542 n. 22,
191 n. 12, 192, 205, 216, 265 n. 19, 544–546, 548–550
273 n. 55, 279, 299 n. 47, 310–312, kāṇḍa 136
378, 394 n. 30, 419 n. 23, 438 n. 101, Karṇa 4, 21, 23–27, 28 n. 68, 57, 95,
495, 498, 502 n. 49, 507 n. 58, 537, 148, 151 n. 52, 159, 161–163, 191
553, 567, 578 n. 11, 224, 243 n. 57, 248 n. 66, 253,
Interval, antaram 22, 66, 103, 163, 262 n. 10, 345, 352, 355 n. 52, 359,
167, 178, 204, 221, 248, 256, 266 374, 398 n. 47, 411, 412 n. 3, 413–417,
n. 26, 426, 436, 446 n. 154, 529, 566 419–450, 451 n. 178, 452–459,
Invasion 11, 28, 74, 87, 89, 98–100, 462–463, 465–467, 469–472, 474,
102, 104 n. 66, 554–557, 560–569, 585 477–483, 491, 494–496, 500, 502–510,
itihāsa xxiii, xxx–xxxi, 11, 18, 74–77, 520–524, 533 n. 44, 547, 568, 584, 586
79–80, 93–94, 110, 141–142, 146, 152, n. 14, 598, 599 n. 29
307–309, 311, 461 Karṇikāra forest of Śiva 443
636 index
Kārsṇ ̣a Veda 141 Kṛsṇ ̣ā Draupadī 249, 262, 284 n. 15
Kārtavīrya Arjuna 159 Kṛsṇ ̣a Dvaipāyana 16 n. 35, 23, 26,
Kātḥ aka Saṃhitā 18, 133, 141, 308 57, 141, 204, 209, 214, 252, 254, 356,
Kauravas, Kurus 17, 26, 77, 88, 97 489
n. 52, 100–101, 110, 148, 156–157, Kṛtavarman 95
159, 161, 229, 246, 249, 262, 288, 309 Kṛtyā 421, 448 n. 165
n. 72, 322, 416 n. 15, 420, 423, 426, Ksạ triya, Ksạ tra; annihilation of;
429–430, 434, 437, 446 n. 149, 447, non-Ksạ triya despots; old Ksạ triyas;
449, 450, 453, 455, 456, 458, 473, 489, sorrow of; turned Brahman 170,
510, 524, 526, 536 n. 4, 540–541, 241–242, 290, 292, 338, 445, 468, 470,
547–548, 559, 563, 564, 582 n. 2, 590 503, 516, 519, 546, 548, 556, 582, 586,
See also Kuru state 565 590 n. 22, 591, 595, 598, 599
Kaurava women; widows of hundred Kubera 151 n. 47, 301, 302 n. 52, 395,
Kauravas 156 433, 451
Kāvya 12 n. 23, 47–75, 80 n. 13, 132, Kulapati 203
134, 138, 140, 142, 152–154, 180–181, See Gṛhapati
302, 304, 306–308, 310–313, 572 Kuntī 23, 26 n. 63, 117–119, 148, 156,
Keśi 250, 455, 542 n. 22 159 n. 68, 166 n. 81, 224, 225 n. 10,
Khāṇḍava Forest 158, 233–234, 226–227, 229, 243 n. 57, 269 n. 34,
253–254, 415, 438 n. 98, 441 n. 122, 275–277, 284, 288, 319, 345, 351–352,
491–492, 502 356, 359, 374, 415–417, 420, 421
Kīcaka 604 n. 30, 422–426, 431, 444 n. 138, 445
Kīta-Upākhyāna 145 n. 141, 447 n. 159, 458 n. 224, 467,
Kosala 85 n. 22, 88, 100–102, 140, 180, 567, 585
554 Kuru, Kaurava ancestor 110
Krauñca birds 137, 139 Kuru Brahmans 126, 157
krauñcī 139 Kuruksẹ tra; Samantapañcaka 463,
Kṛpa 288, 416 n. 15, 433, 599 n. 30 465–466, 468, 473
Kṛsṇ ̣a; and cowherds; Govinda; Kurupañcālas 85, 89
Hṛsị̄keśa; Keśava; Janārdana; Kuru state 565
Mādhava; Mādhusūdana; Kuśa and Lava 13, 19 n. 44, 124, 138,
Pārthasārathi; two Kṛsṇ ̣as on one 140, 180, 264, 282
chariot; Vārsṇ ̣eya; Vāsudeva 20, Kuśīlavas 124 n. 11
23, 26, 55, 57, 58 n. 31, 95, 213, 226,
247–248, 262, 309 n. 72, 319, Laksṃ aṇa 121–122, 170–173, 177, 178
353–354, 358, 374, 419, 423, 427–429, n. 103, 179–180, 260–261, 267 n. 31,
433 n. 60, 435, 439, 441–442, 444 293, 295–296, 307, 328–330, 499
n. 138, 456–459, 465, 467, 469–473, n. 39, 584
478–479, 483, 485, 488, 502, 523, Laksṃ ī 454 n. 188, 495, 543
526–527, 531 n. 39, 537, 538 n. 10, Lokapālas 395, 397, 542
540–543, 545 Lomaśa 147–148, 159
See also Arjuna; Yudhisṭḥ ira 16, Lunar dynasty 155, 266 n. 25, 287, 378,
24–27, 47 n. 29, 56–57, 63, 70, 118, 381, 383, 388–389, 397–398, 408, 588
121, 147, 157–159, 161–162, 168, 204 See Candravaṃśa
n. 38, 206 n. 41, 210 n. 50, 218, 230,
233, 242 n. 56, 248–256, 262–264, 273 Madhusūdana 213, 247, 427, 441, 523,
n. 55, 274 nn. 56–57, 281 n. 8, 283 531 n. 39, 543, 545
n. 11, 284, 287–288, 304, 317, 319–320, Madrakas 470
324–325, 338–339, 345–359, 361 n. 70, Mādrī 156, 161, 225 n. 10, 269 n. 34,
371–372, 398, 413–459, 462, 465–467, 275, 320, 457
469–474, 477–483, 488–496, 498–500, Madurai 552
502–512, 519, 523–524, 529 n. 33, 536, Magadha 15, 82–88, 92 n. 40, 97–98,
539, 540, 542 n. 21, 545, 548, 551, 564, 100, 108–109, 447 n. 159, 516, 519,
566, 584, 587, 597 521, 525, 527, 532 n. 40, 537, 546,
index 637
548–549, 554–556, 558, 564–565, Mārkaṇḍeya 94, 96, 104, 121, 125, 147,
570–571, 585, 590 150 n. 44, 159–160, 167, 230, 290,
Magic; black magic 112, 128, 181, 297–298, 343, 358 n. 63, 367–368,
321–322, 359 n. 65, 421, 430 n. 54, 371, 373, 386, 519, 526–530, 532
448 n. 165, 473 n. 4, 499 n. 39 n. 43, 584, 599 n. 30
Mahābharata vii–xi, xii n. 22, xiii–xvii, Marriage 33, 77 n. 7, 113, 116–117,
xviii n. 40, xix–xxvi, xxviii–xxxii, 119–120, 156–158, 166, 170, 180, 222,
3–24, 25 n. 59, 28, 29 n. 71, 31–36, 224, 231–232, 235, 239, 243–245, 248,
38, 40–41, 42 n. 18, 43, 49–54, 259, 286, 288, 291, 299, 319, 326, 404,
57–58, 60–62, 64 n. 60, 69–70, 73–77, 406, 424, 467, 524, 545, 548, 552, 564,
79–82, 84, 86, 89–94, 96–97, 98 n. 54, 567, 570, 575, 585
100–102, 104–113, 116–117, 119, Materialists 323–325, 515, 560
120 n. 6, 121–127, 129, 131–143, Matsya, Kingdom of the Fishes 100, 136,
146–149, 151–155, 157, 160, 161 159–160, 301, 511, 536 n. 4, 547, 564
n. 70, 162 n. 73, 166–173, 175 n. 98, Menander, Milinda 561
176, 179–181, 183–184, 187, 197, Meru 67–68, 188, 197, 206–208, 368
209, 214–215, 219–222, 224, 227, n. 2, 379–380, 382, 386, 404–405, 419,
228 n. 21, 230–231, 233, 234 nn. 37, 427, 509
39, 239 n. 52, 242, 245–246, 248 n. 68, See Mountains
251, 252 n. 87, 253, 255, 259–260, Milky Way; milky ocean 149, 188, 198,
265 n. 20, 267, 269–270, 271 n. 43, 212, 378, 405
272–273, 277, 279, 280 n. 3, 283, 287, Mīmāṃsa, Pūrvamīmāṃsā 321
311, 315–318, 320, 324, 333–337, Mithilā 116, 157 n. 66, 170, 207, 244,
338 n. 15, 341, 342–344, 346–349, 290–291, 370 n. 14
362, 364, 367–369, 370 n. 11, 371, Mleccha 343 n. 25, 549, 568–569, 583,
372 n. 24, 374, 381 n. 46, 387–389, 589–591
392, 397, 407, 411–412, 413 n. 6, Moksạ 15, 62, 184, 197, 200, 235 n. 40,
414, 417, 420 n. 25, 421 n. 31, 422 236 n. 43, 286, 313 n. 78, 335, 340,
n. 32, 425 n. 42, 433 n. 58, 443 n. 134, 367, 368 n. 5, 407, 516 n. 9
447 n. 159, 461–464, 466–467, 469, Moment; momentariness 5, 16, 20, 50,
471–472, 473 n. 5, 474, 477, 480, 483, 52, 66, 69, 73, 139, 156, 160, 166
485–486, 487 n. 8, 488–489, 497, 499, n. 80, 172, 178, 187, 221, 235, 248,
500 n. 42, 501 n. 44, 502 n. 49, 503 294, 297, 324, 329, 353, 361, 367, 381,
n. 50–51, 505–507, 511, 513–527, 529 402, 414, 426, 436, 442, 495, 498, 510,
n. 36, 530 n. 37, 531–533, 535–539, 514 n. 2, 529, 531 n. 39, 588, 592
543–551, 553, 555 n. 4, 556–561, See also Ksạ ṇa; Nimisạ , nimesạ 22,
564–565, 566 n. 20, 568–569, 66
571–572, 574–579, 581–582, 584–589, Mongoose 168, 363 n. 74
592–593, 597, 598 n. 29 Monstrosity 412
Mahābhārata: and Veda; archetype of; Mountains; backs of; double; Himavat;
composition of; Critical Edition of; Jenniao; H’un-lun; Kailāsa; K’un-lun;
dating of; dissemination, transmission Meru; Muñjavat 22, 66–68, 95, 138,
of 74, 82, 109, 126–127, 215 158, 197, 208, 219, 317, 347, 395, 433,
Mahārāja Srg̣ āla 522 451, 454–455, 547, 557
mahārājya 15 Mṛtyu 78, 151 n. 47, 165, 166 n. 80
Mahāvamsa 554 Mudgala 145 n. 31, 228 n. 22, 260
Mahāvrata 265 n. 19, 271 n. 38 Muni, Munis 145 n. 31, 202–203, 211,
Mahisạ̄ sura 518 n. 13 328, 370–371, 382, 393–394, 407, 459
Maitreya 149 n. 41, 368 n. 2 n. 228, 531
Maitreyī 243 Muses 558
Māṇḍavya 615
Māndhātṛ 146 n. 32, 159, 177 n. 101 Nāga, Nāgas 395 n. 32, 401, 437 n. 91,
Manu, Laws of; Manu Sāvarṇa 78–79, 438 n. 101, 530, 536 n. 4, 564
86, 107, 198, 316, 319, 369–370, 387 See also Snakes 52, 61–62, 137, 175,
n. 4, 404 n. 69, 424 183, 189–190, 205, 207, 212, 272, 288,
638 index
309, 371, 396, 401, 403, 405, 415–416, Odyssey 572
427 n. 45, 436, 437 n. 91, 438 nn. 98, Omens 90, 329–330
101, 439–443, 446 n. 154, 452, 456, Orality 6–9, 12, 19, 24, 26, 28–29,
469, 536 n. 4, 557, 565–566 214–215, 369 n. 7
Nāgavithi 407 See also Epic, oral 3, 6, 9, 17, 23,
Nahusạ 287, 347, 387–404, 407–409, 28, 32 n. 2, 34, 36, 37 n. 7, 42–43, 46,
567 55, 228 n. 21, 368, 535, 553, 558, 574,
Naimisạ ; conventions; Forest; Arbor 582, 592
or Bower (kuñja); Nimsar 9 n. 17, Oriya Mahābhārata of Sāralādāsa
18, 19 n. 44, 22, 52, 62 n. 49, 63, 66, 3–24, 25 n. 59, 28, 29 n. 71, 31–36,
85, 89, 109, 137–138, 147–149, 157, 38, 40–41, 43, 50, 52–53, 60–61, 64
178–179, 182 n. 109, 183, 189, 190 n. 60, 69–70, 73–77, 79–82, 84, 86,
n. 8, 195, 203, 205, 209–210, 218, 229, 89–94, 96–97, 98 n. 54, 100–102,
260 n. 4, 308–309, 371, 547 104–113, 116–117, 119, 121–127,
See also Sattras 65 n. 63 131–143, 146–149, 152–155, 157,
Naimisạ s, Naimisẹ yas, Naimisẹ ya 166–171, 176, 179–181, 183–184, 187,
Ṛsịs 195, 205–206, 547 197, 209, 219–222, 224, 230–231, 233,
Nāka, Nākapṛsṭḥ a 66–67 242, 245–246, 248 n. 68, 251, 252
Nakula 95, 145 n. 31, 169 n. 88, 283, n. 87, 253, 255, 259–260, 265 n. 20,
344 n. 27 267, 269–270, 271 n. 43, 272–273,
Nala, Nala, Nalopakhyāna; as Bāhuka, 277, 279, 283, 287, 311, 315–318, 320,
as eunuch 32, 60, 70, 143 n. 28, 145 324, 333–336, 341–342, 344, 346–349,
n. 31, 151–152, 159–160, 169 n. 86, 364, 368–369, 370 n. 11, 371, 372
183 n. 114, 227 n. 18, 230, 280, 301 n. 24, 374, 381 n. 46, 387–389, 392,
n. 50, 303–304, 422 n. 32, 446 n. 149, 393 n. 24, 397, 407, 411–412, 413
473 n. 4, 511–512 n. 6, 414, 417, 420 n. 25, 422 n. 32,
Nāmanirvacana 195 433 n. 58, 443 n. 134, 447 n. 159,
Nārada 17, 23, 26, 59, 124, 137–139, 461–464, 466–467, 469, 471–474, 477,
148, 153, 158, 163, 178–179, 188, 192 480, 483, 485–486, 488–489, 497, 499,
n. 13, 194–195, 198, 200, 203–204, 502 n. 49, 503 n. 50, 505–507, 511,
206–210, 222, 253, 281 n. 8, 293, 345, 513–525, 527, 530 nn. 36–37, 532–539,
352–356, 359, 361, 368, 370–372, 374, 543–551, 553, 556–561, 564–565, 566
386, 416–417, 432, 433 n. 60, 458, n. 20, 568–569, 571–572, 574–579,
519–520, 528, 584, 599 n. 30 581–582, 584–589, 592–593, 597
Nārāyaṇa; Nara and 26, 115, 161–162,
182–184, 188, 190–191, 194–200, Padmanābha 200
202–210, 212–213, 215, 218, 257 Paila 197
n. 99, 269, 272, 337 n. 11, 363, 414, Pañcāla (for the land) or Pāñcāla(s)
418 n. 18, 434, 447, 455 n. 197, 458, (for the people) 88, 99–102, 114,
469, 481, 489–490, 492–493, 502, 504, 116–118, 157, 214, 228, 281, 322, 436
506, 539 n. 14, 540, 544, 550, 566 n. 84, 454, 459, 520, 536, 547
Nārāyaṇīya 418, 419 n. 22 Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa 317
Nāstikas, nāstikya, heresy 11, 321–324, Pāṇḍava women 70, 118, 151, 158,
515, 583 225, 361 n. 69, 563–564, 567, 573,
Nīlakaṇtḥ a 472 585
Nimisạ , nimesạ 66 Pāṇḍavas, Pāṇḍava; minus Arjuna 21,
Nostalgia 585 24, 26, 52, 58 nn. 31, 32, 69 n. 83,
See also Janapada 584–585 70, 77, 85, 94–95, 97 n. 52, 110, 112,
Novel 393, 577 117–119, 121, 137, 147–148, 150–152,
157–161, 166, 168, 181–182, 189–190,
Oaths and vows 156, 159, 178, 195, 204 n. 38, 206, 209–210, 222, 225,
197, 225 n. 11, 228 n. 21, 246, 269, 228, 230, 233, 247, 248 n. 68, 251
271, 273–274, 276, 283, 290, 329–330, n. 82, 253, 262 n. 10, 264, 273 n. 55,
358, 416, 427, 433 n. 60, 462 n. 1, 528 274 n. 57, 280–281, 282 n. 9, 283–284,
index 639
287–288, 291, 295, 297, 301 n. 50, 304, Pātạ liputra 87 n. 28, 97–99, 100 n. 59,
319–320, 324, 343, 361 n. 69, 370, 373, 101, 571
398 n. 47, 417, 420, 423, 425, 427–428, Patañjali 59, 214 n. 67, 406
431–432, 435–436, 442, 444–447, 450, Plato 468 n. 2, 496 n. 33, 497, 498
454–455, 457–459, 462, 467, 473, n. 37, 568, 579
477–479, 489, 493, 507, 510–511, 521, Possession 27, 109, 276–277, 309, 421,
523 n. 20, 526–527, 536 n. 4, 540–541, 422 n. 32, 432, 456 n. 210, 482, 564
543, 545–548, 559, 563–565, 567, 573, Pōttu Rāja 41 n. 15
582 n. 2, 585, 590, 597 Prajāpati 70, 78, 265 n. 19, 404 n. 69,
See also Draupadī, polyandry of 13 487
n. 28, 118, 222, 229, 253, 281, 559 Primary process 36–43, 46–47
Pāṇḍu 14, 148, 156–157, 166 n. 81, Pṛthu Vainya 90
224, 226–227, 229 n. 25, 273 n. 53, Pulastya, Paulastya 199, 260 n. 4
275, 277, 288, 422, 467, 495, 559–560 Pune Critical Edition / Critical Edition
Pāṇini 16–17, 59, 214, 536 xxvii–xxix, xxxi, 7, 12, 16, 51, 56 n. 23,
Parāśara 155, 288, 588 64, 73, 75, 76 n. 6, 82, 111 n. 2, 126,
Pariksịt 88 n. 29, 94, 96, 204, 209, 211, 132 n. 7, 135–136, 145, 148 n. 37, 149,
212 n. 59, 264, 288, 359 n. 66, 565 152, 159 n. 68, 177, 179, 181, 182 nn.
Parrot 232 108, 111–112, 183 n. 113, 192–193,
See also Śuka 14–15, 52, 60–63, 203–205, 209, 210 n. 50, 211 nn. 53,
66, 68, 137–139, 151 n. 54, 183–184, 55–56, 223, 240 n. 53, 247, 250 n. 79,
189–191, 197, 201, 207, 218, 220, 223, 263 n. 15, 272 n. 47, 279 n. 2, 290, 310
288, 350 n. 38, 367–368, 370–371, 378 n. 72, 337, 415, 417 n. 17, 438 n. 98,
n. 36 439 n. 104, 452 n. 182, 455 n. 195, 472,
Pārthasārathi 470 495, 541, 564 n. 18,
Parvan, upaparvan, join, knot, book; Ādi; Purusạ 199, 211, 213, 215, 244, 300,
Āpaddharma; Anuśāsa-na; Āraṇyaka; 316, 455 n. 197, 487–488, 490,
Āstīka; Āśvamedhika; Bhisṃ a; 511–512, 590
Karṇa; Mahāprasthānika; Mausala; Purusạ Sūkta / Purusạ sūkta 215, 567,
Moksạ dharma; Pauloma; Pausỵ a; 590, 593
Putradarśana; Rājadhar-ma; Sabhā; Purusọ ttama, Purusạ 526
Śalya; Śānti; Sauptika; Strī; Svargā- Pusỵ amitra Śuṅga 278
rohaṇa; Udyoga; Virātạ 4, 21,
23–27, 28 n. 68, 57, 63, 74, 80 n. 15, Rabbis, Rabbinical hermeneutics 46
88, 91, 95–96 n. 49, 106, 135 n. 15, n. 28
136, 138–139, 147–149, 155, 159–166, Rajagriha 519, 525, 546, 548, 571, 588
183, 191–192, 200–201, 218, 224, 235 n. 18
n. 42, 240, 247, 248 n. 68, 253, 262 Rājasūya 177, 251, 260, 263, 271, 277,
n. 10, 280, 334, 337, 340, 344 n. 27, 519, 524, 527–528, 545 n. 31, 546,
345, 351–352, 355 n. 53, 360–364, 556–557, 561, 570
368–369, 374, 386, 389–396, 398–400, Rāksạ sas 290, 294
402–404, 407–408, 411, 412 n. 3, Rāma, Rāma Dāśarathī; as Dharmarāja
413–417, 419–439, 440 nn. 108, 116, 26–27, 54, 117, 119, 157, 160, 170,
441–450, 451 nn. 178–179, 452–459, 233, 246, 283–284, 292, 298, 363 n.
459 n. 228, 462–463, 465–467, 75, 420 n. 25, 457, 459, 489, 516–517,
469–472, 474, 477–483, 491, 494–496, 533, 548, 583
498, 500, 502–510, 512, 517, 520–521, Rāma Jāmadagnya, Bhārgava Rāma,
523–524, 533 n. 44, 547, 556 n. 6, 568, Paraśurāma 93, 107, 134 n. 13, 138,
583–584, 586, 598, 599 n. 29, 621 148, 161, 167, 170–171, 180, 190
Parvata 144, 248 n. 68 n. 6, 231, 288, 291–294, 299, 302
Pārvatī 274 n. 57 n. 53, 371, 373, 385–386, 415–416,
Pāśupata weapon 417 n. 17, 434 n. 72, 417 n. 17, 432 n. 54, 438 n. 97, 481,
444 n. 139, 466, 482 489, 586 n. 14, 587–590, 599 n. 30
640 index
Rāmāyaṇa 8–10, 13, 16, 19, 28, 31–36, 210 n. 50, 218, 283 n. 11, 291 n. 32,
38, 39 n. 11, 41, 43, 55–59, 65, 66 298, 333, 334, 337, 339, 341, 342 n. 23,
n. 68, 69 n. 83, 70 n. 85, 74–75, 77 345, 361, 364, 367–370, 418 n. 18, 516,
n. 8, 79, 80 n. 13, 92 n. 41, 101, 520–521, 568
111–116, 119–124, 127, 131, 135–141, Sarasvatī 67, 90–91, 96 n. 50, 213, 225
145–146, 152–155, 167 n. 83, 169–171, n. 10, 547
175 n. 98, 178–181, 194 n. 16, 216, 228 Sarasvatī River; as Kāñcanāksị; celestial;
n. 21, 231 n. 28, 251 n. 80, 254 Sapta Sārasvata Tīrtha 23, 34, 67,
n. 90, 260–261, 273, 277, 279, 290, 306, 68 n. 76, 77, 90, 118, 161, 167, 182
318, 326–327, 331, 355, 413 n. 6, 461, n. 110, 268, 287, 309, 328, 330,
499 n. 39, 514, 515 n. 6, 518, 538 368, 371 n. 22, 372, 378–380, 382,
n. 12, 548, 553–554, 556–563, 566, 568, 385–386, 405, 408, 456 n. 204
571, 574–576, 578 n. 32, 579, 581–582, Sarayū River 179
584–585, 588–589, 592 Śārṅgaka birds 233, 245
Rāvaṇa 69, 115–116, 117 n. 4, 118, 122, śāstric 167
124, 136, 146, 169, 172–173, 174 n. 98, Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 15–16, 142 n. 26,
175–176, 180, 260 n. 4, 273 n. 55, 285 395, 402, 565
n. 17, 289 n. 25, 295, 300–301, 302 Satī, suttee 41, 232, 235 nn. 41–42,
n. 51, 304, 307, 325–329, 331, 519, 548, 241, 246, 592
563, 570, 582 n. 2 Sattras; and Vrātyas; at Naimisạ Forest;
Rome 11, 74, 554 Baka Dālbya’s; Janamejaya’s at
Ṛsịs, celestial 237, 240, 280, 285–291, Kuruksẹtra; Janamejeya’s Snake sattra
293–297, 299, 301–302, 304–305, 307, at Taksạ śilā; of snakes in Pañcaviṃśa
309, 313, 500 Brāhmaṇa; Śaunaka’s; Yama’s 18,
Ṛtuparṇa 473 n. 4 19 n. 44, 22, 52, 58 n. 32, 62 n. 49,
Rudra 25 n. 61, 197–198, 202, 270, 271 63, 65–66, 78, 85, 89, 109, 127,
n. 40, 274, 393, 413 n. 7, 433, 436, 137–138, 140 n. 20, 147–148, 151
505–506 n. 47, 156–158, 160, 166 n. 80, 168,
Rukmi / Rukmin 522 178–179, 182–183, 189, 190 n. 8,
Rukmiṇī 159 n. 68, 225 n. 10 192–197, 201–205, 206 n. 43, 207–212,
214, 218, 226, 229–230, 233, 240, 260
Sabhā 240, 247, 309 n. 72, 407 n. 4, 272 n. 47–48, 286, 297, 301,
Sacrifice of battle 359, 459 n. 228, 485 308–309, 370–371, 395, 417, 420, 433,
n. 3, 511 442 n. 128, 446 n. 154, 448, 450, 451
Sadasya, sadasyas 61 n. 177, 454 n. 192, 516–517, 533 n. 45,
Sahadeva 86, 95, 459, 542 n. 21 543, 564–566
Śākamedha 270, 274 See also Gavāmayana; Yātsattra 96
Śakas 11, 89 n. 32, 90, 100, 101 n. 61, n. 50, 265 n. 19, 271 n. 38
102–103, 109, 515, 549, 568 n. 22, Satyavatī-Kālī 77, 81 n. 19, 83–85,
569, 589 87–88, 93, 96, 104–105, 155–156,
Śakuni 95, 161, 445, 446 n. 148, 494 269–270, 271 n. 41, 273, 522–523, 591
Śalya 25, 27, 95, 148–149, 161–163, Śaunaka; school 64, 137, 142 n. 26,
396, 413, 414 n. 11, 416, 422, 424, 148, 192–197, 201–204, 206 n. 43,
431, 433, 435–436, 438, 439 n. 104, 207–211, 214, 272 n. 47, 370, 533
450, 451 n. 179, 453, 456 n. 206, 465, n. 45, 549
470–472, 477–481, 483, 494–496, Schriftartprämisse 193, 217
503–506, 509 Seven Ṛsịs 285–291, 293–294, 299,
Śamitṛ 157 301–302, 305, 313
Saṃjaya 22, 27, 125 n. 15, 141, 181 See Big Dipper
n. 107, 225 n. 12, 282 n. 9, 358 n. 60, Shadows 5
372–374, 381 n. 46, 474 Śisṭạ s 14
Sāṃkhya, Sāṃkhya-Yoga 200, 351 Śiśupāla 53, 57 n. 28, 95, 419 n. 22,
Śāntiparvan xxiv–xxv, xxviii, 23, 63, 74, 432 n. 56, 462, 518 n. 14, 520,
149, 163–164, 167, 182–183, 191–192, 522–523, 547, 549 n. 49
index 641
Sītā 325–331, 582, 588 n. 18 Tamil, Tamilnadu 103
Śiva, Mahādeva; Śaiva 501 n. 44 Thought entire: Vāsudeva and Arjuna’s;
See also Rudra 25 n. 61, 197–198, Vyāsa’s 7, 14–16, 21–22, 43, 52,
202, 270, 271 n. 40, 413 n. 7, 433, 436, 56–64, 67, 74, 96, 117–119, 131, 133,
505–506, 510 137–139, 141–142, 148–149, 150
Sixteen Kings 15, 17 n. 37, 340 n. 18, n. 44, 152 n. 55, 155–159, 163–164,
355, 556–557 167, 180, 181 n. 107, 183–184,
Snakes; Snake sacrifice 25 n. 59, 189–191, 194, 197–198, 200–202, 204,
52, 61–62, 65 n. 63, 137, 175, 183, 206–212, 214–215, 218 n. 79, 220,
189–190, 205, 207, 212, 272, 288, 222, 226, 228, 251, 253–254, 256
309, 371, 396 n. 36, 401, 405, 436, n. 97, 259, 263–264, 269, 271–275,
441, 443, 452, 456, 536, 557, 281, 288, 291, 308, 310–311, 333,
565–566 348, 351–354, 355 n. 52, 356–358,
Śrī, śrī 117, 151 n. 47, 157, 222, 225, 360–361, 367–368, 370–374, 378
256, 337 n. 11, 389, 395–396, 447 n. 36, 414, 416 n. 15, 422 n. 33, 430
n. 156, 489, 544 n. 54, 433 n. 60, 458 n. 221, 459
Stars; astrology 212, 239, 285–286, n. 228, 489–490, 511, 536, 556 n. 6,
293, 301–302, 378, 393, 397 n. 42, 557, 566–567, 569, 576, 578–579, 584,
398–400, 402–403, 405, 406 n. 79, 586–587, 599 n. 301
474, 501 Three Krṣṇ ̣as 57, 256 n. 97, 489–490,
See also Big Dipper; Dhruva; Gaṅgā; 564
Mountains, Meru; Naimisạ , Forest; Time, Kāla; and place; dark times;
Ṛsịs, celestial 18, 19 n. 44, 22–23, cooks; playing for; three times 34,
52, 62 n. 49, 63, 66–68, 76–77, 85, 76, 151 n. 47, 166 n. 80, 179, 194, 234,
89, 109–110, 116, 137–138, 140 246, 267, 294 n. 36, 317, 351 n. 41,
n. 40, 147–149, 151 n. 47, 154 n. 61, 386, 404, 443 n. 133, 595
156–157, 167–168, 172, 178, 182 See also Chronotope; Interval;
nn. 109–110, 183, 189, 190 n. 8, 195, Moment
203, 205–207, 208 n. 46, 209–210, 212 Transposition 37, 39–40, 46, 331, 462,
n. 59, 213, 218, 229, 260 n. 4, 281 480, 486
n. 8, 286–287, 308–309, 368 n. 2, 371, Tṛsṭụ bh verses 24, 412 n. 4, 433, 463
374–386, 397, 403–405, 413, 419, 424,
427, 509 Ugraśravas 7, 18, 19 n. 44, 52, 62
Subhadrā 253, 264, 273 n. 55, 288, 319, n. 49, 127, 134 n. 13, 137, 139, 140
540, 545 n. 31, 551 n. 20, 147–148, 182–184, 189–190,
Śuka 14–15, 52, 60–63, 66, 68, 137–139, 192–193, 272 n. 47, 308, 566
151 n. 54, 183–184, 189–191, 197, 201, Ulūpī 264
218, 220, 223, 288, 350 n. 38, 367–368, Umā 67
370–371, 378 n. 36 Uñchavṛtti. 145 n. 31, 164, 165 n. 78,
Sukra 310 n. 72, 398 169 n. 88
Śukra, Uśanas 132, 372, 377, 385–386, See Gleaners, gleaning
398 Uñchavṛtti-Upākhyāna 145 n. 31,
Sumantu 197 159
Sunda and Upasunda 222 Upanisạ ds 232, 255, 353 n. 45, 461,
Śuṅgas, Brahman dynasty 51, 86 497 n. 35
n. 26–27, 102, 278, 515, 555 Uttaṅka 168
Sūta; Sauti 182, 183 n. 113, 192–193, Uttarā 149 n. 41, 409 n. 92
195–197, 201–202, 204, 209–211, 373,
415, 432, 436, 444, 468, 470, 473–474, Vaiśampāyana 7, 14, 18, 52–53, 62, 66,
477, 503, 566–569, 571 69 n. 83, 75, 129, 134 n. 13, 137,
Śyena-Kapotīya Upākhyāna 144, 159 147–148, 150, 159, 163 n. 75, 167,
182 n. 111, 183, 189, 193, 195–197,
Taksạ ka 437, 565 200–202, 203 n. 37, 204, 206–210, 212
Taksạ śilā 207, 515, 565, 571 n. 59, 214–215, 232–233, 236, 238,
642 index
240, 248, 252–254, 272 n. 47, 297, 304 Virātạ 135 n. 15, 136, 160, 253, 512,
n. 59, 309, 343, 345–346, 351, 354, 542 n. 21, 556 n. 6
356–357, 361, 373, 384, 419 n. 22, Visṇ ̣u; Vaisṇ ̣ava 86, 292, 305, 469, 472,
421–422, 459, 531 n. 38, 566 481, 509 n. 66, 525, 549
Vāk, Goddess of Speech 276 Viśvajit 266 n. 26
Vālmīki; hermitage of 13, 16, 21–22, Viśvakarman 151 n. 47, 500
38–39, 56 n. 25, 59, 64, 68 n. 76, 70 Viśvāmitra 120, 146 n. 32, 167,
n. 85, 74, 112, 116, 120, 122, 124, 132 170–171, 180, 285, 286 n. 20,
n. 9, 137–141, 153–154, 169, 171–172, 287–288, 290–294, 299, 302 n. 53, 343
174 n. 96, 177–178, 180–181, 207, n. 25, 345, 394 n. 31, 569, 587, 589,
260–261, 263, 266 n. 24, 267, 269 590–591
n. 34, 276 n. 61, 281–282, 289–291, Vrātya, Vrātyas; Daiva Vrātya, Daivya
293–294, 296 n. 42, 297, 299, Vrātya; Vrātyastoma 58, 90, 109
300–311, 313, 331, 368 n. 2, 371, 499 Vyāsa; hermitage of; three years’
n. 39, 548, 566, 578, 584, 599 n. 30 work; as Vedavyāsa; Vyāsasthalī;
Vārsṇ ̣eya 226 n. 14 Vyāsavana 197, 226, 228–229,
Varuṇa; Mitra and 120, 151 n. 47, 230, 251–254, 256 n. 97, 259, 263–264,
271, 273, 301, 395, 433, 440 n. 109, 269, 271–275, 277, 281, 288, 291, 308,
446, 451 n. 177, 502 310–312, 333, 338 n. 15, 339 n. 17,
Vasisṭḥ a 78–79, 124 n. 10, 143, 145 344 n. 28, 348, 350 n. 38, 351–354,
n. 31, 147 n. 36, 157, 170, 246 n. 63 355 n. 52, 356–361, 367–368,
Vasudeva 417, 434 n. 63, 489, 495 370–374, 378 n. 36, 414, 416 n. 15,
Vāsudeva 16, 57, 70, 95, 191 n. 11, 422 n. 33, 430 n. 54, 433 n. 60, 458
246, 338, 349, 353, 373, 427–428, 430 n. 221, 459 n. 228, 489–490, 511, 556
n. 54, 433, 436, 445–446, 457, 489, n. 6, 557, 565–567, 569, 576, 578–579,
522, 536, 541, 549 n. 49, 551 584, 586–588, 599 n. 30
See Kṛsṇ ̣a See also Thought entire 308, 373
Vāyu 85–86, 95, 105 n. 69, 151 n. 47,
230, 301, 307, 378, 406, 446 Widow, widows 41 n. 16, 576
Veda 13–15, 18, 43, 51 n. 9, 59–60, See also Satī 41 n. 16, 232, 235, 241,
75 n. 5, 82, 88, 126, 141, 142 n. 26, 246, 592
147–148, 153, 171, 191, 195, 199, Wind, Vāyu 85, 86 n. 23, 95, 105
201–202, 204, 211, 214–215, 234, 266, n. 69, 151 n. 47, 230, 301, 307, 378,
268, 271 n. 43, 272, 285–286, 305, 308, 406, 446
316, 368 n. 5, 372 n. 26, 386, 388, 396, Worm 225 n. 11, 368, 586–587
397 n. 41, 405, 409, 461, 472, 487 Writing 3, 5–9, 11, 13 n. 28, 14–17, 19,
n. 8, 488, 496, 500, 508 n. 63, 509 26, 28–29, 34, 42, 50, 52–53, 64, 81,
n. 66, 528, 531, 562–563, 567, 583, 590 87 n. 28, 103, 214 n. 66, 219, 311, 515,
See Atharva Veda; Kārsṇ ̣a Veda; 568–569, 571, 578, 590
Mahābhārata, and Veda; Vyāsa as
Vedavyāsa Yādava 89 n. 31, 288, 418
Vedi 114–116 Yāja and Upayāja 288
Vicitravīrya 270, 275–277, 522 Yama 54, 58 n. 32, 78, 151 n. 47,
Videha 370 156–158, 160, 166 n. 80, 168, 226,
Vidura; and Dharma; son of Atri 14, 230, 233, 286, 301, 395, 417 n. 17, 420
49, 57, 121, 125, 151 n. 47, 156–160, n. 25, 433, 442 n. 128, 446 n. 154,
163–166, 168, 173 n. 95, 210, 223 448, 450, 451 n. 177, 454 n. 192,
n. 4, 225, 227, 246, 255–256, 273 516–517, 533
n. 53, 277, 282 n. 9, 288, 294, 302, Yātsattra 96
335, 344 n. 27, 355 n. 53, 363 n. 74, Yavana, Greek 81, 82 n. 19, 86, 89,
418 n. 18, 423, 443, 459, 462 n. 1, 98–100, 103, 108, 110 n. 77, 125,
497, 527 549–550, 553, 560–561, 568, 572–573
Villipāratam, Tamil Mahābhārata of Yayāti 78, 155, 226, 287, 370, 387–388,
Villiputtūr Āl̠vār 40 396–398, 408–409, 420, 462
index 643
Yoga 55, 200, 212–213, 353 n. 45, n. 98, 175 n. 98, 176–177, 179–181,
356–357, 367, 372–373, 438 n. 101, 183–184, 189–191, 194–198, 200–202,
487, 526, 533 n. 45, 541, 543 204, 206–215, 218, 220–234, 240,
Yudhisṭḥ ira, Dharmarāja; and Arjuna; 242 n. 56, 243, 245–256, 259–278,
and Bhīsṃ a; and Brahmans; and 280–284, 287–291, 294, 297–298,
Dharma, the god; and Draupadī; 301–306, 308–313, 316–326, 328–330,
and Draupadī’s question; and 333, 335, 336 n. 9, 337–339, 341 n. 20,
Duryodhana; and Gāndhārī; and 343, 344 n. 25, 345–363, 367–368,
Karṇa; and Kṛsṇ ̣a; and Indra; 370–374, 378 n. 36, 385, 388 n. 9, 389,
and Nala; and Śuka; and Vyāsa; 391–396, 398, 400–404, 407, 409, 411,
as audience and interlocutor; 412 n. 3, 413–459, 461–463, 465–467,
as Dharmarāja; as gambler; as 469–474, 477–483, 488–496, 498–500,
Vaiyāghrapādya; Aśvamedha of; 502–512, 515–517, 519–524, 527–533,
birth of; divine eye of; disguise of; 536, 539–540, 542, 545–548, 550–551,
dog of; education of; grief of; heart 554 n. 2, 555 n. 4, 556–557, 559 n. 11,
of; questioning Draupa-dī; Rājasūya 561, 564, 566–570, 573, 576, 578–579,
of; tests of; Yaksạ ’s questions to 4, 581–593, 595, 597–599
7–8, 13–17, 19 n. 44, 20–27, 28 n. 68, See also Dharma, the god; Vidura
31–32, 34, 40, 41 n. 15, 43, 47 n. 29, Yuga, yugas; Dvāpara yuga; Kali yuga.
49, 51–52, 54, 56–64, 66–68, 69 n. 83, See also Kali, yuga demon 42 n. 18,
70, 74–77, 79, 83, 89 n. 32, 92, 95–96, 76, 81, 83–85, 87–88, 92–97, 103–105,
101 n. 61, 105–106, 107 n. 71, 108 107, 109, 396, 488, 565, 591
n. 75, 110–124, 126–127, 131–133, Yuga Purāṇa xxvi, xxx, 81, 84, 89–94,
134 n. 13, 137–139, 141–142, 143 95 n. 46, 96–106, 109–110
n. 28, 145 n. 31, 147–170, 173, 174
2. List of authors
Adarkar, Aditya 4–5, 24, 411 n. 2, 432 516–517, 519–525, 528–529, 531–532,
Akhtar Das, Mamna 400 n. 52, 500 539–540, 542 n. 21, 545 n. 33, 546,
n. 43 550
Allan, J. Wolseley 549 n. 48 Bloom, Harold 38 n. 10, 335 n. 5
Allchin, F. R. 402 Bodhi, Bhikku 129
Allen, N. J. 556 Bosworth, A. B. 563 n. 16
Alles, Gregory D. 529, 558 n. 8, 561, Bottomore, T. B. 594–595
571 Bowles, Adam 363–364
Alter, Richard 5 Brockington, John 28, 362
Aurobindo, Sri (see Aurobindo Ghosh) Brodbeck, Simon 73 n. 1, 81, 226
n. 14, 236 n. 43, 244, 590 n. 22
Bakhtin, M. M. 374 Bronkhorst, Johannes 82, 84, 99
Beck, Brenda E. F. 40, 592 n. 25 Brown, W. Norman 397 n. 41
Belvalkar, Sripad Krishna 192, Burgess, Ebenezer 404 n. 72
195–196, 202–203, 209–210, 216–218 Burnell, A. E. 574
Bharadwaj, O. P. 565
Bhatt, G. H. 264 n. 17 Chattopadhyaya, B. D. 591
Bhatta, Krishna M. 593 Chiba, Masaji 224, 224 n. 9
Bhattacharji, Sukumari 401 n. 53 Cohen, Patricia 594
Bhattacharya, Pradip 104 n. 66, 105 Colebrooke, H. T. 403 n. 65, 404
n. 69 n. 72
Biardeau, Madeleine xi, xiii, xvi, xxvi, Conze, Edward 128, 132 n. 9, 242
7–8, 15, 55, 56 n. 25, 73–74, 125, 127, Couture, André 526 n. 26, 538 n. 7,
256, 264, 271, 280 n. 3, 302 n. 53, 336, 541 n. 18
348 n. 33, 416 n. 15, 420 n. 26, 430, Cowell 234 n. 37
432, 480, 485 n. 3, 487, 490–491, 514, Cross, Tom Peete 468, 468 n. 2, 475
644 index
Dandekar, R. N. 164–165, 167, 231 209 n. 49, 210, 213 n. 64, 215 n. 69,
de Bary, Theodore 497 n. 34 216–219
De, S. K. 310 n. 72 Gupte, B. A. 400 n. 50, 402 n. 60
Defourny, Michel 288 n. 24, 396 n. 34,
388 Hacker, Paul 218
Derrida, Jaques xxi, 7, 56 n. 27, 221 Halbfass, Wilhelm 443 n. 136
n. 2, 222 n. 2 Harbison, Peter 464
Dodwell, H. H. 549 n. 48 Hardy, Fred 319
Dubuisson, Daniel 461, 480 Hatto, A. T. 462
Dumézil, Georges 7, 249, 262, 273 Hegarty, James 81, 247 n. 65
n. 53, 472, 480, 508, 597–598 Hill 225 n. 12
Dumont, P.-E. 265 n. 19 Holtzmann, Adolf xiii, xxvii n. 75, 391,
403, 514, 555 n. 4
Eliade, Mircea 387 Hopkins, E. W. 6, 17 n. 37, 133 n. 10,
Elliot, C. A. 574 54, 78, 239 n. 52, 285, 303 n. 57,
Elliot, Sir Walter 175 n. 98 394, 397–398, 402, 529 n. 36, 559,
Emerson, Ralph Waldo 587 560–561, 569
Eschmann, Anncharlott 551 n. 55 Hudson, Dennis 552 n. 59
Esnoul, Anne-Marie 192 n. 13, 201 Hudson, Emily 125 n. 15, 191 n. 10,
n. 13, 207 n. 44 225 n. 12, 229 n. 24
Fitzgerald, James xxvii, 23, 50–55, 164, Ilaiah, Kancha 593
315, 333–334, 337–340, 342, 356 Ingalls, Daniel H. H. 537 n. 7
n. 55, 369, 517
Flood, Gavin D. 560 Jaiswal 536
Fraser, J. 474 n. 5 Jamison, Stephanie 143 n. 28, 166, 223,
224 n. 7, 230–231, 243, 251 n. 80, 260,
Ganguli, Kisari Mohan 35, 165 n. 79, 263, 265 n. 19, 269–270, 271 n. 38,
204 n. 39, 210 n. 50, 242, 250, 263, 274–275
393, 435 n. 76, 436 n. 90, 447 n. 159, Joshi, N. P. 551 n. 55
454 n. 192, 574, 578 Jowett, B. 496 n. 33
Gehrts, Heino 260 n. 2, 461
Genning, V. F. 464 Kane, P. V. 402
Gerow, Edwin 479 Kangle, R. P. 79 n. 12
Ghosh, Aurobind 49 n. 4, 133, 152 Katre, Sadashiva L. 538 n. 10, 546 n. 34
n. 55 Katz, Ruth Cecily 25 n. 60
Ghurye, G. S. 394, 397 n. 42, 405 Kern, Hendrik 405 n. 74
n. 74, 406–407 King, Henry C. 403 n. 66
Gode, P. K. 402 n. 63 Kinjawadekar, Ramachandra 213 n. 62,
Goldman, Robert 37, 114, 135–136, 249 n. 71, 262 n. 14, 309 n. 69, 472
265 n. 19–20, 266, 267 n. 30, 268–269, Kinsella, Thomas 463, 471
285, 291, 301, 302 n. 53, 303 n. 54, Kipling, Rudyard 34–35, 578–579
304, 306, 308, 327, 338, 584, 585 Kloetzli, Randy 49 n. 1, 91, 97 n. 51,
n. 12, 588 n. 16 374, 380, 386, 405 n. 76, 526
Gomach, Barbara 142 n. 27, 147 n. 35, Knipe, David M. 408 n. 89
149, 151–152, 240 n. 53 Kolff, Dirk H. A. 591
Gombrich, Richard 302 n. 53 Kosambi, D. D. 581, 599
Gonda, Jan 462 n. 1 Kothari, Kamal 35, 40 n. 14, 582, 592
González-Reimann, Luis 73, 81, 83–84, Krappe, Alexander H. 480
87–88, 104–105, 106 n. 70, 109 Kulke, Herman 551 n. 55
Greer, Patricia 4, 24, 411 n. 2, 432
Grierson, George 574 Lacan, Jacques 38
Grünendahl, Reinhold 188, 189 n. 6, Lal, P. 577 n. 31
190–196, 198 n. 26, 203, 205–206, Lamotte, Étienne 532 n. 40–41
index 645
Lassen, Christian xii n. 22 O’Brien, Steven 462
Lefeber, Rosalind 68 n. 76 O’Flaherty, Wendy Doniger 49 n. 1,
Leslie, Julia 232 285 n. 18, 408 n. 91, 501 n. 46
Lévi, Sylvian 132, 490 Olivelle, Patrick xxxiii, xxxix, 78, 124,
Lincoln, Bruce 406 n. 79 245 n. 61, 246, 254–255, 317, 353 n. 45
Lord, Albert 7, 23, 368 Outhwaite, William 594–595
Lovejoy, Arthur 587
Lüders, Heinrich 311 Pande, G. C. 128, 555
Lutgendorf, Philip 43 n. 20, 295 n. 41, Pargiter, Frederick 85, 574
592 n. 27 Parsons, Talcott 593, 596–598
Pathak, Shubha 75 n. 3, 152 n. 56, 153
Macdonell, A. A. 557 n. 7 n. 60
Magnone, Paolo 299 n. 47 Patton, Laurie 81, 317
Magrath, William T. 387 n. 3 Péterfalvi 228, 412 n. 2, 448 n. 164
Mahadevan, T. P. xxvii n. 74, xxix, Piggott, Stuart 464
9 n. 17, 51, 73 n. 1, 81–82, 91, 106, Pollock, Sheldon xii, 56 n. 26, 115,
109, 214 n. 67, 126–219, 286 n. 20, 121, 136, 293–294, 305, 326, 556
312–313 Polomé, Edgar 464
Majumdar, Bimanbehari 536 Poole, Fitz 35 n. 4, 36 n. 6, 46 n. 28,
Malamoud, Charles 7, 17 553
Malinar, Angelika 125 n. 13, 188 Pratap, Chandra Roy 574
Malini, Hema 221 Prentiss, Karen 319
Mangels, Annette 369, 372–374 Prescott, William 562
Mankekar, Purnima 582, 592 Pusalkar, A. D. 539 n. 13
Marstrander, J. S. 469, 474
Matilal, B. K. 315 Quin 469, 474
McGrath 4, 24, 411 n. 2 Quint, David 10, 417, 554, 555
Menski, Werner 224
Merton, Robert K. 594–595, 598 Radhakrishnan, S. 468
Metcalf, Thomas 572 Raghavan, V. 301 n. 49
Meyer, Johann Jacob 399 n. 50, 402 Rajagopalachariar 592
Miller, Jeanine 412 n. 3, 500, 502 Ramanujan, A. K. xxi, 8, 29, 31–34, 36,
Minkowski, Christopher 43 n. 22, 62 38–39, 41, 43 n. 20, 44, 46, 374, 413
n. 49, 65 n. 63, 131 n. 5, 189 n. 5, 190 n. 6
n. 7, 370 n. 12, 372 n. 24 Ramasami 563
Mitchiner, John E. 89–94, 95 n. 46, 97, Ramasami, E. V. 592 n. 26
98–100, 101 n. 60, 102–104, 105 n. 69, Ravinder, Shashi 594
106–107 Raychaudhuri, Hemchandra 536, 565
Monier-Williams 249 n. 72, 354 n. 49, Reich, Tamar 5, 65 n. 64
379, 454 n. 192, 572–574 Reiniche, Marie-Louise 50 n. 47
Monius, Anne 9 n. 15, 216 n. 74 Richman, Paula 38–39, 563, 592 n. 26
Müllerlj, Max 575 n. 27, 576 Roghair, Gene H. 36 n. 7
Roy, Pratap Chandra 565–578
Ñaṇamoli 242 n. 56 Roy, Sundarī Bāla 576
Narayana Rao, Velcheru xxi, 13, 369 Ruben, Walter 388 n. 5, 545 n. 34
Nattier, Jan 127–128 Rudolph, Lloyd 598
Neelis, Jason 90 n. 35, 99 n. 58, 109
n. 76 Sax, William S. 412 n. 3, 420 n. 27,
Neusner, Jacob 536 n. 5 425 n. 42
Nicholas 239 n. 51 Scheuer, Jacques 274 n. 56
Schlinghoff, Dieter 135 n. 15
O’Raihilly, Cecile 464 Schreiner, Peter x n. 12, 49 n. 2,
Oberlies, Thomas 187–193, 211 n. 51, 187–188, 208, 215, 218 n. 78
216 n. 73, 217–218, 255 n. 93 Shah, Shalini 582
646 index
Shastri, J. L. 261 n. 7, 289 n. 25 Tripathi, Gaya Charan 551 n. 55
Shulman, David 75 n. 4, 133 n. 12, Türstig, Hans-Georg 421 n. 30, 448
140, 306, 308, 311–313 n. 165
Sidhanta, N. K. 558, 559, 567
Simlote, Anu 221 Underhill, M. M. 400 n. 50, 401
Singh Daman, Sarva 468 nn. 55–56
Sircar, D. C. 557, 571
Slover 468, 475 Vaidya, C. V. 7, 61, 64, 267 n. 31, 559,
Smith, Mary Carol 6 n. 6, 24 561–571, 585
Smith, Vincent 574 Vaidya, P. L. 280, 301 n. 49, 302 n. 53,
Söhnen-Thieme, Renate 6 n. 6, 234 n. 303 n. 54, 307
37, 235 van Buitenen, J. B. 80, 158 n. 67, 236
Sörensen, S. 223 n. 6, 225 n. 10, 491 n. 45, 239 n. 50, 251 n. 82, 277, 309
n. 21 n. 69, 574
Srinivasan, Doris 551 n. 55 Varma, Ravi 579
Srinivasan, Perundevi 227 n. 20 Vassilkov, Yaroslav 3 n. 1
Staal, Frits 53, 65 n. 63, 214 n. 67, Vaudeville, Charlotte 538 n. 7–8, 549
533 n. 47
Stein, Otto 474 n. 5 Venniyoor, E. M. J. 579
Stietencron, Heinrich von xiii, 81, Vidal-Naquet, Pierre 581
84–88, 89 n. 31, 93, 105 n. 69
Strong, John 199, 532 n. 40, 557 Wallace, Ruth 594 n. 28
Stuart, Heather 35 Waterfield, William 574
Sukthankar, V. S. xvii n. 38, xxvii Watkins, Calvert 6 n. 8
n. 75, 7, 73, 133 n. 11, 134 n. 13, 143 Weinberger-Thomas 227 n. 19
n. 28, 193, 220, 310 n. 72, 498, 560 Whitney, William Dwight 250
Sullivan, Bruce 490, 556 n. 6 Wikander, Stig 461, 597
Sutherland, Sally 136, 170, 291 n. 30, Winternitz, Moriz x n. 13, 45
327 Witzel, Michael 12, 15, 68, 74, 81, 110
Sutton, Nicholas xxvi, 74, 514–516 n. 77, 126, 565, 590 n. 23
Suzanne, Hoeber Rudolph 598 Wolsely Haig, T. 549 n. 48
Swāmin, Śrīdhara (ca A.D. 1400) 403 Wulff, Fernando 73 n. 1, 81, 108, 110
n. 65 n. 77, 126
Tadpatrikar, S. N. 541 n. 34 Yardi, M. R. 566
Temple, R. C. 565, 574 Younger, Paul 316
Thapar, Romila 81, 278, 554, 581
Tokunaga, Muneo 80, 369 n. 9, 433 Zaehner, Robert C. 362–363
n. 58 Zimmer, Heinrich 405 n. 76
