how to become a Brahman:
the construction of varṇa as social place
in the Mahābhārata’s legends of Viśvāmitra
Adheesh Sathaye
University of British Columbia
This article investigates varṇa as an embodied and spatialized social practice in
the Sanskrit Mahābhārata, with a focus on the epic subnarratives of Viśvāmitra,
the legendary king who became a Brahman. Adopting a post-Dumontian position
that the articulation of social status is always a political act, the Mahābhārata’s
treatment of Viśvāmitra is analyzed as a literary attempt to secure the social
place of Brahmanhood in post-Mauryan India. Two speciic narratives are
taken up for comparative study: irst the kāmadhenu legend—the squabble with
Vasiṣṭha that led to Viśvāmitra’s Brahmanhood—and then an altogether diferent
story in which a mixup by Viśvāmitra’s sister Satyavatī meant that he had always
been a Brahman by birth. Two distinct interpretive voices are heard in the same
epic—one extolling Viśvāmitra’s extraordinary ascetic power, and another,
louder one minimizing his realworld impact by insisting that his varṇa change
never actually happened. Developing the concept of ‘textual performance’ to
explain how luid legendary material was embedded into the ixed epic corpus,
this article argues that the Mahābhārata utilized counter-normative igures
like Viśvāmitra to articulate alternative voices and possibilities, but within a
carefully regulated epic storyworld that naturalized varṇa as an everyday social
practice.
though little is certain about how it took place, the composition of the sanskrit
Mahābhārata was clearly of monumental signiicance in the social history of early
india.1 its grand vision has been linked closely to the consolidation of imperial polity
(see Thapar 1984; Sutton 1997; Brockington 1998, 162–7), the emergence of bhakti
religiosity (see hiltebeitel 2004; Biardeau 1982; Laine 1989; Fitzgerald 1983; Sutton
2000), and the development of a newly cosmopolitan sanskrit literary culture around
1 All references to the two sanskrit epics in this essay are to their respective critical editions,
henceforth abbreviated as Mbh and Rām. their use has been greatly facilitated by the electronic texts
of the sanskrit epics produced by muneo tokunaga, as revised and corrected by john smith, and are
accessible electronically on smith’s home Page [online] (accessed march 24, 2007). Available from:
<http://bombay.indology.info/index.html>.
ISSN 1648–2662. ACTA ORIENTALIA VILNENSIA 8.1 (2007): 41–67
42 ADHEESH SATHAYE
the beginning of the Common Era (Pollock 2006, 224–6). Equally signiicant is the
epic’s role in the development of varṇa as a normative discourse in post-Vedic social
life. What emerges in Vedic culture as a ‘totalistic classiicatory system’ (see Smith
1994, 8),2 and what functions as an all-encompassing social ideology within śāstraic
texts3 appears in the Mahābhārata as everyday social practice, as a natural determinant
of moral life (dharma). Particularly striking here is the idea that an individual’s social
place is immutably ixed by his physical birth. Throughout the Mahābhārata—and
especially in its ‘ancillary’ portions—it is birth that carves social barriers and limits,
birth that ixes one’s life trajectory. I do not wish to argue that the principle of inherited
social status is unique to this epic, nor do i suggest it to be the earliest formulation
of a discourse lucidly articulated in the śāstras.4 What sets the epic project apart
from other early indian texts is its imbrication of varṇa discourse within the complex
mass of myths, legends, and anecdotes—in short, within a narrative tradition.5 in an
efort to take this seemingly extraneous material seriously, this essay argues that the
Mahābhārata’s discursive use of legendary subnarratives constitutes an important
source of its cultural power and textual authority in early india. the Mahābhārata,
i suggest, utilizes this traditional storyworld to naturalize varṇa as an embodied and
spatialized social practice,6 and this essay will investigate this social productivity of the
epic through its treatment of Viśvāmitra, the legendary king who became a Brahman.
2 CCClllaaassssssiiiccc IIInnndddooolllooogggiiicccaaalll aaapppppprrroooaaaccchhheeesss tttooo ttthhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnn ooofff cccaaasssttteee iiinnncccllluuudddeee::: DDDuuutttttt 111999333111;;; GGGhhhuuurrryyyeee 111999333222;;; KKKeeettt---
kar 1909; Kosambi 1946. The origins of the system may indeed be pre-Vedic; Georges Dumézil, for
example, regards varṇa to be a survival of archaic Indo-European thought (Dumézil 1968–1973).
3 On the śāstras’ use of ‘pliable’ and ‘strict’ norms to articulate this all-encompassing ideology,
see rocher 1975. A seminal discussion of caste in the dharma texts is found in Muir 1868; see also
Olivelle 1998. in another publication, Olivelle helpfully points out that ‘Dharmaśāstra … represents
an expert tradition and, therefore, presents not a simple record of customs but a jurisprudential re-
lection on custom’ (Olivelle 2004, xxxix).
4 the tangled intertextuality of the epics and śāstras lies outside the purview of this essay.
Brockington argues that ‘in general terms, the parallels found in the didactic parts of the Mahābhārata
are closer to the extant texts of the Manusmṛti than those found elsewhere and it seems likely that
they are derived from it …’ (Brockington 1998, 486).
5 This phenomenon was perhaps irst noted by Joseph Dahlmann, who regarded the epic as a
mode of popular instruction of the dharmaśāstra—see Dahlmann 1895.
6 i use the term ‘storyworld’ following David herman’s remarkable analytic shift from story to
storyworld in the study of narrative literature (herman 2002). through the term ‘storyworld’, her-
man evokes ‘the world-creating power of narrative, its ability to transport interpreters from the here
and now of face-to-face interaction, or the space-time coordinates of an encounter with a printed text
or a cinematic narrative, to the here and now that constitute the deictic center of the world being told
about’ (ibid., 14). The concept of storyworld therefore signals the performativity of ictional narra-
tive in imagining possible places inhabited by possible bodies. in the case of the Mahābhārata and
most mythological narratives in South Asia, this storyworld is not purely ictive, but represented as
historical fact. As herman points out, nonictional narratives involve ‘relocating not to an alterna-
tive possible world but to a possible world that is an earlier—and perhaps competing—vision of the
world deemed actual’ (ibid., 15).
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 43
Viśvāmitra and varṇa in the Mahābhārata
In a section of the Anuśāsana Parvan (Mbh 13.3–4) entitled the ‘Viśvāmitropākhyāna
[The Viśvāmitra Subnarrative]’, Yudhiṣṭhira, newly victorious in the Bhārata War,
poses a question to the dying Kuru patriarch Bhīṣma about Viśvāmitra, a Vedic
personality quite clearly situated at the margins of epic narrative tradition. ‘mighty
King, lord of men’, he asks,
if Brahmanhood is impossible to attain by members of the other three varṇas, then how did
the mighty Kṣatriya Viśvāmitra attain Brahmanhood? This is what I wish to hear, righteous
King of men—please tell it to me in detail, grandfather (Mbh 13.3.1–2).
Before Bhīṣma may respond, Yudhiṣṭhira irst summarizes what he already knows
of the sage. This laundry list of legends alludes to the existence of a Viśvāmitra
narrative tradition, stories that were not invented by the epic but presumably were
transmitted orally prior to its textualization in the epic. Yudhiṣṭhira’s query participates
in what sheldon Pollock has called the ‘faux orality of textual performance’ within
the epic, through which, ‘faux’ or not, we are able to hear the voice of the epic’s
target audience at the time of its written composition (Pollock 2006, 79, note 9).
‘grandfather’, he says,
Please tell me how that man of immeasurable valor slew the hundred sons of Vasiṣṭha,
entirely through his tapas [ascetic power]; how, appearing like the end of Time, he created
violent yātudhānas and rākṣasas [demons], his body enveloped in hostility.7
Tell me how, lauded as a Brahman, the wise one went on to establish the great Kuśika
lineage in this world, packed with hundreds of brahmarṣis [Brahman-sages].
Tell me how Ṛcīka’s son, the great ascetic Śunaḥśepa, was released from the great sacriicial
rite in which he had been placed as a victim,
And how, during hariścandra’s sacriice, by gratifying the gods with his majesty, he became
the son of great Viśvāmitra;
how, when they did not assent to Devarāta being the eldest, your Majesty, his ive hundred
sons were summarily cursed to be Śvapacas [dog-cooker outcastes].8
7 this is an allusion to the Mahābhārata’s Kalmāṣapāda legend (Mbh 1.165–168), in which
Viśvāmitra encourages the king Kalmāṣapāda, who is already possessed by a rākṣasa, to eat up the
hundred sons of Vasiṣṭha. This is resonant perhaps with the Rāmāyaṇa’s account of the struggle be-
tween the two sages, in which Viśvāmitra does not kill Vasiṣṭha’s sons, but instead curses them to be-
come low-caste Śvapacas, dog-cookers, after they refuse to attend his sacriice for the similarly cursed
Ikṣvāku king Triśaṅku (Rām 1.58.16–20).
8 The Śunaḥśepa legend is told at length in the Rāmāyaṇa, where the king is named Ambarīṣa
(Rām 1.60.5–1.61.27); the reference here corresponds more closely to the earlier Vedic version found
in the Aitareya Brāhmaṇa (AB 7.13–18) and the Śāṅkhyāyana Śrauta Sūtra (ŚŚS 15.20–21).
44 ADHEESH SATHAYE
Tell me how Triśaṅku, the Ikṣvāku, though shunned by his peers, was led gladly into
heaven, upside-down, and placed in the southern direction.9
Tell me how Viśvāmitra’s broad river, the Kauśikī, is frequented by rājarṣis [royal sages],
blessed and auspicious, and served by throngs of brahmarṣis [Brahman-sages].10
Tell me how the esteemed nymph named Rambhā, possessing ive jewels, acted as an
obstacle to his tapas, and due to his curse was turned to stone.11
Tell me also how long ago, overcome with fear of him, Vasiṣṭha tied himself up and drowned
himself in the waters, but was raised back out, unbound—how, from that time on, the great
river Vipāśā became holy, made illustrious by the deeds of that great Vasiṣṭha.12
Tell me how he praised the lord Skanda, the leader of the gods’ armies, and how, gratiied,
[skanda] released him from a curse.
Tell me about him, he who shines eternally amongst the “Brahman-sage” [brahmarṣi]
constellation as it revolves around the pole star Dhruva, ixed in the northern sky.
Kaurava, I am highly intrigued by all of these and other exploits of this Kṣatriya—please
tell me in detail how this came to be, powerful Bhārata: how did he become a Brahman
without taking on another body? (Mbh 13.3.3–17)
A few of these allusions, such as the story of Śunaḥśepa Devarāta, have deep
continuities with Vedic literature; others, like his praise of Skanda, are entirely
fragmentary, with no traceable antecedents. these wispy threads of narrative come
together to produce a fascinating snapshot in the literary history of this mythological
character, emphasizing the extraordinary ascetic power that enables Viśvāmitra
to challenge the gods’ will and to invoke terrifying curses. At the same time,
Yudhiṣṭhira’s query leaves no doubt that the most striking aspect of Viśvāmitra for
the Mahābhārata’s audience is sociological: this is a man who successfully changed
his own varṇa.
9 The story of Triśaṅku is told very briely in the Ādi Parvan (Mbh 1.65.31–35), but in great
detail in the Rāmāyaṇa (Rām 1.56.11–1.59.33). The mention of Triśaṅku being placed upside-down
in the south suggests that this reference is closely allied with the Rāmāyaṇa version, in which ‘the
gods agreed to allow Triśaṅku to remain in those constellations, hanging upside down, appearing as
if immortal’ (Rām 1.59.33).
10 Similar associations are made between the Kauśikī and Viśvāmitra throughout the Mahāb-
hārata (e.g., Mbh 1.65.30–32; 3.82.124; 3.85.9). In the Rāmāyaṇa the river Kauśikī is said to be his
sister, Satyavatī (Rām 1.33.7–8), but in the Mahābhārata, that connection seems not to be made, as
robert P. goldman and sally sutherland note (goldman, sutherland 1984, 349, note 8). conversely,
as we shall discover, the Mahābhārata holds Satyavatī’s actions before Viśvāmitra’s birth directly
responsible for his varṇa change, while the Rāmāyaṇa leaves the entire episode unmentioned.
11 Yudhiṣṭhira here refers to the Rāmāyaṇa’s account of the curse of Rambhā (Rām 1.62.25cd–
26, 1.63.1–15). It is true that Viśvāmitra is often tempted by the apsaras Menakā throughout purāṇic
and classical Sanskrit literary tradition, including the Ādi Parvan within the story of Śakuntalā (Mbh
1.65.20–66.12), but the Rambhā narrative, in which Viśvāmitra is able to resist the temptations of
kāma, appears uniquely in the Rāmāyaṇa.
12 Yudhiṣṭhira appears to be begging Bhīṣma for the story of Viśvāmitra’s conlict with Vasiṣṭha in the
Ādi Parvan, where Vasiṣṭha becomes suicidal after Kalmāṣapāda eats his sons (Mbh 1.166.39–167.10).
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 45
the concept of varṇa, suggests Brian smith, was ‘perhaps the most pervasive
taxonomical scheme in vedic texts’ (smith 1989, 242), and was classifying everything
from the world of the gods and the divisions of space and time to natural lora and
fauna (smith 1994, 8). smith’s argument that varṇa has been a watertight and all-
encompassing concept throughout its history challenges the more common theory,
held since at least the writings of john muir, that social boundaries were luid and
negotiable in early Vedic culture.13 jan heesterman, for example, explains that varṇa
ideology crystallized during the late Vedic period, when an ‘axial breakthrough’ within
archaic Vedic sacriicial culture resulted in a cleavage between the ‘transcendent
ritualism’ and ‘mundane reality’, and as a consequence, required ‘absolute dividing
lines’ between the varṇas.14 in either case, with the advent of the dharmaśāstras, varṇa
and its attendant concepts of purity and puriication were institutionalized within
the normative Brahmanic worldview.15 Early heterodox texts, along with Aśokan
inscriptional evidence, disputing the social status of Brahmans but not the validity of
varṇa, further support the hypothesis that even when contested, varṇa remained the
dominant mode of social discourse in the late Vedic period (Chakravarti 1987; Jha
1991, 30–1; Thapar 1997, 56–7). In other words, within the time of the epic’s textual
production, to be an intellectual meant to think using the sociological episteme of
varṇa.16
More diicult to assess, however, is whether varṇa was an actual social practice
in early india, or whether it was pure social discourse, the world as seen through
particularly Brahman-tinted lenses. louis Dumont’s landmark structural analysis of
caste has suggested both to be true, theorizing varṇa to be a timeless, cognitive grammar
of ‘encompassment’ governing the observed reality of jātis [castes] in south Asia.
This assessment is not without its critics, and in the 40 years since its irst publication,
Dumont’s Homo Hierarchicus has been subjected to a signiicant dismantling.17
13 For example, the earliest pronunciation of a four-tiered social ideology, the oft-quoted puruṣa
hymn within the Ṛgveda-saṃhitā (RV 10.90), fails to mention the word ‘varṇa’ and contains the only
occurrence of ‘Vaiśya’ and ‘Śūdra’ in the entire Ṛgveda-saṃhitā—see Sharma 1978, 295; Kane 1961.
Key historical studies making this argument include: Muir 1868; heesterman 1985, 29–30; Mazum-
dar 1965, 387–91; Jha 1991, 25; Thapar 2002, 124–5.
14 sseeee ‘‘BBrraahhmmiinn,, rriittuuaall,, aanndd rreennoouunncceerr’’ aanndd ‘‘rriittuuaall,, rreevveellaattiioonn,, aanndd tthhee AAxxiiaall AAggee’’ iinn hheeeesstteerr--
man 1985.
15 One could argue, for example, that 2000 years before Dumont, manu was making the same
saussurean argument that the langue of varṇa governs the observable parole of social strata difer-
entiated by degrees of purity and pollution—see Olivelle 1998, 214.
16 giving support to this assertion is Pollock’s analysis of śāstraic discourse as a naturalization
of cultural practices—see Pollock 1985.
17 FFoorr aa tthhoorroouugghh oovveerrvviieeww ooff ppoosstt--DDuummoonnttiiaann sscchhoollaarrsshhiipp,, sseeee RRaahheejjaa 11998888.. FFoorr iimmppoorrttaanntt ccrrii--
tiques and reassessments of Homo Hierarchicus, see Dirks 1989; Inden 1986; Marriott 1969; Madan
1971; Mencher 1974.
46 ADHEESH SATHAYE
Pauline Kolenda and others have explored the complexities of south Asian social
formations muted within Dumont’s work (Kolenda 1976; Barnett, Fruzetti, and Östor
1976), while Arjun Appadurai has taken particular aim at Dumont’s opposition of
the individualistic West to holistic India (Appadurai 1986; see also Berreman 1971).
mcKim marriott, richard Burghart, and gloria raheja have argued that caste coexists
with other modes of hierarchy in traditional indian social environments (marriott
1976; Burghart 1978; Raheja 1989), and Declan Quigley has suggested that Dumont’s
reading of purity uncritically privileges Brahmanic texts and therefore Brahman
perspectives (Quigley 1993). Perhaps the most frontal assault to Dumont’s theory
has been nicholas Dirks’s critique that ‘caste’ as an institution, as a natural property
of indian society, was an Orientalist construction—a cultural technology of British
rule (Dirks 2001, 9; see also Inden 2000).18 though they focus almost exclusively
on contemporary inlections of caste, Dumont’s critics have provided one important
observation for the textual study of early india: the articulation of social status has
always been a political act.
Following Dirks’s suggestion that ‘Indian society, indeed caste itself, was shaped
by political struggles and processes’ (Dirks 2001, 11, quoting Dirks 1987, 5), this
essay regards the Mahābhārata’s treatment of Viśvāmitra as an attempt to secure,
through literary representation, the social place of the Brahman class within a
changing political world.19 A sage with an impressive Vedic reputation, Viśvāmitra
is located at the margins of the Mahābhārata’s storyworld—within the mass of myths,
legends, and tales embedded within its primary narrative of fratricide, guru-murder,
and the general collapse of Kṣatriya ethos.20 though this subnarrative material is
often regarded as extraneous and secondary, it forms the majority of the epic’s textual
mass and plays a critical role in the epic’s thematic development.21 Barbara gombach
argues that this ‘ancillary’ material was ‘the principal means by which the Bhārata
story was explained in traditional terms’ (gombach 2000, 349). likewise, Danielle
Feller has noted the epic’s deep continuities with Vedic mythological tradition,
adapting old myths within ‘changed social and religious conditions’ (Feller 2004,
312). set within a past that is far removed from the epic’s apocalyptic disturbances,
and certainly from our unfortunate age of Kali, legends told in the Mahābhārata
18 Dirks and inden are, of course, heavily indebted to edward said’s Orientalism (1979).
19 This observation accords with Fitzgerald’s argument that the epic is primarily concerned ‘to
provide ideological and narrative grounding for a brahminical conception of kingly rule and hierar-
chical society in the wake of the Mauryan empire’ (Fitzgerald 2003, 811).
20 For deinitive studies of Viśvāmitra in Vedic literature, see hariyappa 1953; Rahurkar 1964;
Sharma 1975; Chaubey 1987; Sathaye 2004.
21 hiltebeitel, building on the work of Biardeau, has made a similar argument; see hiltebeitel
2005; Biardeau 1984.
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 47
thus help paint an idealized moral backdrop to the turbulent events of the primary
narrative, a storyworld populated with bodies clearly marked as Brahman, Kṣatriya,
Vaiśya, or Śūdra.22
At the same time, these embedded stories often feature characters whose actions
pose striking challenges to Brahmanic social norms.23 Viśvāmitra, for example, is the
only major igure in ancient Indian literature to have become a Brahman by his own
free will.24 Yudhiṣṭhira’s question itself, ‘how did he become a Brahman without taking
on another body?’ evokes a close association of varṇa with the physical body, and it is
precisely Viśvāmitra’s extraordinary circumvention of everyday social physics that is
celebrated through his legends. On the other hand, even though Viśvāmitra’s actions
seem consistently to challenge the system, the epic uses these stories to reairm
social norms and boundaries. As we will see, the story of Viśvāmitra’s conlict with
the Brahman Vasiṣṭha over a wish-giving cow, is customarily used to explain how
Viśvāmitra changes his varṇa, and forms the centerpiece of the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa’s
lengthy treatment of Viśvāmitra. In the Anuśāsana Parvan, however, Bhīṣma ignores
this narrative and tells a diferent story—Viśvāmitra, he claims, was actually born with
a Brahmanic essence but raised in a Kṣatriya home. Within this textual juxtaposition,
the ‘Viśvāmitropākhyāna’ is making use of traditional narratives irst to raise a social
question and then to regulate its interpretation.
i will refer to this technique of framing epic subnarratives as textual performance—
the strategic entextualization of legendary narrative matter within the larger literary
frame of the epic.25 in doing so, i follow a performance-centered turn within folklore
studies, that investigates how ‘verbal art’ emerges through a negotiation between
performer and audience (Bauman 1975).26 traditional narratives embedded within
22 Or, indeed, the ‘Other’. The Cāṇḍāla and other outcaste groups form a signiicant part of the
Mahābhārata’s physical and spatial deinitions of social identity, and Viśvāmitra also plays a key role
in constructing this social boundary in the Mahābhārata, but that cannot be explored in detail here;
for a thorough discussion of Viśvāmitra and outcastes, see White 1992.
23 For the deinitive study of counter-normative igures in the Mahābhārata, see goldman 1977.
24 the Mahābhārata, to be sure, mentions a handful of other igures who became Brahmans, but
the transformation is in most cases accidental, providential, or temporary. The Śalya Parvan’s narra-
tion of Viśvāmitra’s transformation gives the names of two others who are turned into Brahmans by
the power of a tirtha—Sindhudvīpa and Devāpi (Mbh 9.39.10). goldman notes ‘the only other case
of such a transformation in the epic literature is that of the king Vītahavya who is transformed into
a Bhārgava brahman through the infallible power of the potent father igure Bhṛgu (MBh Xiii.31)’.
For more on Vītahavya, see Goldman 1978, 387, note 200.
25 Perhaps the most well-known theory of epic entextualization is the ‘Bhṛguization’ theory
irst proposed by S.V. Sukthankar (1936) and later extended by Goldman (1977). For reassess-
ments of the Sukthankar-Goldman theory, see hiltebeitel 1999; Minkowski 1991; Reich 2001;
Fitzgerald 2002.
26 For further analysis of ‘textual performance’ and Viśvāmitra, see Sathaye forthcoming,
142–3.
48 ADHEESH SATHAYE
the text of the Mahābhārata, i suggest, may be more productively regarded as
‘performances’ within the conines of textual space. Such a reading enables the
historical analysis of the epic without becoming mired in the interminable and
largely unanswerable questions of its textual development.27 if, as the prevailing,
‘analytic’ opinion holds, the epic text evolved over a period of at least 500 years
and as many as 1,000, it is futile to search for any single master blueprint to what is
ultimately a composite text, a kind of premodern pastiche. As john Brockington’s
meticulous studies of epic development warn, any analysis of the epic’s meaning
is susceptible to anachronistic results without irst isolating stages of development
within the epic corpus (Brockington 1998, 20–1).28 conversely, building upon
joseph Dahlmann’s ‘synthetic’ theory and the holistic work of madeleine
Biardeau, Alf hiltebeitel provocatively argues the Mahābhārata to be authored
by a committee of composers and in a relatively brief span of time at the end of
the 1st millennium, Bce—perhaps as little as two generations (hiltebeitel 1999b,
20). Arguing against reading the epic as an encyclopedic amalgam, hiltebeitel
suggests that the Mahābhārata’s role in early india may be understood only when
the epic is theorized as a coherent work of written literature (hiltebeitel 1999b,
21).29 But this is a literary work for which we have basically no external historical
data, and so any investigation of the epic’s role in social history, therefore, arrives
at a seemingly unavoidable leap of faith.
The concept of textual performance, I believe, ofers a unique means of mediating
between the arguments of the analysts and synthesists. regardless if one posits that
the epic developed over centuries of ever-expanding oral tradition, or if one imagines
it to be a literary creation of a committee of authors, the epic text, at some point in its
production, has clearly incorporated pre-existing narrative material. Both conservative
and creative forces are therefore at play in its composition, suggesting that we may
think of the Mahābhārata as being at once a luid and ixed text.30 On the one hand,
since legends like those of Viśvāmitra are found in both epics and in the early purāṇas,
but in vastly diferent contexts, with great variation, and without overt verbatim
reproduction, they must have belonged to a luid oral narrative tradition prior to their
presence within the epic. these legends would have been familiar to broad segments of
27 This is precisely the predicament that has befallen the theory of Bhṛguization—see especially
hiltebeitel 2001, 105–18.
28 the classic statement of the analytic approach is e. Washburn hopkins (1993), especially
Chapter Five, ‘Origin and Development of the Epic’ (pp. 363–85).
29 For further discussion on the Mahābhārata’s encyclopedic nature, see hiltebeitel 2001, 14–5,
161–3; Proudfoot 1979.
30 I borrow this terminology from Wendy Doniger’s brief but thought-provoking essay ‘Fluid
and Fixed Texts in India’ (Doniger 1991).
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 49
society and would have difused widely across the subcontinent, but also would have
exhibited the variation expected within an oral tradition.31 On the other hand, there
is a remarkable coherence in how these stories are embedded in the Mahābhārata,
displaying little signiicant textual variation across the extant manuscripts.32 At some
point in time, therefore, it appears that there arose an intellectual need to situate these
epic narrative traditions within the bounds of a ixed, written text, within a bona
ide Vedic religious context, and within the moral boundaries of Brahman-oriented
social order.33 Furthermore, as Pollock has argued, epic textual production involved
a ‘plotting of an epic geosphere’ of political power, serving as an early stage in the
development of the sanskrit ‘cosmopolis’ (Pollock 2006, 226). An important aspect
of what Fitzgerald has called the ‘Gupta archetype’ appears a scholastic efort to ‘ix’
the epic’s narrative tradition (Fitzgerald 2004, 70), by giving it textual authenticity,
temporal and spatial boundedness, and most importantly, by placing it within the
Mahābhārata’s religious, social, and political authority. The ixed, literary production
of the Mahābhārata contained, in this sense, a textual performance of otherwise luid
narrative traditions in early india.
unlike the binary opposition of oral and written literature, the concept of
textual performance—the ixed utterance, either oral or written, of a luid narrative
tradition—enables the recovery of multiple interpretive possibilities alongside an
otherwise monolithic sanskrit text, and reveals the presence of distinct voices in the
construction of early indian social discourse.34 rather than as simply a documentary
archive of early indian cultural life, the Mahābhārata may be read as a constructed
cultural space in which popular understandings of history, religion, and social order
are being regulated through the strategic use of narrative literature.35 in the case of
31 This half of the picture speciically takes inspiration from the work of A.K. Ramanujan, but
also espouses the standard folkloristic model of epic composition as oral-formulaic poetry—see
Ramanujan 1986. For a deinitive discussion on international scholarship on the Oral-Formulaic
Theory, see Foley 1988.
32 Fitzgerald notes that despite the vast amounts of variation between manuscripts, ‘there was a
remarkable degree of close agreement in readings line after line, in the order of verses, and in the con-
tents of the Parvans, agreement that can be explained only by postulating the existence of a normative
written text at some point in the past and in some signiicant measure’ (Fitzgerald 2004, 69).
33 some evidence for this Brahmanic regulation of the epic narrative tradition may be recovered
through the structural analysis of its opening frame narratives, involving oral performance during
a 12-year sattra ritual in the Naimiṣa Forest—see Minkowski 1989; Witzel 1987; hiltebeitel 2001,
93–104.
34 iinn ootthheerr wwoorrddss,, wwee mmaayy ppeerrcceeiivvee,, wwiitthhiinn tthhee bboouunnddeedd ssaannsskkrriitt tteexxtt,, wwhhaatt rraammaannuujjaann hhaass iinn--
sightfully described as a ‘presence of relexive worlds’ within folk narratives (Ramanujan 1991, 51).
35 james hegarty (2004) provides an in-depth analysis of the importance of narrative in the
Mahābhārata’s construction of the ‘signiicant past’, and many of the ideas in this essay take direct
inspiration from hegarty’s work on the cultural connections between the past and ‘place’ in the san-
skrit epics.
50 ADHEESH SATHAYE
Viśvāmitra, this essay will recover two distinct interpretive voices in the Sanskrit
Mahābhārata: one that spotlights the extraordinary ascetic power behind his social
rupture, and another, louder one that minimizes the social impact of this counter-
normative igure by insisting that his varṇa change never actually happened. Bhīṣma’s
reply to Yudhiṣṭhira will illustrate this second, normalizing voice of the Mahābhārata,
but the social question he is trying to eface is raised through another, more provocative
account of how Viśvāmitra actually became a Brahman. This fascinating narrative, to
which we now turn, is the legend of Vasiṣṭha’s kāmadhenu.
The kāmadhenu legend
At the heart of the kāmadhenu legend, there is a social rupture: a Kṣatriya body violates
Brahman domestic space. Though neglected in the ‘Viśvāmitropākhyāna’, this story
is told three times in the Sanskrit epics: once in the irst book of the Rāmāyaṇa, once
in the Ādi Parvan of the Mahābhārata, and then briely again in its Śalya Parvan.36
though the Rāmāyaṇa version is lengthier and more detailed than the Ādi Parvan
version, it remains diicult to determine conclusively which version was composed
irst. Despite the ambiguity of textual history, it remains relatively clear that both
epics share a common narrative tradition. As Goldman notes, ‘despite diferences
in size and in detail, the versions are fundamentally the same’, and Biardeau has
similarly observed that all versions of this story contain a common underlying
ideological message (Goldman 1978, 351; Biardeau 1999). This shared plot proceeds
as follows: Viśvāmitra, the Kṣatriya ruler, arrives in the hermitage of the Brahman
sage Vasiṣṭha, where the king and his troops are served a delicious feast through
the services of the sage’s kāmadhenu.37 Impressed, Viśvāmitra tries irst to purchase
the kāmadhenu from the sage, and then tries to take her by force, but is defeated by
hordes of barbarian armies emitted from every oriice of the magic cow.38 Vanquished
36 Rām 1.50.20–1.55; Mbh 1.164–5; 9.39. Though it has fascinating ramiications for understand-
ing the relative chronology of the Rāmāyaṇa and Mahābhārata, the Śalya Parvan version seems
largely derivative from the Ādi Parvan, and for sake of simplicity, we will not take it up in great
detail.
37 There is, however, some supericial variation in the presentation of these motifs. In the
Rāmāyaṇa, Viśvāmitra the king arrives at Vasiṣṭha’s hermitage during a tour of his dominions (Rām
1.50.20–1); the Mahābhārata speciies that he is ‘hunting deer and boar in the charming woods’ (Mbh
1.165.5). the Rāmāyaṇa names the cow ‘Śabalā’ while the Mahābhārata calls her ‘Nandinī’. The
kāmadhenu is unnamed in the Śalya Parvan version, which in fact lacks the cow-theft motif alto-
gether. Instead, Vasiṣṭha simply asks his cow to attack Viśvāmitra and his armies after they desecrate
his hermitage.
38 There are certain key diferences in the details of Viśvāmitra’s defeat. First, while the
Rāmāyaṇa has Vasiṣṭha actively order his cow to produce the barbarian armies (Rām 1.53.17), in the
Mahābhārata, the kāmadhenu acts on her own (Mbh 1.165.31). in the Rāmāyaṇa, the kāmadhenu’s
barbarian armies slay Viśvāmitra’s hundred sons (Rām 1.53.18–1.54.7), while in the Mahābhārata,
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 51
by the Brahman, Viśvāmitra becomes disenchanted with his Kṣatriya status and
decides to become a Brahman himself. Divine forces urge him to stop, declaring that
such a feat is impossible, but nonetheless, Viśvāmitra eventually succeeds in gaining
Brahmanhood through a great amount of tapas.39
the cultural power of the kāmadhenu legend lies in how it conigures narrative
spaces as varṇa-encoded social ‘places’ and then tightly regulates how physical
bodies may move within them. if a narrative may be thought of as a mimesis, as a
verbal reproduction of a sequence of realworld events, it is important to note that such
a sequence always takes place within a set of storyworld spaces, regardless of the
ictionality of the narrative or the historicity of those spaces.40 Of particular interest
is the role of narratives in the construction of ‘domestic spaces’—interiorized social
spaces that are demarcated from a public exterior, on account of their being coded
by particular qualities and practices.41 By inscribing certain cultural practices as
naturally belonging to speciic social spaces, narrative literature has a signiicant but
underestimated role in the cultural construction of social ‘place’.42 in the kāmadhenu
legend, and arguably in epic literature as a whole, domestic space is intrinsically
inscribed with the ideology of varṇa, as are the physical bodies that move in and
out of this space. That is to say, it is fundamentally the story of a Kṣatriya who
penetrates a Brahman’s home and tries to steal his Brahmanic cow. these varṇa-
encoded narrative movements create a rupture, a structural ‘ungrammaticality’ that
turns a story about cow theft into a profound statement on the natural boundaries of
only his armies are defeated. Furthermore, the latter speciies that ‘none of Viśvāmitra’s soldiers
was deprived of life by the angered sons of Vasiṣṭha’ (Mbh 1.165.39). the loss of his sons in the
Rāmāyaṇa instigates a mini-quest within the story, as Viśvāmitra leaves the hermitage in dejection,
and travels to the himalayas to procure the divine astras from Śiva (Rām 1.54.8–20). his inal defeat
comes through one-on-one battle with Vasiṣṭha (Rām 1.54.21–1.55.21).
39 in the Mahābhārata, this transformation is described in one and a half verses (Mbh 1.165.44),
while the Rāmāyaṇa’s telling will extend this narration to nearly nine chapters (Rām 1.56–64), in-
corporating his encounters with Triśaṅku (Rām 1.56–59), Śunaḥśepa (Rām 1.60-61), Menakā (Rām
1.62), and Rambhā (Rām 1.63), until Vasiṣṭha eventually is forced to acknowledge him to be ‘the
greatest knower of the Kṣatriya Veda as well as the Brahman Veda’ (Rām 1.64.15).
40 narratologists thus speak of a ‘deictic shift’ relocating a reader from the here and now into the
‘alternative space-time coordinates of the storyworld’ (herman 2002, 270).
41 the classic study of the ‘intimate values of inside space’ is Bachelard 1994. the humanistic
geographer Yi-Fu Tuan has also written eloquently about domestic ‘places’ as intimate spaces (Tuan
1984, 136–48). Notable among anthropological studies of domesticity in South Asia is Daniel 1984.
in the context of early india, Patrick Olivelle has noted the robust contrast between the cultural cat-
egories of ‘village’—settled, cultivated, moral—and ‘wilderness’—wild, powerful, and dangerous;
see Olivelle 1990.
42 Particularly illuminating in this regard is Michel de Certeau’s analysis of the signiicance of
cultural practice in the negotiation of place and the relations of power embedded within place—see
certeau 1984.
52 ADHEESH SATHAYE
society.43 the legend induces a social rupture—the inescapable radicality of a human
body out of place.
Though we are not given extensive detail about the bodies of Vasiṣṭha and
Viśvāmitra in either epic version of the story, a manifest opposition between their
Brahman and Kṣatriya bodies is created through formulaic epithets and dialogues
in the narrative. The following tabulation of epithets describing Viśvāmitra and
Vasiṣṭha, taken from all three epic versions of the kāmadhenu legend, for example,
clearly indicates the close connection between varṇa and the body.
Viśvāmitra:
Number of
Epithet Citations
Occurrences
‘having great splendor Rām 1.50.19.c, 1.50.20a, 1.50.21a,
5
[mahātejas]’ 1.51.5a, 1.51.10c
‘having great strength Rām 1.50.28d, 1.51.1.b, 1.54.19b,
4
[mahābala]’ 1.55.1b
‘intelligent [dhīmant]’ 3 Rām 1.51.3a, 1.52.21b, 1.54.22b
‘good king [rājasattama]’ 2 Rām 1.51.4b, 1.51.5d
‘having great ascetic power
2 Rām 1.54.15b, 1.55.21b
[mahātapas]’
‘vehicle of massive strength
1 Mbh 1.165.4b
[saṃṛddha-bala-vāhana]’
‘enemy-slayer [ripu-mardana]’ 1 Mbh 1.165.4d
‘the greatest of conquerors
1 Rām 1.50.28c
[jayatām śreṣṭha]’
‘glorious [pratāpavant]’ 1 Mbh 9.39.12d
‘having great fame
1 Rām 1.54.8b
[sumahāyaśas]’
‘great-minded [mahāmati]’ 1 Rām 1.51.15b
‘great-souled [mahātman]’ 1 Rām 1.53.2b
‘great sage [mahāmuni]’ 1 Rām 1.54.13d
Vasiṣṭha:
Number of
Epithet Citations
Occurrences
‘the most eminent of reciters 7 Rām 1.51.1d, 1.51.6c, 1.51.20b,
[japatām vara, śṛeṣṭha]’ 1.54.6b, 1.54.26b, 1.55.13a, 1.55.20b
43 By ungrammaticality, I am using the terminology of the French poetician Michael Rifaterre.
in remarking on the use of ungrammatical linguistic forms in the late medieval works of rimbaud,
Rifaterre describes ungrammaticalities as ‘special signs, bearers of the poem’s literariness, because
they connect it with a generic or thematic intertext and at the same time deine a poem’s originality
by opposing it to this intertext’ (Rifaterre 1981, 232–3).
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 53
Number of
Epithet Citations
Occurrences
‘blessed [bhagavant]’ 6 Mbh 9.39.19, Rām 1.51.2d, 1.51.12a,
1.52.10a, 1.52.21a, 1.55.2a
‘having great splendor 3 Rām 1.51.20a, 1.54.26a, 1.55.22a
[mahātejas]’
‘excellent sage [munivara, 3 Mbh 9.39.20b Rām 1.51.3c, 1.52.10b
munisattama]’
‘having great ascetic power 2 Rām 1.51.6b, 1.55.22b
[mahātapas]’
‘having great fame 1 Rām 1.53.17b
[sumahāyaśas]’
‘righteous-souled [dharmātman]’ 1 Rām 1.52.10c
‘of immeasurable radiance 1 Rām 1.53.13d
[amitaprabha]’
‘of extreme potency [paramaujas]’ 1 Rām 1.53.5d
the Mahābhārata versions make little use of epithets—taken together, the Ādi and
Śalya Parvan versions employ only three for Viśvāmitra and three for Vasiṣṭha. On the
other hand, formulaic descriptions abound in the Rāmāyaṇa’s telling, and these align
themselves in the following striking pattern: while Vasiṣṭha is regularly called ‘great-
souled [mahātman]’ or ‘blessed [bhagavant]’, Viśvāmitra is considered to be ‘having
great splendor [mahātejas]’ or ‘having great strength [mahābala]’. Furthermore,
while both are deemed to be ‘having great ascetic power [mahātapas]’, Viśvāmitra is
called this only when engaging in tapas to acquire Śiva’s astras (‘magic weapons’) in
an efort to defeat Vasiṣṭha, a motif not found in either Mahābhārata version. in the
Rāmāyaṇa, the Brahman Vasiṣṭha is also lauded three times as ‘having great splendor
[mahātejas]’, an epithet ordinarily expected of Kṣatriyas. however, each one comes
after a Kṣatriya-like act: after Vasiṣṭha generously ofers a feast to the king and his
troops (Rām 1.51.20a), after he angrily swears to destroy Viśvāmitra (Rām 1.54.26a),
and after their feud escalates to the point of universal destruction (Rām 1.55.22a).
Aside from these exceptions, the evidence suggests that Vasiṣṭha’s Brahman body
is distinguished by the blessedness and greatness of the inner self, its ātman, while
the Kṣatriya body of Viśvāmitra—aside from a period in which he accrues ascetic
power—is marked by external qualities of splendor (tejas) and strength (bala).
this mapping of varṇa onto physical bodies also takes place through dialogues
within the kāmadhenu legend. The Ādi Parvan constructs an opposition between
the aggressive Kṣatriya and the placid Brahman when, in his attempt to seize the
magic cow, Viśvāmitra declares to Vasiṣṭha, ‘I am a Kṣatriya, and you are a sage,
engaged in ascetic practice and contemplation—and where is valor among Brahmans,
those placid and restrained souls?’ (Mbh 1.165.18). As the cow is being dragged
54 ADHEESH SATHAYE
away, Vasiṣṭha informs her that as a ‘merciful Brahman [kṣamāvān brāhmaṇa]’, he
is powerless to stop the king’s use of force (Mbh 1.165.24d). ‘the strength [bala]
of Kṣatriyas is splendor [tejas]’, explains the sage, ‘while the strength of Brahmans
is mercy [kṣamā]; mercy has possessed me, so you should go with him if you like’
(Mbh 1.165.28). The opposition of Kṣatriya tejas and Brahmanic kṣamā here places a
varṇa-encoding upon physical power (bala). the use of the verb bhaj (possess, enjoy)
also indicates that Brahmanic compassion is imagined as a physical trait of Vasiṣṭha.
The physicality of Kṣatriya valor is made explicit in a declaration by Viśvāmitra that
has been omitted from the critical edition of the Mahābhārata: ‘I am a Kṣatriya,
not a Brahman, and according to my ethics, i possess physical valor [bāhuvīrya];
and so here, i will steal her from you, as you look on, with the strength of my arms
[bhujabalena]’ (Mbh 1.1758*). The Kṣatriya characteristics of Viśvāmitra’s body, his
‘physical valor [bāhuvīrya]’ and ‘strength of arms [bhujabala]’, are what sanction
him to behave as a Kṣatriya and take the cow by force, reinforcing the embodied
nature of varṇa. ‘You are a king who is irm in strength [balastha]’, retorts Vasiṣṭha,
‘a Kṣatriya possessing physical valor [bāhuvīrya]. just do whatever you want, but do
it quickly—don’t deliberate over it’ (Mbh 1.165.20).
Through epithet and dialogue, then, Brahman and Kṣatriya varṇas are mapped
onto the bodies of the two principal characters of the kāmadhenu legend. At the same
time, varṇa is mapped onto more static features of the narrative landscape—the
hermitage of Vasiṣṭha, its background inhabitants and most importantly, within the
kāmadhenu herself. First, the epic’s depiction of the hermitage as a Brahman domestic
space—in which the Kṣatriya is welcomed as a guest—constructs a world in which
Brahman religious practice is centralized, but placed outside of the realm of Kṣatriya
political authority. the clearest examples of the mapping of the Brahman varṇa onto
Vasiṣṭha’s hermitage appear in its aesthetic description, the elaborate greeting ritual
with which Viśvāmitra and his troops are welcomed and the wondrous feast that they
are ofered as part of the sage’s hospitality to his guest. The Mahābhārata’s account
of Viśvāmitra’s entry into the hermitage is brief and unadorned—Viśvāmitra and his
fatigued troops are welcomed with ‘water to wash his feet, to use as oblation, and
to cleanse his mouth, and with salutations and forest oferings’ (Mbh 1.165.8). the
Rāmāyaṇa’s description of the hermitage is more detailed and elaborate, and worth
presenting here in detail:
he came upon Vasiṣṭha’s hermitage, bearing many kinds of lowers, fruits and trees, full
of herds of diferent kinds of fauna, and frequented by perfected beings. It was adorned
with gods, dānavas, gandharvas, and kinnaras, illed with placid deer and frequented by
groups of twice-born. it was full of groups of Brahman sages [brahmarṣis] and divine sages
[devarṣis], and it was everywhere packed with great men who looked like Agni through the
performance of austerities, and with great men who were like Lord Brahmā, who lived on
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 55
water alone, or air, or eating only dried leaves; [it was illed] with others who ate only fruits
and roots, those who had conquered their passions and subdued their senses, and with sages
[ṛṣis] and divine ascetics, who were devoted to prayer and sacriice. Thus did the mighty
Viśvāmitra, greatest of warriors, behold Vasiṣṭha’s hermitage, resembling Brahmā’s heaven
itself (Rām 1.50.23–28).
Packed with divine beings, ascetics, natural bounty, and peaceful religious activity,
Vasiṣṭha’s home is given the very same Brahmanic characteristics that belong to his
body: sacredness, placidity, and a general aura of ascetic power. the Rāmāyaṇa
version further emphasizes the Brahmanic nature of the hermitage. Vasiṣṭha bids the
king welcome, gives him a seat, and serves him fruits and roots, ‘according to custom’
(Rām 1.52.3c). the pair then ask each other about their welfare, in a discussion that
similarly normalizes the characteristics of Brahman and Kṣatriya varṇas: While
Vasiṣṭha asks the king about his subjects, his military exploits, his treasury and his
progeny, Viśvāmitra inquires about the state of the sage’s austerities, his penances, his
sacriices, and the fauna in his hermitage (Rām 1.52.4cd–5ab). Vasiṣṭha then ofers
Viśvāmitra and his troops a feast. The Ādi Parvan version describes the kāmadhenu’s
meal in two verses: ‘she emitted cultivated and wild rice, herbs and milk, and
unequalled elixirs containing all six lavors and the lavor of ambrosia; also, foods,
beverages, and other consumables of great variety, as well as heated sauces all made
out of ambrosia’ (Mbh 1.165.10–11). The exquisite—and noticeably vegetarian—
nature of this meal is evident from the Rāmāyaṇa’s more detailed description:
there were sugarcane and sweets, grains and wines, excellent liquors, expensive drinks and
eatables of many sorts; mountainous heaps of steaming rice, savory dishes and soups, and
rivers of yogurt; curries of all sorts of lavors, and thousands of silver platters piled up with
delicious things (Rām 1.52.2–4).44
Just how vegetarian would a Brahman’s feast have been in early India? D. N. Jha
has demonstrated the existence of ‘latitudinarian’ attitudes towards vegetarianism in
the śāstras, and argues that Brahmans may have continued to keep a non-vegetarian
diet even during the medieval period (Jha 2002, 91–3, 118). Brockington notes an
ambivalence towards meat in the Mahābhārata, and a ‘tendency to condemn it’ within
the didactic portions.45 in our case, like other narratives involving the protection
44 Further evidence for the vegetarian nature of this meal comes from imagery found in the Ś
manuscript of the Mahābhārata, but excised from the critical edition text (Mbh 1.1753*): ‘there
were steaming hot piles of rice that appeared like mountains; there were condiments and soups, as
well as lakes of yogurt; there were wells illed with ghee, alongside piles of other edibles. there were
thousands of edibles of the highest quality, all over the place; there were wines of several diferent
kinds, and thousands of clothes and blankets of great quality’.
45 Jha and Brockington both consider an incident within the Kalmāṣapāda narrative, where a
Brahman asks the accursed king Kalmāṣapāda for a meal of meat, only to receive a meal of human
lesh (Mbh 1.166.20–32), as indicating that ‘meat was clearly a normal part of a brāhmaṇa’s diet’ (Jha
2002, 95; see also Brockington 1998, 225).
56 ADHEESH SATHAYE
of cows (Proudfoot 1987), the kāmadhenu legend appears clearly impacted by
the ahiṃsā doctrine—which Jha believes to have ‘made its irst appearance in the
Upaniṣadic thought and literature’ (Jha 2002, 140; see also Chapple 1996). If it is
indeed vegetarian, the Brahman feast is perhaps meant to contrast with the violence
of the Kṣatriya hunt, but in any case, its copiousness and the ensuing delight of
Viśvāmitra’s satiated troops is above all a testimonial to the concealed magniicence
of the Brahman’s divine power.46
The central conlict of the narrative occurs precisely because the Kṣatriya tries to
usurp the embodied symbol of this limitless Brahman power, the kāmadhenu.47 this
is made clear through the cow’s own speech to Vasiṣṭha as she is dragged away:
They say that a Kṣatriya has no real strength [bala], and that the Brahman is really
stronger [balavattara]. O Brahman, the strength of Brahmans [brahmabala] is divine
[divya] and stronger than that of the Kṣatriya [kṣattra]. you have immeasurable strength
[aprameyabala], there is no one stronger than you—Viśvāmitra may possess great valor
[mahāvīrya], but your splendor [tejas] is unassailable. O man of great valor [mahāvīrya],
I am illed with Brahman strength [brahmabala-saṃbhṛta]—give me the orders and i will
destroy that wicked man’s pride along with his army (Mbh 1.53.14–16).
Vasiṣṭha hesitates to order the release of this power in the Ādi Parvan, but in the
Rāmāyaṇa, he urges the kāmadhenu to ‘let loose an army to destroy my enemy’s
army’ (Rām 1.53.17cd).48 the two epics will thus arrive at distinct moral positions
on whether a Brahman ought to make active use of Brahman power, but they are
united in the opinion that this power is the natural property of a Brahman, a symbolic
kāmadhenu whose extraction from the Brahman’s home leads to disastrous results. in
the Śalya Parvan version, Viśvāmitra’s armies are ‘scattered in all directions’ (Mbh
9.39.21d), while the Ādi Parvan claims that though the king was defeated, ‘none
of Visvamitra’s soldiers was deprived of his life by the angered sons of Vasiṣṭha’
(Mbh 1.165.38d–39). We may again note the Ādi Parvan’s emphasis on Vasiṣṭha’s
forbearance, even in the violent midst of the ‘great marvel that had arisen from
Brahman power’ (Mbh 1.165.41ab).
the Mahābhārata’s depiction of Brahmanic passivity is in sharp contrast to the
active portrayal of Vasiṣṭha in the Rāmāyaṇa version, which features a one-on-one
46 resonant here is a theme running throughout the Mahābhārata of concealed divine power, to
be released through a kind of explosive, apocalyptic display of force; see Goldman 1995; hiltebeitel
1980.
47 in his psychoanalytic study of sanskrit epic literature, goldman argues that the kāmadhenu
legend acts as a sublimated representation of the oedipal struggle between father and son, displaced
onto the social hierarchy of Brahman and Kṣatriya. The feminized kāmadhenu represents the mother
at the center of the oedipal struggle; see Goldman 1978, 351.
48 Vasiṣṭha is presented as a pro-active Brahman in the Śalya Parvan, as well, ordering his cow
to ‘Let loose the ferocious Śabaras!’ (Mbh 9.39.20c).
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 57
duel between the sage and the king. Viśvāmitra’s utter defeat—including the death of
his hundred sons incinerated by Vasiṣṭha himself—prompts the king to travel to the
himālaya Mountains, perform tapas, and procure magic weapons from Śiva (Rām
1.54.12–18). Astras in hand, the king vengefully returns to Vasiṣṭha’s hermitage. In
contrast to his earlier visit, when the intervening formalities of hospitality, food,
and conversation had nulliied the dangerous implications of a Kṣatriya entering a
Brahman’s home, Viśvāmitra’s entry is now violent and terrifying:
the king arrived at the hermitage and let loose his magic weapons, which, because of
their splendor [tejas], engulfed the ascetic grove in lames. Seeing the mighty Viśvāmitra
releasing his magic weapons, the sages trembled and ran in fear in hundreds of directions.
Vasiṣṭha’s frightened disciples, and the animals and birds, all scattered in a thousand diferent
directions. In just a second, great Vasiṣṭha’s hermitage became empty; it was as silent as a
wasteland (Rām 1.54.21–24).
Despite the weapons of mass destruction that he possesses, Viśvāmitra’s assault
fails, as Vasiṣṭha confronts him and swallows up [gras] each of the Kṣatriya’s astras
using his powerful Brahman staf [brahmadaṇḍa]. This inal defeat leads Viśvāmitra
to declare his famous dictum:
Damn this Kṣatriya force! The force of Brahmanic power is truly the greater force. With
merely one Brahman’s staf, all my magic weapons have been vanquished.49
Resolving to procure what is clearly Vasiṣṭha’s superior martial power, Viśvāmitra
then determines to seek Brahman status through a rigorous program of tapas. in the
end, he is said to have acquired Brahmanhood by accumulating such tremendous
tapas that it threatens the stability of the cosmos itself. this astonishing, extraordinary
feat is precisely the source for the great sociological question that haunts Viśvāmitra,
reappearing time and again in hindu mythological literature ever since Yudhiṣṭhira
irst asked it: how could a Kṣatriya become a Brahman without changing his body?
As it imprints the ideological discourse of varṇa onto the physical bodies and
domestic spaces of its storyworld, the kāmadhenu legend comes to possess a certain
narrative force within the sanskrit epics. On the one hand, varṇa is being naturalized
as a social discourse, since the kāmadhenu—the symbol of Brahman power—naturally
belongs in the Brahman’s domestic space. At the same time, the simultaneous rupture
of narrative and social space produces an inevitable ‘ungrammaticality’, a discursive
question that demands interpretation. Both epics explain Viśvāmitra’s varṇa change
49 dhig balaṃ kṣatriyabalaṃ brahmatejobalaṃ balam | ekena brahmadaṇḍena sarvāstrāṇi
hatāni me (Rām 1.55.23). The irst half of the verse is found verbatim in the Ādi Parvan’s version,
but—importantly—with a diferent second half: ‘I have understood which is more powerful and
which is less, and clearly, tapas is the highest force [balābalaṃ viniścitya tapa eva paraṃ balam]’
(Mbh 1.165.42). For a theorization of the role of this half-verse in the textual performance of the
kāmadhenu legend, see Sathaye forthcoming, 144–7.
58 ADHEESH SATHAYE
as resulting from tapas, but the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa further regulates this tapas
through a lengthy expansion of the narrative. In between his conlict with Vasiṣṭha
and his triumphant self-transformation, the Rāmāyaṇa embeds a sequence of the
other familiar Viśvāmitra-centered legends: the stories of Triśaṅku, Śunaḥśepa,
Menakā, and Rambhā. These are all tests of Viśvāmitra’s will, as his accumulated
ascetic power is repeatedly lost through moments of desire and anger (kāma and
krodha). In the end, Viśvāmitra’s quest is successful only after he eliminates kāma and
krodha in their entirety through 1,000 years of uninterrupted tapas. in other words,
the Rāmāyaṇa is arguing that under ordinary human conditions, varṇa change is
practically impossible.50
Satyavatī and the mixed-up birth of Viśvāmitra
though Viśvāmitra’s achievements might be diicult to emulate, the story of his success
continues to leave open the possibility of anyone becoming a Brahman, and this is
indeed the thrust of Yudhiṣṭhira’s question with which we began our inquiry. We are
now in a better position to assess the performative power of the ‘Viśvāmitropākhyāna’
in the Anuśāsana Parvan, and how it directly takes up the physicality and spatiality of
the sage’s varṇa change. Surprisingly, while Yudhiṣṭhira’s questions include a number
of allusions to other Viśvāmitra-centered epic legends (e.g., Triśaṅku, Kalmāṣapāda,
Śunaḥśepa), there is no reference—at all—to the kāmadhenu legend in Yudhiṣṭhira’s
query or in Bhīṣma’s response.51 Instead, Bhīṣma explains that Viśvāmitra’s body was
already infused at birth with Brahmanhood through the fateful mistake of his sister
Satyavatī. Exerting strict control on how its audiences interpret Viśvāmitra, Bhīṣma’s
response may be read as an efort to regulate the social ungrammaticality of a Kṣatriya
seizing Brahman power. the story proceeds as follows:
Gādhi, son of Kuśika and a descendant of the famous king Jahnu, is the king of
Kānyakubja. Unable to produce a male heir, Gādhi decides to retire in the forest.
While living in the forest, he comes to have a daughter named Satyavatī, who catches
the eye of the Bhārgava sage Ṛcīka. Smitten by her unparalleled beauty, the Brahman
50 Within the Mahābhārata, the Śalya Parvan version similarly reairms the rigidity of varṇa
even as it celebrates Viśvāmitra’s achievement, since he attains Brahmanhood after many austerities
at a tirtha on the banks of the Sarasvatī, a place made sacred in the Kṛta age by a Brahman named
Ārṣṭisena (Mbh 9.39.3–11). According to the Śalya Parvan, two others attained Brahmanhood at this
same site, Sindhudvīpa and Devāpi, but we are not given any details about their lives. With respect
to the Ādi Parvan’s telling, I have argued elsewhere that the juxtaposition of the Kalmāṣapāda nar-
rative after the kāmadhenu narrative leads to two distinct modes or ‘lavors’ of tapas—Viśvāmitra’s
Kṣatriya tapas and Vasiṣṭha’s Brahman tapas (sathaye forthcoming, 150).
51 This absence is all the more striking since Yudhiṣṭhira’s query includes a clear reference to
Vasiṣṭha’s suicide attempts within the Mahābhārata’s Kalmāṣapāda narrative that is juxtaposed im-
mediately after the Ādi Parvan version of the kāmadhenu legend (Mbh 13.3.14).
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 59
asks Gādhi for his daughter’s hand in marriage. Gādhi, deeming the destitute ascetic
to be an unworthy groom for his daughter, demands a seemingly unattainable bride
price [śulka]: ‘one thousand horses, the color of the moon’s rays, fast as the wind, but
each having one black ear’ (Mbh 13.4.12abc). To the king’s surprise, however, Ṛcīka
propitiates the god Varuṇa and easily accomplishes the task. Fearing the sage’s curse,
the king agrees to the marriage. After the wedding, in order to ensure the fertility of
both his wife Satyavatī and his mother-in-law, Ṛcīka tells Satyavatī that she should
irst embrace a icus tree [udumbara], and her mother a ig tree [aśvattha],52 before
eating two special carus (mantra-infused concoctions of rice) that he has prepared
especially for them. When Satyavatī excitedly tells her mother, however, her mother
urges her to switch the trees and carus, since Ṛcīka must have given his wife the
more powerful caru. ‘just think’, she argues, ‘how else might your brother become
distinguished? (Mbh 13.4.33cd). mother and daughter switch the trees and the carus,
and both become pregnant. Ṛcīka soon realizes what has happened and angrily
rebukes his wife:
i had placed the complete brahman in your caru, and i had placed pure kṣattra valor in
her caru. you would have given birth to a sage whose virtues would be praised in all three
worlds, and she to a distinguished Kṣatriya—this is what I had done. But since you and your
mother have reversed it, she will become the mother to a great Brahman and you, my dear,
will produce a Kṣatriya of ferocious deeds. My wife, this is not a good thing you have done,
out of fondness for your mother (Mbh 13.4.37–40).
heartbroken, Satyavatī pleads to Ṛcīka for forgiveness, asking for a boon so
that her son—and his son—may not behave like a Kṣatriya. Ṛcika agrees that fate
be made to skip one generation, and it is their grandson, Rāma Jāmadagnya, who
eventually becomes the terrifying slayer of the entire race of Kṣatriyas. Satyavatī’s
mother, meanwhile, the wife of Gādhi, gives birth to Viśvāmitra, who becomes a
Brahman sage ‘due to the power of that sage (Ṛcīka)’ (Mbh 13.4.46cd).
The Satyavatī legend makes use of a genealogical argument to reconigure
Viśvāmitra’s body in two distinct ways. Not only does the narrative bind Viśvāmitra
by blood to the Bhārgavas, the most infamously counter-normative family in epic
mythology, it reduces Viśvāmitra’s life-story to the circumstances of his birth,
thereby nullifying the discursive threat to the immutability of varṇa raised through
the kāmadhenu narrative. Viśvāmitra did not change his body, but had always had a
Brahman body inhabiting Kṣatriya domestic space. With this remapping of Brahman
varṇa onto Viśvāmitra’s body, his movement into Brahman social space is no longer
a radical event, no longer a forcible seizure of Brahman power, but rather can only
52 ‘During the menstrual period, she should embrace a ig tree [aśvattha] and you a icus tree
[udumbara]’ (Mbh 13.4.27).
60 ADHEESH SATHAYE
be viewed as a return home. As Bhīṣma himself explains, ‘So, King Yudhiṣṭhira, the
great ascetic Viśvāmitra was not in fact a Kṣatriya, since Ṛcīka had infused the highest
brahman within him’ (Mbh 13.4.59). through this strategic use of a genealogical
narrative, the Mahābhārata produces the strongest possible airmation of normative
social discourse: an individual’s social place is inviolably ixed by varṇa at birth.
Just as it reconigures the varṇa-encoding of Viśvāmitra’s body, the Mahābhārata’s
textual performance of the Satyavatī legend also inverts the kāmadhenu legend’s
mapping of varṇa onto domestic space. Whereas the kāmadhenu legend had valorized
Brahman domestic space as placid, sacred, and welcoming, the Satyavatī legend
represents Kṣatriya domestic space as alien and patently inhospitable to Brahmans.
We can get a better sense of how the Anuśāsana Parvan does this by comparing its
telling to another epic version of the story. Interestingly, Yudhiṣṭhira has heard this
story before—and in fact a very short time before—in the preceding Śānti Parvan,
where Kṛṣṇa had told him of Rāma Jāmadagnya’s birth (Mbh 12.49). Kṛṣna tells more
or less the same story as Bhīṣma, but through a diferent focalization: the Śānti Parvan
version is centered on Rāma Jāmadagnya, while the Anuśāsana Parvan centers its
narration on Viśvāmitra.53 these distinct focalizations are connected to two important
textual variations between the two versions. First, the bride price motif is not present
in the Śānti Parvan’s Rāma-centered version. Through the inclusion of this customary
royal marriage practice, the Viśvāmitra-centered Anuśāsana Parvan version produces
a markedly Kṣatriya domestic space, one that is further tied to economic status, since
Gādhi rejects the Brahman sage as a suitor because he is ‘destitute [daridra]’ (Mbh
13.4.9c). here, since the Brahman penetrates Kṣatriya domestic space and forcibly
seizes the beautiful Kṣatriya princess, the bride-price motif clearly inverts the Brahman-
centered narrative kinetics of the kāmadhenu legend. Second, while the Śānti Parvan
suggests that the caru-switch happened because Satyavatī had been unwittingly
‘tricked’ (vyaṁsitā) by her mother, the Anuśāsana Parvan makes her equally culpable
in the crime. her mother’s voice dramatically pleads the Kṣatriya case for switching
the carus: ‘Just think—how else might your brother become distinguished?’ Both of
these motifs appear on the surface to articulate Kṣatriya points of view on varṇa as a
social practice, through the strong and willfully resistant voices of Viśvāmitra’s mother
and father. On the other hand, since both are, in the end, easily silenced by Ṛcīka’s
Brahman power, these Kṣatriya voices—like Viśvāmitra’s eforts—may hardly be
considered true articulations of any counter-Brahmanic ideology within the epic, but
53 Seven other versions exist in purāṇic literature—with a notable absence within the
Rāmāyaṇa—and each follows either the Viśvāmitra-centered or Rāma Jāmādagnya-centered focal-
ization. For a more extensive comparative study of these variants of the Satyavatī legend in the epics
and purāṇas, see Sathaye 2004, 53–67.
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 61
at best what Ramanujan has termed ‘a presence of relexive worlds’—a brief, leeting
glimpse of Kṣatriya-centered possibilities within the discourse of varṇa (ramanujan
1991, 54). Along with Viśvāmitra’s self-transformation, the resistant voices of his
parents are rapidly foreclosed by the textual performance of the Satyavatī legend
in the Anuśāsana Parvan, turning Viśvāmitra into yet another dreaded example of
varṇa-saṅkara (intermixture of varṇa) in the Mahābhārata.
Conclusions:
Textual performance and varṇa in Early India
Our analysis of the Mahābhārata’s representation of the legendary sage Viśvāmitra
permits some conclusions about the cultural work of epic subnarratives. Firstly,
and most importantly, we are able to see how epic subnarratives about Viśvāmitra
naturalize the very social boundary that he successfully crosses. this takes place
irst through a mapping of varṇa-based social discourse onto bodies and domestic
spaces within the narrative, and then representing Viśvāmitra’s varṇa change as either
a violent penetration of Brahmanhood through the religious force of tapas (as in the
kāmadhenu legend), or as a return to an original condition (as in the Satyavatī legend).
Despite diferences in content, both narratives reairm a fundamental diference
between Brahman and Kṣatriya domesticity—both act, therefore, as naturalizations
of varṇa as social place. As a consequence, varṇa is constructed as a static and
immutable relationship between physical bodies and domestic spaces. to express this
in simple terms, the Mahābhārata depicts a world in which Brahman bodies naturally
belong in Brahman homes, and Kṣatriya bodies belong in Kṣatriya homes.
Secondly, our approach to epic subnarratives as ‘textual performances’ clariies our
understanding of the textual production of the Mahābhārata. since the Mahābhārata
follows a clear discursive strategy in embedding the Viśvāmitra legends within its
larger literary corpus, and since these narratives exhibit robust intertextualities with
the Rāmāyaṇa and other purāṇic texts, it seems evident that the epic is neither a
haphazard, cancerous growth, nor a standalone work of pure literary imagination.
The query-response structure of the ‘Viśvāmitropākhyāna’ in the Anuśāsana Parvan
allows the epic to regulate the counter-normative implications of this legendary king
who became a Brahman—and not just any Brahman but one of the principal Vedic
seers. By providing an authoritative answer to the question of how this could happen,
the Satyavatī narrative regulates our interpretation of Viśvāmitra, and in this sense
‘ixes’ an otherwise luid narrative tradition. It must be said, however, that epic textual
performance is always a supplementary act, trumping but not entirely efacing the
variant readings and alternative voices that it seeks to address. As a result, competing
sources of social power remain enticingly within the realm of possibility in the igure
62 ADHEESH SATHAYE
of Viśvāmitra, to be taken up time and again by literary and popular cultural traditions
in south Asia.
Finally, the analysis of textual performance in the epic addresses the important
question of why the Mahābhārata gained broad cultural power in early indian society.
the Mahābhārata is an expansive, all-encompassing text that famously claims ‘that
which exists here, exists elsewhere—and that which does not exist here, exists
nowhere’ (Mbh 1.56.33, 18.5.38). The analysis of epic Viśvāmitra legends suggests
that ‘that which exists here’ sought, around the beginning of the common era, to be
the deinitive consolidation of ‘that which exists elsewhere’. As a ixed cultural stage
upon which authoritative ‘performances’ of traditional narratives about marginal
igures like Viśvāmitra take place, the Mahābhārata permitted the expression of
counter-normative voices and possibilities, but which were carefully and safely
couched within a naturalized, Brahman-centered social order. the mechanics of this
naturalization, as we have observed, is the encryption of varṇa ideology onto narrative
bodies and spaces. to the extent that it situated actual human bodies within realworld
social spaces, and to the extent that it tried to solidify the boundaries between these
spaces, even as it told of igures who broke those boundaries, the Mahābhārata may
be read as a literary text that employed traditional narratives to construct social place
in early india.
references
Sanskrit texts:
Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, ed. Vasudevasharma Panshikar and Krishnambhatta gore, Bombay:
nirnayasagara Press, 1911.
Mahābhārata: Critical Edition, 24 vols, ed. V.s. sukthankar, et al., Pune: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1933–1970.
Ṛgveda-saṁhitā, with the Commentary of Sāyaṇācārya, 5 vols, Poona: Vaidic samshodhan
mandal, 1933.
Śāṅkhyāyana Śrauta Sūtra, 4 vols, ed. Alfred hillebrandt, calcutta: Asiatic society of
Bengal, 1888–1889.
Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa: Critical Edition, 7 vols, ed. g.h. Bhatt and u.P. shah, Baroda:
University of Baroda, 1960–1975.
Secondary sources:
Appadurai, Arjun. ‘Is homo hierarchicus?’ American Ethnologist 13 (1986): 745–61.
Bachelard, gaston. The Poetics of Space, trans. maria jolas, Boston: Beacon Press, 1994.
Barnett, Steve, Lina Fruzetti, and Àkos Östor. ‘hierarchy Puriied: Notes on Dumont and
his critics’, Journal of Asian Studies 35 (1976): 627–50.
Bauman, richard. ‘Verbal Art as Performance’, American Anthropologist, new series, 77
(1975): 290–311.
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 63
Berreman, gerald. ‘the Brahmannical View of caste’, Contributions to Indian Sociology
5 (1971): 16–23.
Biardeau, madeleine. Études de mythologie hindoue, Vol. 1: Cosmogonies purāṇiques,
Paris: maisonneuve, 1982.
―――. ‘Nala et Damayanti. héros épiques. Part 1’, Indo-Iranian Journal 27 (1984):
247–74.
―――. ‘Kāmadhenu: La vache mythique, symbole de prospérité’, Dictionnaire des
mythologies et des religions des sociétés traditionelles et du monde antique, ed. yves Bonnefoy,
Paris: Flammarion, 1999, 2139–40.
Brockington, john. The Sanskrit Epics, leiden, Boston, Köln: Brill, 1998.
Burghart, richard. ‘hierarchical models of the hindu caste system’, Man, new series, 13
(1978): 519–36.
certeau, michel de. The Practice of Everyday Life, Berkeley, cA: university of california
Press, 1984.
chakravarti, uma. The Social Dimensions of Early Buddhism, new Delhi: Oxford
university Press, 1987.
Chapple, Christopher. ‘Ahiṁsā in the Mahābhārata: A Story, a Philosophical Perspective,
and an Admonishment’, Journal of Vaiṣṇava Studies 4, 3 (1996): 109–25.
chaubey, B.B. (ed.). Viśvāmitra in Vedic and Post-Vedic Literature, hoshiarpur, india:
Panjab university, 1987.
Dahlmann, joseph. Das Mahābhārata als Epos und Rechtsbuch, Berlin: Dames, 1895.
Daniel, e. Valentine. Fluid Signs: Being a Person the Tamil Way, Berkeley: university of
california Press, 1984.
Dirks, nicholas. The Hollow Crown: Ethnohistory of an Indian Kingdom, cambridge:
cambridge university Press, 1987.
―――. ‘The Original Caste: Power history, and hierarchy in South Asia’, Contributions
to Indian Sociology 23 (1989): 59–77.
―――. Castes of Mind: Colonialism and the Making of Modern India, Princeton: Princeton
university Press, 2001.
Doniger, Wendy. ‘Fluid and Fixed Texts in India’, in Boundaries of the Text: Epic
Performances in South and Southeast Asia, ed. Joyce Burkhalter Flueckiger and Laurie Sears,
Ann Arbor, MI: Center for South and Southeast Asian Studies, 1991, 31–41.
Dumézil, Georges. Mythe et epopée, 3 vols, Paris: Gallimard, 1968–1973.
Dutt, nripendra Kumar. Origin and Growth of Caste in India, calcutta: mukhopadhyay,
1931.
Feller, Danielle. The Sanskrit Epics’ Representation of Vedic Myths, Delhi: motilal
Banarsidass Publishers, 2004.
Fitzgerald, James L. ‘The Great Epic of India as Religious Rhetoric: A Fresh Look at the
Mahābhārata’, Journal of the American Academy of Religion 51 (1983): 611–30.
―――. ‘India’s Fifth Veda: The Mahābhārata’s Presentation of itself’, Journal of South
Asian Literature 20 (1985): 125–40.
―――. ‘The Rāma Jāmadagnya “Thread” of the Mahābhārata: A new survey of Rāma
Jāmadagnya in the Pune Text’, in Stages and Transitions: Proceedings of the Second Dubrovnik
International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas, ed. mary Brockington, Zagreb:
Croatian Academy of Arts and Sciences, 2002, 89–132.
64 ADHEESH SATHAYE
―――. ‘The Many Voices of the Mahābhārata’, Journal of the American Oriental Society 123
(2003): 803–818.
―――. ‘Mahābhārata’, in The Hindu World, ed. sushil mittal and gene thursby, new york
and London: Routledge, 2004, 52–74.
Foley, John Miles. The Theory of Oral Composition: History and Methodology, Bloomington
and indianapolis: university of indiana Press, 1988.
ghurye, g.s. Caste and Race in India, london: Kegan Paul, 1932.
goldman, robert P. Gods, Priests, and Warriors: The Bhṛgus of the Mahābhārata, studies in
Oriental culture 12, new york: columbia university Press, 1977.
―――. ‘Fathers, Sons, and Gurus: Oedipal Conlict in the Sanskrit Epics’, Journal of Indian
Philosophy 6 (1978): 325–92.
―――. ‘Gods in hiding: The Mahābhārata’s Virāṭa Parvan and the Divinity of the Indian
epic hero’, in Modern Evaluation of the Mahābhārata (R. K. Sharma Felicitation Volume), ed. s.P.
Narang, Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1995, 73–100.
goldman, robert P., sally j. sutherland. The Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki: An Epic of Ancient India,
Vol. I: Bālakāṇḍa, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984.
gombach, Barbara. Ancillary Stories in the Mahābhārata, Ph.D. Dissertation, columbia
university, 2000.
hariyappa, h.l. Ṛgvedic Legends through the Ages, Pune: Deccan college, 1953.
heesterman, jan. The Inner Conlict of Tradition: Essays in Indian Ritual, Kingship, and Society,
chicago: university of chicago Press, 1985.
hegarty, james. A Fire of Tongues: Narrative Patterning in the Sanskrit Mahabharata, Ph.D.
Dissertation, university of manchester, 2004.
herman, David. Story Logic: Problems and Possibilities of Narrative, lincoln and london:
university of nebraska Press, 2002.
hiltebeitel, Alf. ‘Śiva, the Goddess, and the Disguises of the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī’, History
of Religions 20 (1980): 147–74.
―――. ‘Reconsidering Bhṛguization’, in Composing a Tradition: Concepts, Techniques and
Relationships: Proceedings of the First Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics
and Purāṇas, ed. mary Brockington and Peter schreiner, Zagreb: croatian Academy of sciences
and Arts, 1999, 155–68.
―――. Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education of the Dharma King,
chicago: university of chicago Press, 2001.
―――. ‘More Rethinking the Mahābhārata: towards a Politics of Bhakti’, Indo-Iranian
Journal 47 (2004): 203–27.
―――. ‘Not without Subtales: Telling Laws and Truths in the Sanskrit Epics’, Journal of
Indian Philosophy 33 (2005): 455–511.
hopkins, e. Washburn. The Great Epic of India: Character and Origin of the Mahābhārata,
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1993 (irst published in 1901).
inden, ronald. ‘Orientalist constructions of india’, Modern Asian Studies 20 (1986): 401–46.
―――. Imagining India, 2nd ed., Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000 (irst
published in 1990).
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 65
jha, D.n. The Myth of the Holy Cow, london, new york: Verso, 2002.
Jha, Vivekanand. ‘Social Stratiication in Ancient India’, Social Scientist 19, 3–4 (1991):
19–40.
Kane, P.V. History of the Dharmaśāstra, 5 vols, 2nd ed., Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental research
Institute, 1990 (original edition, 1930–1962).
Ketkar, s.V. The History of Caste in India, ithaca, ny: taylor and carpenter, 1909.
Kolenda, Pauline. ‘seven Kinds of hierarchy in Homo Hierarchicus’, Journal of Asian
Studies 35 (1976): 581–96.
Kosambi, D.D. ‘early stages of the caste system in northern india’, Journal of the Bombay
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, New Series, 22 (1946): 33–48.
laine, james. Visions of God: Narratives of Theophany in the Mahābhārata, Vienna: gerold,
1989.
madan, t.n., et al. ‘On the nature of caste in india: A review symposium on louis
Dumont’s Homo Hierarchicus’, Contributions to Indian Sociology, new series, 5 (1971):
1–135.
marriott, mcKim. louis Dumont, Homo Hierarchicus [review], American Anthropologist
71 (1969): 1166–75.
―――. ‘hindu Transactions: Diversity without Dualism’, in Transaction and Meaning:
Directions in the Anthropology of Exchange and Symbolic Behavior, ed. B. Kapferer, Philadelphia:
Institute for the Study of human Issues, 1976, 109–42.
mazumdar, r.c. The Vedic Age, Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1965.
mencher, joan. ‘the caste system upside Down, or the not-so-mysterious east’, Current
Anthropology 15 (1974): 469–93.
minkowski, christopher Z. ‘janamejaya’s Sattra and ritual structure’, Journal of the
American Oriental Society 109 (1989): 401–20.
―――. ‘Snakes, Sattras, and the Mahābhārata’, in Essays on the Mahābhārata, ed.
Arvind Sharma, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1991, 284–400.
muir, john. Original Sanskrit Texts on the Origin and History of the People of India, their
Religion and Institutions, 2nd ed., london: trubner & co., 1868.
Olivelle, Patrick. ‘Village vs. Wilderness: Ascetic ideals and the hindu World’, in
Monasticism in the Christian and Hindu Traditions: A Comparative Study, ed. Austin B. creel
and Vasudha Narayanan, Lewiston: Edwin Melle, 1990, 125–60.
―――. ‘Caste and Purity: A Study in the Language of the Dharma Literature’,
Contributions to Indian Sociology 32 (1998): 190–216.
―――. ‘Introduction’, in The Law Code of Manu, ed. and trans. Patrick Olivelle, new
york: Oxford university Press, 2004.
Pollock, sheldon. ‘the theory of Practice and the Practice of theory in indian intellectual
history’, Journal of the American Oriental Society 105 (1985): 499–519.
―――. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men, Berkeley: university of california
Press, 2006.
Proudfoot, ian. ‘interpreting Mahābhārata episodes as sources for the history of ideas’,
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 60 (1979): 41–63.
66 ADHEESH SATHAYE
―――. Ahiṃsā and a Mahābhārata Story: The Development of the Story of Tulādhāra in
the Mahābhārata in connection with Non-violence, Cow protection and Sacriice, canberra:
Faculty of Asian Studies, 1987.
Quigley, Declan. The Interpretation of Caste, Oxford: clarendon Press, 1993.
raheja, gloria goodwin. ‘india: caste, Kingship, and Dominance reconsidered’, Annual
Review of Anthropology 17 (1988): 497–522.
―――. ‘Centrality, Mutuality and hierarchy: Shifting Aspects of Inter-Caste Relationships
in north india’, Contributions to Indian Sociology 23 (1989): 79–101.
rahurkar, V.g. Seers of the Rgveda, Pune: university of Pune, 1964.
Ramanujan, A.K. ‘Two Realms of Kannada Folklore’, in Another Harmony: New Essays
on the Folklore of India, ed. stuart Blackburn and A.K. ramanujan, Berkeley: university of
California Press, 1986, 41–75.
――― ‘Towards a Counter-System: Women’s Tales’, in Gender, Genre, and Power in
South Asian Expressive Traditions, ed. Arjun Appadurai, Frank Korom, and Margaret Mills,
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1991, 33–55.
Reich, Tamar. ‘Sacriicial Violence and Textual Battles: Inner Textual Interpretation in the
sanskrit Mahābhārata’, History of Religions 41 (2001): 142–69.
Rifaterre, Michael. ‘Interpretation and Undecidability’, New Literary History 12 (1981):
227–42.
rocher, ludo. ‘caste and Occupation in classical india: the normative texts’, Contributions
to Indian Sociology 9 (1975): 139–51.
said, edward W. Orientalism, new york: Vintage Books, 1979.
sathaye, Adheesh A. Viśvāmitra: Intertextuality and Performance of Classical Narratives
about Caste, Ph.D. Dissertation, university of california, Berkeley, 2004.
―――. ‘Magic Cows and Cannibal Kings: The Textual Performance of the Viśvāmitra
legends in the Mahābhārata’, in Battles, Bards, and Brahmans: Papers from the Epics Section
of the 13th World Sanskrit Conference, Edinburgh, 10th–14th July 2006, ed. john Brockington,
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, fortcoming, 139–54.
Sharma, Arvind. ‘The Puruṣasūkta: Its Relation to the Caste System’, Journal of the
Economic and Social History of the Orient 21 (1978): 294–303.
sharma, umesh chandra. The Viśvāmitras and the Vasiṣṭhas: An Exhaustive Historical
Study, Vedic and Post-Vedic, Aligarh: Viveka Publications, 1975.
Smith, Brian K. ‘Classifying the Universe: Ancient Indian Cosmogonies and the Varṇa
system’, Contributions to Indian Sociology, New Series, 23 (1989): 241–60.
―――. Classifying the Universe: The Ancient Indian Varṇa System and the Origins of
Caste, new york: Oxford university Press, 1994.
Sukthankar, S.V. ‘Epic Studies 6: The Bhṛgus and the Bhārata: A Text-historical Study’,
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 18 (1936): 1–76.
Sutton, Nicholas. ‘Aśoka and Yudhiṣṭhira: A historical Setting for the Ideological Tensions
in the Mahābhārata’, Religion 27 (1997): 333–41.
―――. Religious Doctrines in the Mahābhārata, Delhi: motilal Banarsidass, 2000.
thapar, romila. From Lineage to State: Social Formations in the Mid-First-Millennium B.C.
in the Ganga Valley, Bombay: Oxford university Press, 1984.
HOW TO BECO ME A BRAHMAN 67
―――. Aśoka and the Decline of the Mauryas, 2nd ed., new Delhi: Oxford university
Press, 1997 (irst published in 1973).
―――. Early India: From the Origins to AD 1300, Berkeley: university of california
Press, 2002.
Tuan, Yi-Fu. Space and Place: The Perspective of Experience, minneapolis: university of
minnesota Press, 1984.
White, David gordon. ‘you Are What you eat: the Anomalous status of Dog-cookers
in hindu mythology’, in The Eternal Food: Gastronomic Ideas and Experiences of Hindus and
Buddhists, ed. R.S. Khare, Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1992, 53–93.
Witzel, Michael. ‘On the Origin of the Literary Device of the “Frame Story” in Old Indian
literature’, in Hinduismus und Buddhismus: Festschrift für Ulrich Schneider, ed. harry Falk,
Freiburg: hedwig Falk, 1987, 173–213.
Adheesh sAthAye, Ph.D. (adheesh@interchange.ubc.ca), Assistant Professor in the
Department of Asian studies at university of British columbia
: Department of Asian studies, university of British columbia, 408 Asian centre, 1871
West mall, Vancouver, Bc V6t 1Z2 canada
