Praxis, Vol. 3, No. 1, Spring 2011 ISSN 1756-1019
Maximizing Dharma: Krsna’s Consequentialism in the
Mahabharata
JOSEPH DOWD
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA-IRVINE
Abstract
The Mahabharata, an Indian epic poem, describes a legendary war between
two sides of a royal family. The epic’s plot involves numerous moral
dilemmas that have intrigued and perplexed scholars of Indian literature.
Many of these dilemmas revolve around a character named Krsna. Krsna
is a divine incarnation and a self-proclaimed upholder of dharma, a system
of social and religious duties central to Hindu ethics. Yet, during the war,
Krsna repeatedly encourages his allies to use tactics that violate dharma. In
this paper, I try to make sense of Krsna’s actions by analyzing them in terms
of categories from Western moral philosophy. I show that Krsna seems to
embrace an ethical approach called consequentialism, but that his version
of consequentialism differs from Western theories of consequentialism by
seeing adherence to dharma as an intrinsic good.
Note: In citing passages from the Bhagavad-Gita in this paper, I cite Zaehner’s 1969
translation. In citing passages from the rest of the Mahabharata, I cite two volumes
(1973, 1975) of Buitenen’s translation, except where otherwise indicated. Where available
volumes of Buitenen’s translation do not include sections of the Mahabharata that I want
to cite, I use Ganguli’s 1883-1896 translation.
1. Introduction
This paper’s purpose is to situate moral issues in the Mahabharata, an Indian epic poem, in
relation to some categories from Western moral philosophy. Some scholars have already
tried to do this. For example, Agarwal (1992, pp. 129-142) sees in the Mahabharata a
conflict between utilitarianism and a more Kantian approach to ethics. In the Bhagavad-
33
JOSEPH DOWD
Gita, a famous section of the Mahabharata, two characters named Arjuna and Krsna
discuss the morality of an impending war. According to Agarwal, Arjuna argues as a
utilitarian, voicing concern about the consequences of fighting, whereas Krsna tells
Arjuna to fight because it is his duty. However, this cannot be the whole story regarding
Krsna’s moral viewpoint. During the war, Krsna repeatedly urges the Pandavas to violate
dharma, or duty, in order to win. In these cases, he does not seem to think that dharma
overrides concern about consequences. At the same time, the Mahabharata affirms that
adherence to dharma is the most valuable of human goals, and that Krsna’s purpose on
earth is to restore adherence to dharma. In this paper, I argue that Krsna advocates a form
of consequentialism—but one according to which adherence to dharma is good in itself.
The Mahabharata revolves around the legendary Bharata war, a war between two sides
of a royal family. These two sides are commonly called the Pandavas and the Kauravas.1
The Pandavas and the Kauravas are the sons of the princes Pandu and Dhrtarastra,
respectively. Dhrtarastra is blind, and his blindness makes him ineligible for the throne.
After Pandu becomes king, he accidentally wounds a sage. The sage curses Pandu to die
if he engages in sexual activity. Pandu goes into exile with his wives Kunti and Madri,
and Dhrtarastra rules despite his blindness. Kunti and Madri bear sons through divine
intervention. The gods Indra, Vayu, and Dharma father Kunti’s sons, Arjuna, Bhima,
and Yudhisthira respectively. The Asvins, divine twins, father Madri’s sons, Nakula and
Sahadeva. Meanwhile, Dhrtarastra fathers the Kauravas, the eldest of whom is named
Duryodhana. The Kauravas are incarnate demons.
Duryodhana wants the throne for himself. However, when the Pandavas return from
exile, Dhrtarastra makes Yudhisthira the crown prince. As one might imagine, this creates
tension between the Pandavas and the Kauravas. After a failed assassination attempt, a
failed partition of the kingdom, and a rather extreme gambling match that results in exile
for the Pandavas, the two sides of the family prepare for war. Friends and relatives must
take sides in the conflict. Thus, the Pandavas find themselves facing loved ones on the
battlefield. The Pandavas “win” the war, but at a horrible cost. Only the Pandavas and a few
others survive. Moreover, the Pandavas find themselves resorting to dishonorable tactics
in order to win.
1 Technically, both sides of the family are Kauravas (“descendants of Kuru”), for they share an ancestor
named Kuru. However, tradition has often reserved the label “Kaurava” for the Pandavas’ cousins, and that
is how I will use the term in this paper.
34
JOSEPH DOWD
To make matters more disturbing, those tactics are often suggested by Krsna, Arjuna’s
charioteer, who is an incarnation of the supreme god Visnu and a self-proclaimed
upholder of dharma. For example, consider Krsna’s treatment of Bhisma, a warrior for the
Kauravas. Bhisma knows that Sikhandi, a warrior for the Pandavas, was a woman in his
previous life. Krsna tells the Pandavas to set Sikhandi on Bhisma. Bhisma refuses to fight
Sikhandi, who deals Bhisma a mortal wound. Another example concerns Karna, another
warrior for the Kauravas. When Arjuna fights Karna, Karna’s chariot wheel gets stuck.
Karna asks Arjuna to let him get his chariot unstuck before continuing with the battle.
But Krsna reminds Arjuna of Karna’s misdeeds and tells him to kill Karna immediately.
During a mace fight between Bhima and Duryodhana, Krsna tells Bhima to violate the
warrior code by using a low blow.
In light of his divine status, Krsna’s apparent disregard for dharma presents a puzzle.
Remarking on Krsna’s adharmic behavior, Sukthankar calls him “that paradox of
paradoxes” (1957, p. 12). The actions of this “devious divinity”, as Matilal (1991, pp. 401-
418) calls Krsna, create numerous ethical—not to mention theological—issues. In this
paper, I try to make sense of Krsna’s moral viewpoint.2
2. Intrinsic and extrinsic goods
Before continuing, I must introduce some terminology. First I will distinguish between
various kinds of goods. By “goods”, I mean things that are good. Goods are either intrinsic
or extrinsic. When I say that X is an intrinsic good or is intrinsically good, I mean that
X is good in itself. When I say that X is an extrinsic good or is extrinsically good, I mean
that X is good because of its relations to other things. The most obvious examples of
extrinsic goods are instrumental goods. When I say that X is an instrumental good or
is instrumentally good, I mean that X is a means to other goods.3 For instance, consider
money. Money allows one to buy other goods. Thus, money is instrumentally good.
2 In writing a two-paragraph summary of a sprawling epic, I have not bothered to support every statement
with burdensome and unnecessary citations. However, a published summary of the Mahabharata, which
includes most of the details that I mentioned, can be found in Buitenen (1973, pp. xiii-xv).
3 As Anderson (1993, p. 19-20) points out, not all extrinsic goods are instrumental goods. (Anderson uses
the term “intrinsic value” where I use the term “intrinsic goodness”, but her point is the same.) Anderson
uses the following example to illustrate this point. Suppose that a friend gives me an ugly bracelet as a gift.
For me, the bracelet is only an extrinsic good: I value it only because of its relation my friend. Yet the bracelet
is surely not a means to achieving other good things. Thus, the bracelet is not an instrumental good.
35
JOSEPH DOWD
Note that a thing can be both an intrinsic good and an extrinsic good. Consider happiness.
A person regards his happiness as good in itself. Thus, he regards his happiness as an
intrinsic good. At the same time, if a person is happy, then he is more likely to benefit
others. Thus, a person may also regard his happiness as a means to the good of others. That
is, he may also regard his happiness as an instrumental good.
3. Consequentialism, deontology, and dharma
I will now discuss two ethical terms that appear frequently throughout this paper—
consequentialism and deontology.
Consequentialism is one approach to ethics. For consequentialists, the sole aim of
morality is to produce good consequences. More specifically, consequentialists think that
the sole aim of morality is to maximize intrinsic goods.4 Consequentialists disagree about
what counts as an intrinsic good. According to one kind of consequentialism, hedonistic
utilitarianism, pleasure is the only intrinsic good. Other consequentialists believe that
pleasure is not the only intrinsic good. In fact, some consequentialists regard certain
consequences as good apart from their impact on people’s welfare.5 Besides disagreeing
about what counts as an intrinsic good, consequentialists disagree about the use of rules.
According to act-consequentialism, the right action is whatever action maximizes intrinsic
goods. According to rule-consequentialism, right actions are actions that obey certain rules,
where the rules have been chosen based on their tendency to maximize intrinsic goods.
However, despite their disagreements, consequentialists agree that the point of morality is
to maximize intrinsic goods.
4 According to the usual definition, consequentialism seeks to maximize goods or good consequences.
However, given our division of goods into intrinsic and extrinsic goods, and our further division of extrinsic
goods into instrumental and non-instrumental extrinsic goods, we must specify what kind of goods con-
sequentialism ultimately seeks to maximize. Purely instrumental goods are good only as a means to other
goods. Thus, no one, consequentialist or otherwise, is interested in maximizing purely instrumental goods
for their own sake. It is less obvious to me that no one would seek to maximize non-instrumental extrinsic
goods for their own sake. Nonetheless, consequentialism is generally understood as a moral system whose
goal is to maximize intrinsic goods (cf. Anderson, 1993, pp. 30-31: Anderson uses the term “intrinsic value”
instead of “intrinsic goodness”, but her point is the same), and I define consequentialism accordingly in this
paper. If consequentialism’s goal were expanded to include the maximization of non-instrumental extrinsic
goods, my main line of argument in this paper would not be much affected.
5 For example, Hurka (1993) advocates a form of “maximizing consequentialism” (p. 55) whose account of
what is good in life “should never be expressed in terms of well-being” (p. 17). For discussion and overview
see Sinnott-Armstrong 2006.
36
JOSEPH DOWD
In contrast, according to deontological ethics, morality is a matter of adhering to duties.
For a deontologist, if an action violates a duty, then the action is wrong—even if the
action produces intrinsic goods. A deontologist need not believe that duties require no
justification. In fact, some deontologists provide sophisticated justifications for duties. For
example, Immanuel Kant attempts to derive duties from the very presuppositions that
agents make when choosing their actions.6 Moreover, some deontologists think that, in
extreme situations, the need to avoid bad consequences can override duties (Alexander
and Moore, 2007). However, to qualify as a deontologist, one must hold that an agent has
moral duties that are not justified in terms of their consequences.
What does all this have to do with the Mahabharata? In the Mahabharata, the concept
of dharma figures prominently. Dharma is a “metaphysically based system of laws,
duties, rites and obligations incumbent upon a Hindu according to his class and stage
of life” (Dimmitt and Buitenen, 1978, p. 353). The words “order”, “justice”, “morality”,
“righteousness”, “virtue”, “custom”, and “ritual” each indicate a part of its meaning (Buitenen
1973, p. xli). Buitenen (1973, p. xli) translates dharma as “Law” in his translation of the
Mahabharata. Dharma’s negative counterpart is adharma, “non-dharma”, which can be
roughly defined as violation of dharma. (In this paper, I will use the term “dharmic” as an
adjective for actions that adhere to dharma and the term “adharmic” as an adjective for
actions that violate dharma.) We will explore the nature of dharma in more detail later in
this paper. For now, the following observation suffices. Dharma refers at least partly to a
person’s “norms of conduct” (Killingley 2003, p. 40), to his duties. Thus, if Krsna advocates
adherence to dharma irrespective of consequences, then we have reason to classify him as
a deontologist. If he advocates dharmic behavior only when, or only because, it produces
6 A full discussion of Kant’s ethical theory would be out of place here. However, I will provide a brief over-
view of Kant’s attempt to establish moral duties. According to Kant, I presuppose that I am free whenever
I make a choice. Thus, my practical reason—the reason that I use when making choices—must presuppose
that my will is free, i.e. not governed by forces outside of it (Kant, 1785, p. 60). If my will is not governed
by forces outside of it, then my will must be “autonomous”: it must be governed by laws that it imposes on
itself (Kant, 1785, p. 44). But if my will is governed by laws that it imposes on itself, then my choices must all
adhere to principles that my will can accept as laws. Or, as Kant puts it, my choices must obey the command
“Always choose in such a way that in the same volition the maxims of the choice are at the same time present
as universal law” (Kant, 1785, p. 44). Kant seeks to derive all duties from this “categorical imperative”. (To be
precise, this is one formulation of the categorical imperative. Kant gives various formulations of the impera-
tive, e.g. “Act in such a way that you treat humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of another,
always at the same time as an end and never simply as a means” [Kant, 1785, p. 36]. He claims that these
formulations are equivalent to each other.)
37
JOSEPH DOWD
good consequences, then we have reason to classify him as a consequentialist.7
4. Krsna and adharmic behavior
In the Bhagavad-Gita, Arjuna faces a dilemma. It is the beginning of the Bharata war.
Looking across the battlefield, Arjuna sees his old friends and relatives in the opposing
ranks. As he reflects on the oncoming war, he fears that it will produce bad consequences—
death, destruction, social collapse, and finally hell for all those involved (Zaehner, 1969, p.
47). However, Arjuna is a warrior, so his dharma includes the duty to fight (Zaehner 1969,
p. 50). At face value, this looks like a choice between consequentialism and deontology:
on one hand, Arjuna can try to minimize bad consequences by not fighting; on the other
hand, he can adhere to his duty and fight, regardless of the consequences. In response
to Arjuna’s dilemma, Krsna urges Arjuna to fight (Zaehner, 1969, pp. 50, 137) without
anxiety about the consequences (Zaehner, 1969, p. 51). Thus, as a first guess, we might
say that Krsna rejects consequentialism and accepts “a sort of Kantian ethics of duty”
(Agrawal, 1992, p. 137), a deontological ethics.
However, this first guess does not work. Throughout the war, the Pandavas repeatedly
pursue victory through adharmic means (Sukthankar, 1957, p. 12). In many cases, Krsna
is responsible for the Pandavas’ decisions to violate dharma (Matilal, 1991, p. 405).
Moreover, at the end of the war, voices from heaven confirm that the Pandavas have killed
Bhisma, Karna, and others by adharmic means (Goldman, 1997, p. 210). Unfazed by the
heavenly voices, Krsna defends the Pandavas’ adharmic actions in the following words:
Ye could never have slain them in battle by fighting fairly! King Duryodhana also could
never be slain in a fair encounter! The same is the case with all those mighty car-warriors
headed by [Bhisma]! From desire of doing good to you, I repeatedly applied my powers
of illusion and caused them to be slain by diverse means in battle. If I had not adopted
such deceitful ways in battle, victory would never have been yours […] You should
not take it to heart that this foe of yours hath been slain deceitfully. When the number
of one’s foes becomes great, then destruction should be effected by contrivances and
means. The gods themselves, in slaying the [demons], have trod the same way. That way,
therefore, that hath been trod by the gods, may be trod by all. (Ganguli, 1883-1896b)
7 As an aside, I should note here that, in addition to consequentialism and deontology, there is another ma-
jor approach to ethics in contemporary philosophy—virtue ethics. The term “virtue ethics” covers a variety
of different ethical theories that focus on the cultivation of positive character traits or virtues (Hursthouse,
2007). I ignore virtue ethics in this paper. The Mahabharata has a great deal to say on the subject of charac-
ter and virtue. However, virtue ethics is not centrally relevant to my argument in this paper. In this paper,
I argue that Krsna is a kind of consequentialist. As far as I can tell, the main objections to my thesis would
rely on passages that suggest that Krsna is a deontologist.
38
JOSEPH DOWD
Thus, Krsna clearly believes that adharmic actions can be justified by their good
consequences. Therefore, he does not appear to be a deontologist. On the contrary, his
defense of the Pandavas’ adharmic behavior seems clearly consequentialist.
At the same time, Krsna’s primary goal is apparently to restore dharmic behavior. In the
Gita, Krsna says that he comes to earth “whenever the law of righteousness [i.e. dharma]
withers away and lawlessness [i.e. adharma] arises” (Zaehner, 1969, p. 58). Visnu says the
same thing in another part of the epic: “Whenever, sage, the Law languishes and Unlaw
rears up, I create myself” (Buitenen, 1975, p. 592). (Recall that Krsna is an incarnation
of Visnu.) If Krsna’s mission is to restore dharmic behavior, then why does he encourage
adharmic behavior?
Here is one possible answer: perhaps Krsna is a “threshold” deontologist (cf. Alexander
and Moore, 2007). That is, perhaps he is a deontologist who believes that, in extreme cases,
the need to avoid bad consequences can override duties. Suppose that Krsna is a threshold
deontologist. Further, suppose that horrible consequences will ensue if the Pandavas lose
the war. In that case, Krsna can violate dharma in order to help the Pandavas win the war.
Here is another possible answer: perhaps Krsna values dharmic behavior merely as a means
to good consequences. According to the Mahabharata, the rules of dharma are designed
to produce good consequences: “Dharma is created for the wellbeing of all creation. All
that is free from harm to any created being is certainly Dharma” (Mahabharata, Kama
Parvan 69.51, quoted by Khan, 1965, p. 35). Thus, dharmic behavior tends to produce
good consequences. In that case, perhaps Krsna has come to earth to restore dharmic
behavior, but only because dharmic behavior is a means to good consequences. If so, then
nothing prevents Krsna from acting adharmically whenever doing so will produce good
consequences.
Both of these proposals have something to be said for them. In fact, perhaps both of
these proposals are true of Krsna at different times. I cannot rule out this possibility.
The Mahabharata is an epic, not a modern philosophical treatise, and Krsna’s moral
viewpoint may not be completely consistent throughout. However, I believe that the text
of the Mahabharata suggests another possibility. This possibility makes Krsna a consistent
consequentialist, but without reducing dharmic behavior to a mere means.
39
JOSEPH DOWD
5. Dharmic behavior as an intrinsic good
According to a widespread Hindu tradition, dharma is one of the purusarthas, or goals of
man (Krishan, 1992, p. 53). The other purusarthas are kama, sensual pleasure, and artha,
worldly prosperity. Here dharma means not the set of rules called dharma but, rather,
adherence to those rules: “As an aim in life, rather than as a rule of conduct, dharma refers
to ‘being established in dharma’” (Koller, 1972, p. 131). Thus, according to this tradition,
dharmic behavior is one of life’s goals. This tradition appears in the Mahabharata.
Moreover, the Mahabharata repeatedly says that dharma is more valuable than kama and
artha (Krishan, 1992, p. 62). Thus, at least within the epic, dharmic behavior seems to be
the most valuable of earthly goals.
This implies that dharmic behavior is an intrinsic good. If dharmic behavior were good
only as a means to other goods, then it would not be one of life’s goals; rather, it would
be only a means to those goals. But in the Mahabharata, dharmic behavior is one of life’s
goals. Thus, dharmic behavior is not a purely instrumental good. Is dharmic behavior
some other kind of purely extrinsic good? That is, does dharmic behavior have value only
in relation to other things? This strikes me as unlikely, given the Mahabharata’s claim that
dharmic behavior is the most valuable of earthly goals. At any rate, for want of a more
plausible proposal, I conclude that dharmic behavior is an intrinsic good.
The Mahabharata’s characters also seem to view dharmic behavior as an intrinsic
good. In many cases, they go out of their way to adhere to the letter of dharma. In one
passage, the Pandavas trick Drona, a warrior for the Kauravas, into thinking that his son
Asvatthaman is dead. At Krsna’s suggestion, they kill an elephant named Asvatthaman
and then tell Drona, “Aswatthaman hath been slain” (Ganguli, 1883-1896a). As a result,
Drona withdraws from the war to grieve. Now, whether or not the Pandavas had killed
the elephant, the outcome would have been the same: Drona would have been tricked into
thinking that Asvatthaman was dead. However, truthfulness is a supreme norm in Hindu
thought (Buitenen, 1975, p. 177; Goldman, 1997, p. 189; Khan, 1965, p. 204). By killing
the elephant, the Pandavas ensure that they are technically speaking the truth when they
say, “Aswatthaman hath been slain.”
Why do Krsna and the Pandavas go out of their way to qualify as “truthful” here? After
all, their “truthfulness” has no obvious good consequence. A rule-consequentialist might
argue as follows: “A rule that requires truthfulness at all times will tend to produce good
40
JOSEPH DOWD
consequences. Thus, one should adhere to that rule, even when it is does not appear to have
good consequences.” Thus, perhaps Krsna and the Pandavas are rule-consequentialists:
perhaps they are always truthful, but only as a means to producing good consequences.8 If
so, then they view truthfulness as a purely instrumental good. However, I find it implausible
that Krsna and the Pandavas view truthfulness as a purely instrumental good. As we have
seen, the Mahabharata appears to describe dharmic behavior as an intrinsic good. Thus,
it seems more likely to me that Krsna and the Pandavas regard the dharmic behavior of
truthfulness as an intrinsic good. If they do, then it makes sense for them to go out of their
way to qualify as truthful, even when truthfulness has no obvious good consequence apart
from truthfulness itself.
Let us consider another example. Arjuna vows to kill anyone who slights his bow.
Yudhisthira slights Arjuna’s bow. Naturally, Arjuna does not want to kill his brother. So
instead of killing Yudhisthira, Arjuna insults him, because insulting one’s older brother is
disrespectful enough to be “like” killing him (Goldman, 1997, p. 190). Because insulting
Yudhisthira is in some sense equivalent to killing him, Arjuna is not technically breaking
his vow. Why does Arjuna go to such lengths to avoid breaking his vow? Granted, Arjuna
refrains from killing Yudhisthira in pursuit of a good consequence, the preservation of
Yudhisthira’s life. But Arjuna could have achieved that consequence without insulting
Yudhisthira, by simply refraining from killing him. By insulting Yudhisthira, Arjuna
suggests that he views the dharmic act of keeping his vow as an intrinsic good.
Again, one could argue that Arjuna is simply being a rule-consequentialist. After all, the
rule “Always keep your promises” tends to produce good consequences. Perhaps that is
the only reason why Arjuna goes to such lengths to avoid breaking his vow. If so, then
Arjuna sees the act of keeping his vow as a purely instrumental good. Again, however, the
Mahabharata elsewhere seems to describe dharmic behavior as an intrinsic good. Thus, I
think it is more plausible to say that Arjuna keeps his vow because he regards the dharmic
act of promise-keeping as an intrinsic good.
One might object that dharmic behavior cannot be an intrinsic good in the Mahabharata.
As we have seen, dharma exists to promote wellbeing: “Dharma is created for the wellbeing
of all creation. All that is free from harm to any created being is certainly Dharma”
8 I would like to thank an anonymous referee for pointing out this possibility to me.
41
JOSEPH DOWD
(Mahabharata, Kama Parvan 69.51, quoted by Khan, 1965, p. 35).9 In that case, isn’t
dharmic behavior good only as a means to wellbeing? And if it is good only as a means
to wellbeing, then isn’t it only an extrinsic good, not an intrinsic good? There is a simple
answer to this objection. As we have seen, something can be both an extrinsic good and
an intrinsic good. Thus, dharmic behavior can be both an extrinsic good—specifically, a
means to wellbeing—and an intrinsic good.
6. Krsna and dharma-consequentialism
Now we can take another stab at understanding Krsna’s moral viewpoint. As we have seen,
the Mahabharata’s characters seem to regard dharmic behavior as intrinsically good. If
dharmic behavior is intrinsically good, then it is something that a consequentialist would
want to maximize. In that case, a consequentialist might violate dharma if doing so would
maximize the dharmic behavior of others. After all, a consequentialist might sacrifice
his own welfare to maximize others’ welfare. In fact, the upright character Bhisma does
precisely that, renouncing sexual activity so that his father can marry a fisher-girl. (For
the context of Bhisma’s decision, see Buitenen, 1973, p. 226, and the surrounding passage.)
Likewise, if a consequentialist believes that dharmic behavior is intrinsically good, then he
might sacrifice his own dharmic behavior in order to maximize the dharmic behavior of
others. Thus, I propose that Krsna is a “dharma-consequentialist”, a consequentialist who
sees dharmic behavior as intrinsically good.
Interpreting Krsna as a dharma-consequentialist seems to give us everything we want. If the
Pandavas lose the war, then adharma will triumph in the world. Thus, as a consequentialist
who sees dharmic behavior as intrinsically good, Krsna helps the Pandavas to win the war,
even by means of adharmic behavior. Krsna violates dharma for the sake of dharma itself.
Thus, his adharmic actions do not conflict with the Mahabharata’s claim that dharma is
supremely valuable. Nor do they conflict with his claim that his primary goal is to restore
dharmic behavior.
An act-consequentialist may feel inclined to object at this point. If Krsna and the Pandavas
are violating dharma for the sake of intrinsic goods, then are they really violating dharma?
9 Does this passage force us to infer that the dharmic action is whatever action will maximize wellbeing? I
do not think so. The passage’s literal meaning does not support such an inference. Taken literally, the passage
simply says (1) that the rules of dharma are designed to promote wellbeing (hence, we can infer that dharmic
behavior tends to promote wellbeing) and (2) that if an action harms absolutely no one at all, then we can
rest assured that it is dharmic.
42
JOSEPH DOWD
Perhaps Krsna and the Pandavas never actually violate dharma. Perhaps dharma ultimately
commands that an agent do whatever will maximize intrinsic goods. In other words,
perhaps the dharmic action is whatever action will maximize intrinsic goods. If so, Krsna
and the Pandavas do not violate dharma during the war.
I do not think that this suggestion works. Recall that, at the end of the war, voices from
heaven condemn the Pandavas’ actions (Goldman, 1997, p. 210). Thus, the Pandavas’
actions are apparently adharmic.10 Yet those actions contribute to winning the war and,
thus, to maximizing intrinsic goods. Thus, an action is not dharmic simply in virtue of
maximizing intrinsic goods. By winning the war by any means necessary, Krsna and the
Pandavas do the right thing from a consequentialist perspective, but they are not thereby
doing the dharmic thing.
To understand this point more fully, we must distinguish between Dharma and dharmas.11
By dharmas, I mean particular duties for particular contexts. The Mahabharata refers to
many such dharmas. For example, there is a specific dharma for warriors, “the Law of
the baronage” (Buitenen, 1975, p. 586), which includes fighting (Zaehner, 1969, p. 50),
and a specific dharma for brahmins (priests), which includes prayer (Buitenen, 1975,
p. 586). However, Indian tradition often mentions a single universal Dharma, which
deteriorates with the passing of great periods of cosmic time called yugas (Creel, 1972, p.
160). According to the Mahabharata, this Dharma declines by one quarter with each yuga
(Buitenen, 1975, pp. 505, 593-594).
What is the relationship between dharmas and Dharma? The concept of dharma as a
cosmic principle seems to have evolved from the early Indian concept of rta (Creel, 1972,
p. 157; Khan, 1965, p. 30-34). Rta is the cosmic order (Khan, 1965, p. 24). But it has a
moral aspect, for people can deviate from the cosmic order: the wicked man does not
follow the path of rta (Khan, 1965, p. 27). Likewise, in the Mahabharata, dharma seems
10 There is some ambiguity here, since Krsna’s divine authority may trump that of the celestial voices.
In the Mahabharata, Visnu (of whom Krsna is an incarnation) is one of the supreme gods (the other is
arguably Siva). Nonetheless, when the voices declare that the Pandavas had acted adharmically, Krsna does
not respond by challenging the voices’ understanding of dharma. Instead, he simply points out that the
Pandavas could not have won by fighting fairly. Thus, it appears that the Pandavas did in fact violate dharma.
11 I take this distinction from a lecture delivered by Professor Robert Goldman (South Asian Studies C142,
University of California, Berkeley, CA, 9-13 March 2009), which distinguished between “little-d dharma”
and “big-D Dharma”.
43
JOSEPH DOWD
to be a principle not only of morality but also of cosmic order. As dharma declines, the
natural world deteriorates: “The cows will yield little milk, and the trees, teeming with
crows, will yield few flowers and fruits” (Buitenen, 1975, p. 587). Thus, it appears that
Dharma is a principle of cosmic order, and that the dharmas are the different rules that
different people must follow in order to be in harmony with Dharma. As one scholar puts
it, “all ordinary human [little-d] dharma is only an aspect of the universal [big-D] dharma,
and is justified not in itself, but only in the function of the universal dharma” (Koller,
1972, p. 141). As another scholar puts it, to violate one’s own dharma is “to be out of step
with the universe” (Creel, 1972, p. 157).
Now we can explain exactly why Krsna authorizes the Pandavas’ adharmic actions. When
Krsna comes to earth, the universe is out of order: demons have incarnated themselves
as the Kauravas (Buitenen, 1973, p. 137). To restore the cosmic order—Dharma—
the Pandavas must win the war, exterminating the demonic incarnations. Thus, Krsna
encourages the Pandavas to violate dharmas when doing so will help them to win the war.
By violating dharmas, the Pandavas deviate from the cosmic order themselves, but they
help to preserve order in the universe at large.
To grasp this point more clearly, we can use the metaphor of a dance routine. The cosmic
order is a huge, coordinated dance routine with many different assigned roles. Demons
have started to run amok on the dance floor, interfering with the dance. To save the dance
routine from being completely ruined, the Pandavas must stop the demons. But to stop
the demons, they must perform actions (e.g. running after the demons) that deviate from
their choreography within the dance routine. From a consequentialist perspective, that
is exactly the right thing to do: if the cosmic order is intrinsically good, then one should
sacrifice one’s own participation in the cosmic order in order to save the cosmic order.
7. Rule-consequentialism in the Gita
However, we should not forget the starting-point of our discussion—the Bhagavad-Gita.
In the Gita, Arjuna fears that his fighting will have a negative effect on dharma. If he fights,
then the war will proceed as planned. If the war proceeds, then the elders of his family
will die. Without the elders, there will be no one to maintain the family’s norms, and its
women will mix with men of lower castes. Caste-mixing, in turn, will lead to widespread
adharmic behavior (Zaehner, 1969, p. 47). In the situation in which Arjuna finds himself,
“the injunctions of svadharma [i.e. individual dharma], therefore, appear […] to be self-
44
JOSEPH DOWD
destructive in character” (Santina, 1992, p. 107). Arjuna’s individual dharma demands
that Arjuna participate in the war; however, from Arjuna’s standpoint, it appears that the
war’s ultimate effect will be to decrease dharmic behavior.
Of course, Arjuna is wrong about this. The battle between the Pandavas and the Kauravas
is not a battle between two merely human foes. Instead, it is a battle between incarnate
gods and demons. Arjuna’s concerns would be valid if his enemies were mere humans.
However, as incarnate demons, the Kauravas must be defeated at all costs. Arjuna is
certainly correct in thinking that the war will weaken the social order. However, if the
Kauravas are not exterminated, then the social and cosmic order may be utterly destroyed.
With his God’s-eye view, Krsna does not encounter any moral crisis (Dubey, 1992, p. 39);
he knows what is necessary to maintain dharma. He knows that, contrary to what Arjuna
thinks, Arjuna’s fighting will actually help to preserve dharma.
However, this is not quite the argument that Krsna presents to Arjuna. In the Gita, Krsna’s
main argument is not that Arjuna’s fighting will help to restore the cosmic order. Instead,
Krsna tells Arjuna that he must do the work prescribed by his dharma (Zaehner, 1969, pp.
50, 137) without anxiety over the consequences (Zaehner, 1969, p. 51). This advice sounds
deontological. Thus, we face a problem: If Krsna is a consequentialist, as we have argued,
then why does he present Arjuna with a deontological-sounding argument?
We can mitigate this problem to an extent by noting that Krsna mentions consequentialist
considerations in the Gita. He points out that some of the bad consequences that Arjuna
fears—namely, the deaths of his relatives—are outweighed by the intrinsic goodness of
dharmic behavior. Krsna reveals that Arjuna is not really killing his relatives when he kills
their bodies, for their souls are immortal (Zaehner, 1969, p. 49). Agrawal argues that this
revelation makes the deaths of Arjuna’s relatives irrelevant to Arjuna’s decision:
Realizing not only intellectually but deeply, existentially, that the inner self is
immortal, Arjuna now feels no grief at the thought of the death of his affectionate
and respected ones. […] The result of this new orientation of mind is that
certain considerations drop out as irrelevant in determining how to act. Thus, for
example, the fact that Arjuna’s dear ones will die in the war becomes irrelevant to
the question of fighting a righteous war. (1992, p. 140-141)
I would not go so far. The soul’s immortality does not change the fact that murder is
usually wrong. For example, the Mahabharata affirms that the murder of brahmins
(priests) is extremely sinful (Buitenen, 1973, p. 134). And, presumably, murder is wrong at
45
JOSEPH DOWD
least partly because the preservation of bodily life is good and the loss of bodily life is bad.
Thus, the soul’s immortality does not mean that the death of Arjuna’s relatives is morally
irrelevant. It simply means that the intrinsic goodness of his relatives’ bodily life is not
great enough to outweigh the intrinsic goodness of dharmic behavior. Thus, by adhering
to his warrior dharma, Arjuna produces more intrinsic good than he would produce by
not fighting. Therefore, when Krsna tells Arjuna to fulfill his warrior dharma without
worrying about the deaths that it will cause, he is in fact making a largely consequentialist
argument, contrary to appearances.
The problem is also mitigated once we realize that the Gita is not just a set of advice
for Arjuna. The Gita discusses many subjects in minute detail—subjects only tangentially
related to Arjuna’s dilemma. For example, it discusses the Day and Night of Brahma
the creator12 (Zaehner, 1969, p. 73), the different afterlives awaiting different kinds of
worshippers (Zaehner, 1969, p. 76), the greater difficulty of contemplating an impersonal
God as opposed to a personal God (Zaehner, 1969, p. 88), and the theory of the three
constituents of reality, “goodness” (sattva), “passion” (rajas), and “darkness” (tamas)13
(Zaehner, 1969, p. 352). The Gita does not simply present moral advice; it presents a
cosmology. If the Gita’s author intended the Gita merely as part of the story of the Bharata
war, then this degree of complexity would be odd. After all, Krsna’s long-winded sermon
hardly helps to move the plot forward, except insofar as it motivates Arjuna to fight. Thus,
the Gita’s author probably intends the Gita largely as a message to ordinary people reading
the Mahabharata.
Once we realize that the Gita is intended primarily as a message to ordinary people, we can
interpret Krsna as consequentialist even in the Gita. As we have seen, the Pandavas often
violate dharma during the war. However, in those cases, they have Krsna—God incarnate—
nearby to assure them that their adharmic actions will produce good consequences.
Ordinary people do not have God at their side to tell them when it is permissible to violate
12 Brahma is the creator of the universe, although most contemporary forms of Hinduism do not identify
him with the supreme being (Visnu and another god named Siva often receive that honor). The Day of
Brahma and the Night of Brahma are vast periods of cosmic time. The universe is destroyed and recreated
repeatedly during the Day of Brahma. At the beginning of the Night of Brahma, the universe dissolves com-
pletely, to remain “unmanifest” until the next Day. The Day and Night follow each other in an endless cycle
(cf. Zaehner, 1969, p. 73).
13 Here I follow Zaehner’s translations of the terms sattva, rajas, and tamas (cf. Zaehner, 1969, pp. 16, 140).
I enclose the translations within quotation marks to indicate that they are translations of what the Gita treats
as technical terms.
46
JOSEPH DOWD
dharma. Hence, ordinary people would be most likely to produce good consequences
if they simply had a policy of adhering to dharma. As we have seen, the Gita’s author
intends the Gita primarily as advice for ordinary people. Thus, he has Krsna preach a
policy of unwavering adherence to dharma. In preaching this policy, Krsna is being a good
consequentialist: by convincing ordinary people to always follow dharma, he is indirectly
producing good consequences.
8. Rule-consequentialism and dharma-consequentialism
Before concluding this paper, I must address a final issue. One might think that Krsna’s
dharma-consequentialism is simply a form of rule-consequentialism. After all, an
individual’s dharma consists of a set of rules. So can’t we simply replace the word dharma
with “rule” and conclude that Krsna is a rule-consequentialist? In response to this question,
I will make two points.
First of all, the term “dharma-consequentialism” is not simply a synonym for “rule-
consequentialism”, a synonym that substitutes the word dharma for the word “rules”. A rule-
consequentialist selects rules based on the rules’ tendency to maximize intrinsic goods.
He then says that actions must obey those rules. In other words, rule-consequentialism
is called rule-consequentialism because it says that right actions adhere to certain rules.
In contrast, Krsna’s moral system is called dharma-consequentialism because it says that
right actions aim at maximizing global adherence to the rules of dharma; this is very
different from saying that right actions themselves adhere to the rules. When Krsna breaks
the rules of dharma in order to win the war, he adheres to dharma-consequentialism, but
he obviously does not adhere to rule-consequentialism.
Secondly, however, I agree that Krsna’s dharma-consequentialism sometimes takes the
form of rule-consequentialism. In the Gita, Krsna advocates strict adherence to dharma
without anxiety over consequences. As I have argued, that is because the rules of dharma
tend to produce good consequences. So, in the Gita, Krsna does advocate a form of rule-
consequentialism.
9. Conclusion
The Krsna of the Mahabharata holds a complex moral outlook. He urges the Pandavas to
violate dharma, to deviate from the cosmic order. But for Krsna, conformity to the cosmic
order, conformity to dharma, is intrinsically good. He urges the Pandavas to violate
47
JOSEPH DOWD
dharma only because their adharmic actions will help to restore dharmic behavior in the
universe at large. In short, Krsna is a consequentialist, but he holds a peculiar form of
consequentialism in which dharmic behavior itself is intrinsically good.
This dharma-consequentialism probably will not find many adherents in the philosophy
departments of Western universities. The majority of Western philosophers are neither
Hindus nor Indians. Hence, the majority of Western philosophers do not believe in the
principle of cosmic order called dharma.14 Thus, although many Western philosophers
are consequentialists, the content of their consequentialism differs from the content of
dharma-consequentialism. Nonetheless, the dharma-consequentialism found in the
Mahabharata is a coherent moral theory and represents an alternative to the kinds of
consequentialism known in the West.
References:
Agrawal, M.M., 1992. Arjuna’s Moral Predicament. In B. Matilal, ed. Moral Dilemmas in
the Mahabharata. Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, pp. 129-142.
Alexander, L., & Moore, M., 2007. Deontological Ethics. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
[online] Available at: <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ethics-deontological/> [Accessed
7 Apr 2009].
Anderson, E., 1993. Value in Ethics and Economics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Buitenen, J.A.B. van, ed. and trans., 1973. The Mahabharata. Vol. 1. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
-----, 1975. The Mahabharata. Vol. 2. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Creel, A., 1972. Dharma as an Ethical Category Relating to Freedom and Responsibility.
Philosophy East and West, 22(2), pp. 155-68.
Dimmitt, C., & Buitenen, J.A.B. van, eds. and trans., 1978. Classical Hindu Mythology: A
Reader in the Sanskrit Puranas. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
14 However, some Western philosophers—ancient, medieval, and modern—have argued that human ethics
is a function of some sort of cosmic principle. For example, the Stoics claimed that a divine fire permeates
and organizes the universe, giving each being its characteristic nature (White, 2003, pp. 133-134), and that
virtue consists of living according to one’s nature (Schofield, 2003, pp. 242-243). We may wonder whether
any Western philosopher would agree with Krsna’s consequentialist approach to preserving the cosmic or-
der. Does any Western philosopher believe that one should deviate from the cosmic order when doing so will
help to keep others in harmony with the cosmic order? Answering this question would require a separate
essay. If any Western philosopher did hold such a belief, then his moral theory would be structurally similar
to dharma-consequentialism. However, it would not be dharma-consequentialism, because its principle of
cosmic order would not be the dharma of Hinduism.
48
JOSEPH DOWD
Dubey, S.P., 1992. The Concept of Moral Dilemma: Its Applicability in the Context of
the Mahabharata. In B. Matilal, ed. Moral Dilemmas in the Mahabharata. Shimla: Indian
Institute of Advanced Study, pp. 35-48.
Ganguli, K.M., trans., 1883-1896a. The Mahabharata, Book 7: Drona Parva: Drona-vadha
Parva: Section CXCI. [online] Sacred-Texts. Available at: <http://www.sacred-texts.com/
hin/m07/m07187.htm> [Accessed 13 March 2011].
-----, 1883-1896b. The Mahabharata, Book 9: Shalya Parva: Section 61. [online] Sacred-
Texts. Available at: <http://www.sacred-texts.com/hin/m09/m09061.htm> [Accessed 13
March 2011].
Goldman, R., 1997. Esa Dharmah Sanatanah: Shifting Moral Values and the Indian
Epics. In P. Bilimoria & J.N. Mohanty, eds. Relativism, Suffering, and Beyond: Essays in the
Memory of Bimal K. Matilal. Delhi: Oxford University Press, pp. 187-223.
Hooker, B., 2008. Rule Consequentialism. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. [online]
(Updated 9 Jan 2008) Available at: <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ethics-virtue/>
[Accessed 4 Oct 2010].
Hurka, T., 1993. Perfectionism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hursthouse, R., 2007. Virtue Ethics. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. [online]
(Updated 18 Jul 2007) Available at: <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ethics-virtue/>
[Accessed 10 Sep 2010].
Kant, I., 1785. Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals: with On a Supposed Right to
Lie Because of Philanthropic Concerns. Translated by J.W. Ellington, 1993. Indianapolis:
Hackett.
Khan, B., 1965. The Concept of Dharma in Valmiki Ramayana. Delhi: Munshi Ram
Manohar Lal.
Killingley, D., 2003. Hinduism. In L.V.J. Ridgeon, ed. Major World Religions: From Their
Origins to the Present. London: Routledge, pp. 8-58.
Krishan, Y., 1992. The Meaning of the Purusarthas in the Mahabharata. In B. Matilal, ed.
Moral Dilemmas in the Mahabharata. Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, pp.
53-68.
Koller, J., 1972. Dharma: An Expression of Universal Order. Philosophy East and West,
22(2), pp. 131-44.
Matilal, B., 1991. Krsna: In Defence of a Devious Divinity. In A. Sharma, ed. Essays on the
49
JOSEPH DOWD
Mahabharata. Leiden: E. J. Brill, pp. 401-81.
Santina, P., 1992. Conceptions of Dharma in the Sramanical and Brahmanical Traditions:
Buddhism and the Mahabharata. In B. Matilal, ed. Moral Dilemmas in the Mahabharata.
Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, pp. 97-115.
Schofield, M., 2003. Stoic Ethics. In B. Inwood, ed. The Cambridge Companion to the Stoics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 242-243.
Sinnott-Armstrong, W., 2003. Consequentialism. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
[online] (Updated 9 Feb 2006) Available at: <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/
consequentialism/> [Accessed 7 April 2009].
Sukthankar, V.S., 1957. On the Meaning of the Mahabharata. Town Hall: Asiatic Society
of Bombay.
White, M.J., 2003. Stoic Natural Philosophy (Physics and Cosmology). In B. Inwood, ed.
The Cambridge Companion to the Stoics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.
133-34.
Zaehner, R.C., trans., 1969. The Bhagavad-Gita, With a Commentary Based on the Original
Sources. London: Oxford University Press.
50
