

i
Philology and Criticism
ii
CULTURAL, HISTORICAL AND TEXTUAL STUDIES OF
SOUTH ASIAN RELIGIONS
The volumes featured in the Anthem Cultural, Historical and Textual Studies
of South Asian Religions series are the expression of an international community
of scholars committed to the reshaping of the ield of textual and historical
studies of religions. The volumes in this series examine practice, ritual and other
textual religious products, crossing diferent area studies and time frames. Featuring a
vast range of interpretive perspectives, this innovative series aims to enhance the way
we look at religious traditions.
Series Editor
Federico Squarcini, University of Florence, Italy
Editorial Board
Piero Capelli, Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Italy
Vincent Eltschinger, ICIHA, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Austria
Christoph Emmrich, University of Toronto, Canada
James Fitzgerald, Brown University, USA
Jonardon Ganeri, University of Sussex, UK
Barbara A. Holdrege, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA
Sheldon Pollock, Columbia University, USA
Karin Preisendanz, University of Vienna, Austria
Alessandro Saggioro, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
Cristina Scherrer- Schaub, University of Lausanne and EPHE, France
Romila Thapar, Jawaharlal Nehru University, India
Ananya Vajpeyi, University of Massachusetts, Boston, USA
Marco Ventura, University of Siena, Italy
Vincenzo Vergiani, University of Cambridge, UK
iii
Philology and Criticism
A Guide to Mahabharata Textual Criticism
̄ ̄
Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee
iv
Anthem Press
An imprint of Wimbledon Publishing Company
www.anthempress.com
This edition irst published in UK and USA 2018
by ANTHEM PRESS
75–76 Blackfriars Road, London SE1 8HA, UK
or PO Box 9779, London SW19 7ZG, UK
and
244 Madison Ave #116, New York, NY 10016, USA
Copyright © Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee 2018
The author asserts the moral right to be identiied as the author of this work.
All rights reserved. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored or introduced into
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise),
without the prior written permission of both the copyright
owner and the above publisher of this book.
British Library Cataloguing- in- Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN- 13: 978- 1- 78308-576- 7 (Hbk)
ISBN- 10: 1- 78308-576- 2 (Hbk)
This title is also available as an e- book.
v
nārāyan ̣aṃ namaskṛtya naraṃ caiva narottamam |
devīṃ sarasvatīṃ caiva tato jayamudīrayet ||
Dedicated to
Vishnu Sitaram Sukthankar
vi
vii
Philology […] has become the modern form of criticism.
— Michel Foucault, The Order of Things
viii
ix
CONTENTS
List of Illustrations xi
Foreword xv
Preface xvii
Acknowledgments xxi
Prologue xxiii
Chapter Summaries 1
Introduction Ad Fontes, Non Ultra Fontes! 11
About This Book 11
Why a Critical Edition? 11
What Is a Critical Edition? 12
How to Interpret the Critical Edition 17
Conclusion 20
Chapter One Arguments for a Hyperarchetypal Inference 45
The Normative Redaction Hypothesis 45
Normative Redaction, Archetype and Original 46
Criticism: Higher and Lower 49
The Argument from Spread and the Argument from Resilience 54
The Argument from Empty Reference 67
The Argument from Loss 75
Chapter Two Reconstructing the Source of Contamination 119
Understanding “Contamination” 119
Contamination: Hyperarchetypal and Extra- stemmatic 120
Identifying the Source of Contamination 122
The Argument from Uncertainty 126
The Argument from Oral Source 131
The Argument from (Postulated) Antiquity and the Argument from Ideology 140
Chapter Three Confusions Regarding Classiication 163
Classiication: Typological and Genealogical 163
Determining Filiation 164
Eliminating Witnesses 167
x
x PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
The Argument from Brevity and the Argument from False Premises 169
The Argument from a Misapprehension Concerning Classiication
(Schriftartprämisse) 182
The Argument from Extensive Contamination 209
The Argument from Independent Recensions 247
The Argument from Expertise 269
Conclusion: Textual Criticism and Indology 319
Epilogue 339
Appendices 343
1. The Volumes of the Critical Edition 343
2. Editions Besides the Critical Edition 345
3. English Translations of the Mahābhārata 347
4. How to Use the Critical Apparatus 351
5. How Editors Reconstructed the Reading of the Archetype 355
6. How to Cite the Mahābhārata 357
7. The Extent of the Mahābhārata’s Books 359
8. The 18 Parvans and 100 Upaparvans of the Mahābhārata 361
9. The Arrangement of the Parvans in the Southern Recension 367
10. Other Narrative Divisions 379
11. Sukthankar’s Table of the Manuscripts Collated for the Ādiparvan 383
12. Extent of the Ś āradā Codex for the Ādiparvan 385
13. Abbreviations and Diacritical Signs Used in the Critical Edition 387
14. Abbreviated Concordance of the Principal Editions of the Mahābhārata 389
15. Stemmata for the Diferent Parvans of the Mahābhārata 393
16. Commentaries on the Mahābhārata 397
17. Commentaries on the Bhagavadgītā 425
18. The Use of Venn Diagrams to Depict Manuscript Relationships 429
Glossary 481
Annotated Bibliography 493
Index 525
xi
ILLUSTRATIONS
Figures
1 The two options of a philology oriented toward the text and a philology
oriented toward the witness 13
2 The constituted text along with its critical apparatus: understanding what
one is reading 17
3 The part stands in for the whole 23
4 The birth and death of manuscripts 25
5 Textual tree of Ādiparvan versions, illustrating the stemmatic relationships 46
6 The “real” stemma 48
7 Maas’s hypothetical stemma, illustrating the distinction between
hyparchetype, archetype and original 51
8 Flores’s argument from the spread of errors, and Bigger’s normative
redaction hypothesis 58
9 Bigger’s argument from the resilience of tradition 61
10 The stemma as a minimal architecture 64
11 Our abstract stemma 65
12 Making the archetype and the normative redaction coincide 66
13 Bigger’s argument from “empty reference” 72
14 Bigger’s “prehistory of the normative redaction” 122
15 Reconstructing the source of contamination 123
16 Extra- stemmatic contamination into an extant witness 127
17 The consequences of assuming extra- stemmatic contamination 128
18 Extra- stemmatic contamination into a direct descendant of the archetype:
S as an example 128
19 The consequences of assuming extra- stemmatic contamination into S 129
20 S as the original oral epic 129
21 Extra- stemmatic contamination into a direct descendant of the
archetype: N as an example 130
22 The consequences of assuming extra- stemmatic contamination into N 130
23 N as the original oral epic 130
24 The original oral epic as the source of N 133
25 Contamination via an oral source 134
26 Recentiores non deteriores 135
27 Recentiores deteriores 137
xii
xii PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
28 Transmission via an oral source and the inevitability of a written
intermediary 138
29 Von Büren’s stemma of the manuscript tradition of Isidore’s Etymologies 142
30 Hyperarchetypal contamination, extra- stemmatic contamination and the
resilience of tradition 143
31 Eliminatio 168
32 Grünendahl reproduces Sukthankar’s stemma 184
33 Sukthankar’s list of manuscripts forming the critical apparatus 187
34 Sukthankar’s stemma reversed 180 degrees around a central axis 191
35 Reversed stemma with the subrecensions in turn reversed around a central
axis 192
36 Lüders’s list of the manuscripts collated for his sample critical edition 194
37 Treating each manuscript as an independent witness 196
38 Groups versus individual witnesses 198
39 Mapping the relationship of manuscripts within a group to each other 199
40 The evolution of northern Brāhmī 207
41 The evolution of southern Brāhmī 207
42 Agreement between independent versions 211
43 Stemma lectionum of verse 1.29.5 212
44 Alternative stemma lectionum of verse 1.29.5 212
45 Contamination, undermining the assumption of independence 213
46 Contamination, the real nature of the relationships in our stemma 214
47 Contamination from and into the central subrecension 215
48 The interpolated passage 321* 216
49 D as the source of the interpolated passage 321* 217
50 γ as the source of the interpolated passage 321* 218
51 (Non)contamination of Ñ4 and D2.5 with K 220
52 Constituting groups on the basis of additional passages missing from
manuscripts 222
53 Identifying a core K group on the basis of missing additional passages 223
54 Using the absence of interpolations to reine the classiication of
manuscripts 225
55 The descent of S in Grünendahl’s classiication 227
56 The true position of S in Grünendahl’s classiication 228
57 The order of interpolations 229
58 Unrelated manuscripts on the same stemma 231
59 The expansion of the text according to Grünendahl 232
60 Open and closed branches of the tradition 233
61 Brushing aside the dead ends 234
62 Hypothetical stemma with K as the archetype 237
63 Understanding Grünendahl’s model for reconstructing archetypes 239
64 Stemma lectionum of verses 1.1.1A and 1.1.2 240
xiii
ILLUSTRATIONS xiii
65 The expansion of the text according to Grünendahl 244
66 Abolishing the distinction between group and version 245
67 The fragmentation of the K group into K1 and K0.2– 6 according to
Grünendahl 246
68 Collapsing Ś1 and K1 into a single version 247
69 Grünendahl explains “contamination” 256
70 Reconstructing the reading of 1.1.1A 356
71 P. P. S. Sastri’s scheme of adhyāyas from his critical edition of the
southern recension 371
72 P. P. S. Sastri’s scheme of ślokas from his critical edition of the southern
recension 372
73– 77 Parvan divisions and śloka counts of the Kumbhakonam recension 373
78 A. C. Burnell’s stemma 393
79 V. S. Sukthankar’s “Pedigree of Ādiparvan versions” 394
80 V. S. Sukthankar’s stemma of the Āraṇyakaparvan manuscripts 394
81 R. Vira’s stemma of the Virāṭaparvan manuscripts 395
82 S. K. De’s stemma of the Udyogaparvan manuscripts 395
83 P. L. Vaidya’s stemma of the Harivamṣ ́ā manuscripts 396
84 Brockington’s “Venn diagram” 436
85 A “Venn diagram” depicting sets whose members are individual
manuscripts 439
86 The corrected “Venn diagram” 440
87 A “Venn diagram” of sets that contain manuscripts of the S and NE
groups 441
88 A “Venn diagram” of sets containing manuscripts of the S and
NE groups 442
89 A modiied version of Brockington’s original “Venn diagram” 442
90 The corrected “Venn diagram” 443
91 Expressing relations between two orders of sets 444
92 The source of the error 446
93 Mapping interpolations using a “Venn diagram” 447
Tables
1 Grünendahl’s list of interpolations in the northern recension 170
2 How Grünendahl imagines the process of constitution 174
3 Grünendahl’s table of the distribution of interpolations in the
northern recension 177
4 Grünendahl’s error in constituting the text 179
5 The text as the true basis of classiication 205
6 K contamination and the fragmentation of the Mahābhārata tradition 238
7 How Grünendahl imagines the classiication of manuscripts 250
8 Grünendahl establishes “iliation” 252
xvi
xiv PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
9 Grünendahl establishes that K3 is not contaminated with the passages with
which it is not contaminated (hence, the editor has failed to establish the
contamination of K3) 254
10 Grünendahl demonstrates that ν and S cannot be against γ (for at least one
γ manuscript always agrees with them) 261
11 Sukthankar considers the agreement of the versions 265
xv
FOREWORD
Philology and Criticism is the irst book of its kind. Incisive in its analysis, this book undertakes
a rigorous defense of the Mahābhārata critical edition. Following a prologue and an
introduction, this book is divided into three chapters. Each chapter states a problem and
discusses key concepts and principles in textual criticism pertaining to it. Thereafter, the
authors guide the reader through a history of responses to the problem. Each response
is posed as an argument (via citing the critic who raised it). The authors address each
argument individually in a separate section. In each section, they consider whether the
argument can be defended from some perspective. Once they establish that the argument
is untenable, they state their conclusion. In this way, they systematically work through
contemporary criticisms of the critical edition, focusing primarily on Andreas Bigger’s
and Reinhold Grünendahl’s work.
The irst chapter addresses the view that the constituted text of the critical edition
reconstructs merely a late stage of the transmission. Although several scholars advocate
this thesis (James L. Fitzgerald, for instance, thinks the critical edition reconstructs a
“Gupta- era archetype,” which he elsewhere calls a “written Sanskrit text” of the epic),
the authors focus on the thesis’s author: Andreas Bigger. Bigger holds that the critical
edition merely reconstructs a text he calls the “normative redaction” of the Mahābhārata,
supposedly the result of “a uniform redaction” of the epic undertaken during its irst
transcription from a luid oral tradition. Adluri and Bagchee demonstrate the circularity
of this claim. The second chapter addresses the underlying assumption of Bigger’s work,
though it also broadens the scope to include other Mahābhārata critics. The authors
show that Bigger’s thesis appears plausible only because scholars assume an oral epic pre-
ceded the written Sanskrit Mahābhārata. The authors demonstrate that their arguments
are not stemmatic and hence do not hold. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the
so- called analytic approach to the epic. The authors argue that this approach is pre-
mised on an uncritical view of Indian history, whose origins they outlined in their book
The Nay Science: A History of German Indology. The third chapter, the longest in this book,
addresses a perplexing problem: How were the Mahābhārata manuscripts classiied?
Were they classiied by script as Grünendahl argues? The authors convincingly demon-
strate that they were not. As they show, script cannot play a role in classiication for it is
an external marker. This chapter also addresses Grünendahl’s claim that extensive con-
tamination makes a critical edition of the Mahābhārata unachievable as well as his claim
that focusing on a regional recension would have led to a better edition. The conclusion
provides a summation not only of this book but also of the authors’ irst book. It presents
a serious challenge to contemporary Sanskrit philology inasmuch as it relies on opinion
rather than argument.
xvi
xvi PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
While I disagree with the authors in some respects (most notably on the southern
recension’s place in the Mahābhārata tradition), Philology and Criticism will stimulate
debate. It poses a major challenge to scholars who have made unguarded statements
about the Mahābhārata’s origins in an oral tradition. As I have argued since 2001
(Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education of the Dharma King), the notion of
an oral epic is a myth. The Mahābhārata is clearly a written text. In all likelihood, a small
group of Brahmans created it. T. P. Mahadevan identiies these Brahmans with the his-
torical Pūrvaśikha Brahmans. In spite of the text’s expansion and changes, no evidence
exists that it was ever transmitted orally. Philology and Criticism conclusively vindicates this
view. As I demonstrated in my review of Fitzgerald’s translation of Books 11 and 12 of
the Mahābhārata (in the Journal of the American Oriental Society), those who resurrect the
oral hypothesis do so for ideological reasons rather than because persuasive historical
evidence exists. Relying on nineteenth- century views of the epic (whose assumptions
Adluri and Bagchee criticized in their irst book), they overlook the fact that the archetype
presupposes a written transmission. Adluri and Bagchee have staked their position, and
scholars in the future will have to account for their view in some way.
I hardly need add that Philology and Criticism is essential reading for Mahābhārata
scholars. This book signiicantly advances our knowledge of the critical edition. It is
an essential reference work— not least because of its appendices, which enable scholars
to consult details of the edition without carrying around all 19 volumes of the edition.
Philology and Criticism also addresses a major lacuna in Mahābhārata studies today. It is the
irst work to explain what the Mahābhārata critical edition is, how it was created, what
its merits are and why criticisms of the edition are frequently based on insuicient knowl-
edge of the principles involved. Though aimed at an advanced audience, the analysis
is clear and systematic, and the arguments can be followed by anyone who takes the
time and trouble (and perhaps uses paper and a pencil). In that sense it is not a diicult
book to read, though its scope is breathtaking. Few today in Mahābhārata studies have
such a thorough grasp of the critical edition or are as qualiied to speak to the issues of
textuality, orality, the manuscript tradition, what can be reconstructed and what can be
shown with philological methods. In my assessment, the authors present a cogent inter-
pretation of the critical edition. Their clariication of its overarching project is brilliant
and makes a lasting contribution to the ield.
Alf Hiltebeitel
Washington, DC
xvii
PREFACE
This book is a guidebook. That means it is intended for use.1 The reader must make
use of the tools presented herein to test for herself the validity and rigor of the arguments
of contemporary Mahābhārata scholars. This is all the more necessary as hardly a ield
of scholarship existing today is as rife with competing and contradictory theories as con-
temporary Mahābhārata studies. This book does not claim to be a comprehensive guide
to textual criticism (for that the reader will have to read one of the classic manuals on the
subject such as M. L. West’s Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique or Giorgio Pasquali’s
Storia della tradizione e critica del testo),2 but it does claim to bring to Mahābhārata criticism
the sort of reason, precision, clarity of thought and beauty that is a hallmark of textual
criticism in other ields. Regrettably, Mahābhārata studies has long been a stronghold of
neo- Aryanist ideology, anti- Semitism and Romantic fantasy. Thus, this book has had to
be equal parts guidebook and polemical essay. As such, it owes as much to the tradition
of Nietzsche as to that of West. There is no doubt in our minds that the great editors
of classical and medieval texts made enduring contributions to the study of texts and,
in particular, to the canons of method that enable us to expunge centuries of error and
dross and come closer to the authors’ original texts. There is also no doubt in our minds
that these techniques are also applicable (with the necessary riders and adjustments) to
the study of Indian texts. As Pasquali wrote (and Paolo Trovato now airms), “I, at least,
cannot imagine that the original, say, of a Chinese or Bantu text could be constructed
from copies or any other testimony, in sum, from its tradition, otherwise than on the basis
of Maas’s considerations and the rules he laid down.”3 In fact, there is an entire tradition
of Indian editors (not only V. S. Sukthankar, to whom this book is dedicated, but also
S. K. Belvalkar, P. L. Vaidya and others4) who could rightfully take their place alongside
the great editors in the classics. But (and we are no less convinced of this than of the appli-
cability of textual criticism to the Mahābhārata) textual criticism cannot and may not be
used to promote ideological agendas. Andreas Bigger writes, “That I make the critical
edition of the Mahābhārata the foundation of my work does not mean that I approve
of the text constituted by the editors in all respects. [Reinhold] Grünendahl and others
have demonstrated that in the domain of lower criticism of the Mahābhārata the inal
word is yet to be spoken. The results of this criticism of the ‘irst critical edition’—f or one
may not forget that Sukthankar quite consciously referred to it as such—w ill low into
this work [Bigger means his book] and, where the evidence forces itself upon us, will be
expanded upon.”5 The reader will frequently encounter such statements in the work of
Mahābhārata authors quoted in this book. She will ind examples of circular reasoning,
conclusions that do not follow from their premises, arguments ad baculum and appeals to
xviii
xviii PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
inappropriate authority. And she will ind that the only two constants among these theses,
theories and dogmatic positions are that Indians are not capable of reading their texts
critically and that priests are corrupt and mendacious.6 This failure to engage with the
theory of textual criticism has extracted a heavy price. It has meant that Mahābhārata
scholars have not kept abreast of recent developments in textual criticism, whether in
the areas of hermeneutics, literary criticism, structuralism, post-L achmannian theories
of critical editing or the study of variantistica—i n short, that entire ield that is today
denoted by the term “ecdotics” and encompasses the study of textual cultures in the
widest sense.7 It has meant that scholarship on the epic, even considered as arising out of
and responding to the documentary impulse,8 has failed to contribute in any meaningful
way to a history of the text. Against this intellectually stunted and resentment-d riven
science, Sukthankar’s genius stands out all the brighter.
Notes
1 Technical terms, especially on their irst occurrence, are placed in italics to draw the reader’s
attention to the relevant glossary entry. An earlier glossary may be found in S. M. Katre,
Introduction to Indian Textual Criticism. With Appendix II by P. K. Gode, Deccan College Handbook
Series 5 (Pune: Deccan College, 1954), 90–9 9 (“A Glossary of Some Important Terms Used in
Textual Criticism”). Sanskrit equivalents may be found in Venkatesh Laxman Joshi, ed., Prauḍha
Manoramā with Commentary Śabdaratna, Deccan College Monograph Series 31 (Poona: Deccan
College, 1966), 331– 52.
2 See the bibliography for further works on the subject; any of the many works on textual criti-
cism listed in this book may be read with great proit. Paolo Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted
to Know about Lachmann’s Method: A Non- Standard Handbook of Genealogical Textual Criticism in the Age
of Post- Structuralism, Cladistics, and Copy- Text (Padua: Libreriauniversitaria, 2014) supersedes the
earlier manuals and is now the deinitive resource.
3 Paul Maas, Critica del testo, trans. Nello Martinelli (Florence: Le Monnier, 1972), v, cited and
translated in Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 74. Trovato’s
comment can be found in the preface to his book (ibid., 21).
4 See Appendix 1 of this volume for a complete list of editors involved in the critical edition pro-
ject and also of the volumes and their dates of publication.
5 Andreas Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata: Seine Darstellung im Rahmen des Textes und seiner Entwicklung
(Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1998), 15. All translations from German sources are ours.
6 For a discussion of the racial, anti-S emitic and anticlerical resentments that drove this scholar-
ship, see our The Nay Science: A History of German Indology (New York: Oxford University Press,
2014). See especially chapters 2 and 4.
7 The somewhat recherché term “ecdotics” will perhaps be unfamiliar to English-s peaking readers,
but it has been a widespread synonym for textual criticism in Romance languages since Dom
Henri Quentin introduced it in his Essais de critique textuelle (Ecdotique) (Paris: Ricard, 1926). For a
discussion of the term’s use in Italian textual criticism, see Paola Pugliatti, “Textual Perspectives
in Italy: From Pasquali’s Historicism to the Challenge of ‘Variantistica’ (and Beyond),” Text 11
(1998): 164– 69. Of course, here we are interested in the term not as a synonym for textual
criticism but in its wider sense, where it has come to mean any study that is not limited “to the
ways and methods of the traditional critical edition,” but “include[s] all the elements which
mark the entire movement of a text from the author to the readers (or users), provided that
these elements are viewed from a perspective of editions, ancient or modern, destined for study
and for a typographic, digital reading, or under the aspect of whatever third possibility.” This is
xxi
PREFACE xix
how the term is deined, for example, in the Foreword of the journal Ecdotica (http:// ecdotica.
org/ index.php?option=com_ content&task=view&id=16&Itemid=42).
8 Sheehan expresses the principle best: “The idea of the textual unconscious was key to the
documentary impulse. By divorcing the physical features of the manuscript from its literary
content, and by using these physical features to historicize the manuscript, both Mabillon and
Montfaucon successfully removed the question of literary content from the domain of serious
scholarship. In a sense, they operated within that wider shift from ‘gentlemanly humanism’
to a ‘professionalized philology’ that we have already seen in the English letters in the early
part of the eighteenth century. For those on the modern side of the querelles des anciens et des
modernes, like the Maurist brothers, scholarship should not be distracted by the idle pleasures
of aesthetic judgment. Nor should it be moved by the particular arguments made in the texts
it analyzed. Rather, it should invent nonliterary techniques (of which paleography was one)
for evaluating documents.” Jonathan Sheehan, The Enlightenment Bible: Translation, Scholarship,
Culture (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005), 102. In the ield of classical and
medieval textual editing, the documentary impulse may have led to signiicant insights. In the
ield of Mahābhārata studies, however, beyond the superb work done by the editors in the
Mahābhārata critical edition, the documentary impulse has at most been cited as justiication
for not reading the text. It has not led to any meaningful consideration of the physical aspects
of the text or the tradition.
xx
xxi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We owe, irst and foremost, an enormous debt of gratitude to our families for their
patience, love and encouragement. We fondly remember Suguna and Indrasena Adluri
and Sumati Bhandarkar, who would have loved to read this book. We were fortunate
to have many sources for advice for this book. We would like to recognize them here:
Michael D. Reeve for reading an early draft; Paolo Trovato for his enthusiastic cham-
pionship of our work and his invitation to teach in the summer school on textual criti-
cism at the University of Ferrara; Patrick Olivelle for encouraging us to write this book
and recommending it to the publisher; Paola Pugliatti for being an invaluable resource
on developments in Italian textual criticism; John Lenz for conversations on Nietzsche
and philology; Alf Hiltebeitel for his scholarship and for writing the foreword; Bruce
M. Sullivan for stimulating discussions about the Mahābhārata; Madhavi Kolhatkar for
her profound knowledge of the Vedic tradition; Aruna Bagchee, Edward P. Butler, Matt
Newman and Paolo Alberto Celentano for their assistance with translations; and fac-
ulty at the Sanskrit Department at Pune University for inviting us to lecture and share
our research. The section on the development of Indian scripts is indebted to Saraju
Rath at IIAS, Leiden. Jahnavi Bidnur graciously shared her work on the Mahābhārata
commentators. We also thank all participants of the textual criticism workshop at the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. We could not have asked for better
students. To our friends and well-wishers Srinivas and Anu Udumudi, Hari Kiran and
Padmaja Vadlamani, Aditi Banerjee, Edward P. Butler, Arbogast Schmitt, John Lenz,
Peter K. J. Park, Brooks Schramm, Kirsi I. Stjerna, Alice Crary, Robert Yelle, Graham
M. Schweig, Susan Ginsburg and Thomas Komarek: thank you, your interest keeps us
writing. Omar Dahbour’s support was vital to continuing this work during a critical tran-
sition. Thank you to Ami Naramor, Vincent Rajan, and the entire production team at
Anthem for producing such a stunning book. Vishwa thanks Swami Prabuddhananda
Sarasvati for rigorously instructing him in the traditions of Mīmāṃsa and Vedānta for
over two decades. Through him, the philosophical, logical and text-commentarial tra-
dition of Ādi Śaṅkarācārya and his successors in the Sringeri Sharada Peetham and
Kailash Ashrama became accessible. Finally, this book, which was written over a 10-year
period with neither public research grants nor university funding, could not have been
completed without Joachim Eichner’s steadfast inancial support. Kalyan Viswanathan,
Krishnan and Indu Ramaswamy and Deepanshu and Silvana Bagchee have been stal-
wart friends and contributors. Open Access publication was enabled by the Sanatana
Dharma Foundation’s ASHEERVADA initiative. Last but not least, Ushakant and Irma
Thakkar—your philanthropy, your public service, and your respect for the humanities
are an unfailing source of inspiration for us.
xxii
Sukthankar’s irst (?) attempt at drawing up a stemma codicum of the Ādiparvan versions,
dated September 24, 1925.
Source: Reproduced from Katre, “Vishnu Sitaram Sukthankar and His Contribution to Indology,” 485.
xxiii
PROLOGUE
saṃ gacchadhvaṃ saṃ vadadhvaṃ saṃ vo manāṃsi jānatām | devā bhāgaṃ yathā pūrve saṃjānānā upāsate ||
— Ṛg Veda 1.191.2
Czech artist František Kupka (1871–1 957)1 painted Le Premier Pas or The First Step,
reproduced on the cover of this book.2 The painting on the cover and this essay accom-
panying it provide a useful avenue for understanding certain concepts: origins and
archetypes, singularity and plurality, emanation and transmission and the parallelism
of cosmology and art. These themes are essential to understanding the conceptually
diicult task V. S. Sukthankar set for himself when he created the design for the critical
edition of the Mahābhārata. Therefore, before we look at the technicalities of a critical
edition, we wish to irst explore the logic and artistry of creating stemmata through a
related medium: abstract art.3
The choice of abstract art to illustrate the concept of a critical edition may seem
strange at irst, yet it is also obvious when one considers that, like abstract art, stem-
mata are idealized representations of relationships that have no basis in matter.4 Hence,
when we approach stemmatics from the perspective of abstract art, we gain a new per-
spective on textual criticism— one that goes beyond the standard presentations of this
ield.5 The movement known as “abstractionism” itself originated in the early part of
the twentieth century in response to a speciic concern: artists wished to free themselves
from the constraints of having to represent something.6 Abstract art and stemmatics thus
both respond to a similar problem: the igurative representation of abstract relations
that nonetheless permit us to intuit certain features of reality–– features that possibly go
beyond what we can intuit with our senses.7
By collating various manuscripts, identifying the textual coherences and harmonies,
arranging them according to the logic of emanation and carefully distinguishing the
original from the archetype, Sukthankar created an intellectual organization that does
justice to the complicated architecture and reception of the Sanskrit epic. His work it-
tingly transcends the crude mechanical models created by the Indologists whose work we
analyze in this book.8 Trained as a mathematician, with a keen appreciation for the subtle
nuances of ideas contained in the text, Sukthankar culled the many extant manuscripts
into a single pyramidal architecture.9 Scientists who appreciate genetic relationships, as
well as artists who understand how plural elements can be meaningfully organized, will
no doubt appreciate his creation.10
Both Sukthankar and Kupka wanted to move beyond the fetishism of facts to an
engagement with truth. If Sukthankar mathematically, philosophically and aesthetically
xvxi
xxiv PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
transcended philology while doing it full justice, Kupka did something similar with art.
He wished to transcend the formal and material dimensions of painting by making it
self- consciously intellectual, mathematical and spiritual.11 In 1892, Kupka moved from
Prague to the Vienna Academy, where he “rea[d] avidly: particularly Greek and German
philosophers: Plato, Aristotle, Paracelsus, Kant, Schopenhauer, Nietzsche and German
romantics. Also he rea[d] extensively on astronomy, astrology, Theosophy.”12 Whatever
the contemporary evaluation of theosophy as a discipline, it was an early protestation
against the gross materialism and hemorrhage of meaning inaugurated by modernity.13
Artists rather than philosophers and social scientists reacted immediately to these trends—
Kupka foremost among them.14 As with Sukthankar, no opposition appears between the
spiritual and the scientiic in Kupka—a distinction that itself has its root in the obsessive
dichotomy between faith and reason endemic to Christianity.15 Margit Rowell notes:
Kupka’s most fundamental premises— that nature had a spiritual reality determined by
inal causes, that the hidden laws of this reality are present in all of nature’s manifestations
including man and the artist’s function is to make visible these laws, not by copying nature
but by creating a parallel order— spring from Goethe’s aesthetic. […] Through a better
understanding of natural causes, rhythms, structures and progressions, he hoped to develop
a parallel vision, order and language. His interest in physiology, biology and astronomy
therefore had its roots in mystical thought. By extension, he paid acute attention to his own
sense impressions and evoked coenesthesis as a form of access to higher knowledge. Through
a close observation of his own body’s rhythms, reactions to stimuli, sense perceptions, emo-
tional responses, he attempted to develop a sixth sense, an extrasensory receptivity which he
believed led to a state of superconsciousness.16
These methods and intellectual eforts led Kupka to describe the artist’s relationship to
inner visions as follows— a description that provides a model for visualizing not only the
intra- textual setup of the Sanskrit epic as containing additional temporal dimensions
clariied by avataran ̣a or descent but also the pan-I ndic relationships that Sukthankar
explored in the manuscript tradition:
In our inner visions, the diferent fragments which loat in our heads are incoherently situated
in space. Even in remembered so- called representative images of organic complexes, they are
so strangely situated that the painter […] who would wish to project them would have to go
even beyond the fourth dimension. Some parts penetrate each other; others seem completely
detached, disconnected from the organism to which they are supposed to belong. The same is
true of purely subjective visions where often only fragments, plexuses of forms, or colors are
given. Before we can seize them and set them down, we must draw lines between them and
establish a structural coherence.17
Kupka thus saw in the cosmic rhythms and repetitions a truth that the artist experienced
in his visions, and it was the artist’s task to go beyond representing the objects given to
the senses and rather depict the intellectual perception of the connections between the
fragmentarily given sense data. Concomitant with this purely intellectual approach was
a spiritual orientation, which included self-c ultivation and a refusal to accept the crude
empiricism of modernity.
xxv
PROLOGUE xxv
The creative solution Kupka adopted is not too diferent from the poetic solutions
found in the epic. The frame narratives and the descent of the characters in the
Mahābhārata represent a self- conscious repetition that organizes itself by organizing
space: descent of gods and titans, or repetition in vertical space, which in turn organizes
the ield of action (the battleield), the ield of transmutation (sacriice) and the ield of
recognition (the forest). By extension, it is these repetitions and rhythms that guide the
expansion and proliferation of the manuscripts, not mechanical and extrinsic “contamina-
tion.” Every interpolation thus clariies the text by providing a new chromatic variation,
and Sukthankar’s task can be seen as one of cataloguing and arranging the cosmos of
manuscripts in the overall intellectual composition of his enterprise. Kupka, on his part,
was aware of this intellectual- spiritual- artistic conceptual constellation. It was the spiri-
tual worldview of many artists of his day. Maurice Tuchman summarizes this worldview
as follows:
The universe is a single, living substance; mind and matter also are one; all things evolve in
dialectical opposition, thus the universe comprises paired opposites (male–f emale, light– dark,
vertical– horizontal, positive–n egative); everything corresponds in a universal analogy, with
things above as they are below; imagination is real; and self- realization can come by illumina-
tion, accident, or an induced state; the epiphany is suggested by heat, ire or light.18
It is hard to remember that Tuchman is speaking of the early abstraction movement
in art, not about the Mahābhārata. It is even harder to believe that in the annals of
Mahābhārata scholarship, not one scholar understands its creative elements so
succinctly.19 The artist, it seems, is the very teacher of the epic.
These insights ind their inest expression in The First Step, a painting Kupka executed
during 1909– 13.20 The painting contains a luminous black background, which evokes a
pregnant darkness full of potential, and not merely a blackness of absence. The orga-
nization of the various circles creates a map of space and dimensionality within the
background, and thus demonstrates that the background is not non-b eing. The painting
itself is a harmonious variation of a single form—t he circle—e choed in its appearance
or disappearance (in red), its concrete manifestation and endurance (blue and white)
and inally its repetition and multiplication (a circumference composed of blue and red
circles). The three processes of evocation, manifestation and multiplication create a com-
plex sense of movement. Kupka was experimenting with motion at the time he painted
The First Step, as were the Futurists. But the movement Kupka depicts is not mere physical
movement, but a complex one of pulsations in existence. Its cosmological meaning was
not lost on later commentators. Roger Lipsey comments on his Disks of Newton, a series
of works to which The First Step was a prelude:
Kupka’s transformation of color theory diagrams into a rotating, complex, genuinely spir-
ited evocation of cosmos and light represents the high point of what might be called the
naïve phase of his work, a phase of mobile search without the hardening that often occurs
when answers are attained or, on the contrary, doubt gains the upper hand. The image moves
freely and glows, conveying sensations of ease and pleasure. It is, as much as any painting, an
Orphic work of strong poetic appeal; sunny and conident, pitched to the scale of the cosmos
xxvi
xxvi PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
and approachable. Kupka intersects here and is generally thought to precede Delaunay. Their
paintings projecting the humble color wheel out into the cosmos constitute, to my mind, an
undeniable manifestation of the spiritual in art. Perhaps neither closely reasoned nor metaphys-
ically elaborate, they are nonetheless a celebration of cosmos that can leave few untouched.21
Besides the cosmological and spiritual meanings of the painting, Kupka endowed it with
a critical evaluation of art. Kupka himself spoke of “a realm of rhythms and signs” to
shed light on his art:
We have to try […] to separate two incompatible elements, that is to say, the imitative work
which today is superluous, from art itself. This is a realm of rhythms and signs too abstract
to be captured easily and which form the leitmotif of all compositions, the basic arabesque, a
kind of framework which the painters […] as of old ill with a vocabulary of forms taken from
nature. If we sacriiced the intruding element we would of course have to face the danger of
talking in an unusual language. Yet there is a kind of pictorial geometry of thought, the only
possible one, which forces the painter to lie less. And that is what I am trying to achieve.22
Kupka’s painting thus illustrates not only a skill, or allegiance to a movement, or
incremental innovation (invenzione) or design (disegno). Art can embody thinking, and
precisely the kind of thinking that— while relected in a historical object— transcends
history. In Kupka’s painting, art likewise transcends the universe and its coming-
into- being and passing away. It does not abolish, but preserves the manifestation and
repetitions of the universe. Each of the blue and red “instantiations” of the one con-
cept, the circle, is diferent. These diferences are preserved, and yet their perfect
procession and repetition and also their interaction (see the green ghostly circles) add
to an overall sense of continuity in the cosmic order of the circle. The clariication of
these existential movements, and the constant presence of a singular reality (here the
circle) in the manifold “lies less” than the representation of a single concrete object.
The painting discloses a profound truth: the truth of mimesis, the “lesser lie” that the
truer existence is never what something is historically, but always a play of paradigms
that transcend it.23
The reason for using this image by Kupka as the cover of a book on the study of
Mahābhārata manuscripts is simple: the Mahābhārata is a literary creation; it is art.
In its materiality, it is of course created within history, but in its intellectual efort it
transcends it. Both the painting and epic exploit the contextualization of the macrocosm
with the microcosm to break free from the “literalism” of both. The First Step and the
Mahābhārata are essentially “cosmological” works. Tuchman notes that The First Step is
“a painting whose imagery is rooted in astrology and pure abstraction. The painting may
be interpreted as a diagram of the heavens and as a nonrepresentational, antidirectional
image referring to ininity and evoking a belief that one’s inner world is truly linked to
the cosmos.”24 Like Kupka’s work, the epic is a cosmological work executed as a series of
echoes: the intra- textual author Vyāsa’s conceptualization of the epic on the slopes of the
axis mundi, Mount Meru; his teaching it to his students in an academic setting; one student’s
(Vaiśaṃpāyana’s) repetition at the horriic scene of the sacriicial immolation of snakes; and
the bard Ugraśravas’s (literally, the “he of the awesome voice”) recounting of the narrative
xxvii
PROLOGUE xxvii
in the sylvan and peaceful assemblage of sages in the Naimiṣa Forest. The text itself
presents these repetitions. Of another order are the repetitions of vignettes and motifs
and messages in the various sectarian bibles: the Purāṇas. A. K. Ramanujan ofers the
best statement of the mimetic self-c onsciousness and the inbuilt mechanisms for trans-
mission of the epic.25 Kupka helps us visualize Ramanujan’s insight, one that states that
repetition and modulation of repeating elements is itself the structure of the epic:
I’d suggest that the central structuring principle of the epic is a certain kind of repetition.
One might say that repetition or replication is the central principle of any structuring. What
occurs only once does not allow us to talk of structure. Einmal ist keinmal— it’s as if what
happens once does not happen at all. Students of narrative like Propp, Levi- Strauss, Dumezil,
and J. Hillis Miller have made this idea a commonplace. Indian artworks, like the Hindu
temple, or the decads (pattu) of Tamil classical or bhakti poetry, of the rāgas of Karnatak
music, are built on the principle of interacting structures of repetition and elaboration and
variation. Not only are there repetitive phrases, similes, and formulaic descriptions that the
students of oral poetics (Parry, Lord, et al.) have taught us to recognize, but incidents, scenes,
settings, and especially relationships are repeated.26
Kupka’s art self-c onsciously creates by using repeating patterns. For instance, in 1921 he
painted the Hindu Motif, consisting of repetitions and modulations, abstractly recreating
the architectural logic of the Hindu temple.27 This work paradigmatically illustrates his
interest in Indian thought as well as his ability to recognize the repeating, abstract and
symbolic qualities of Indian art. So much for the “external,” that is, formal aspects of
mimesis as concerns the text. “Internally,” that is, with regard to the narrative and content,
the mimetic nature assumes cosmological attributes. The text is presented as if it is a “his-
tory” but the universe presented in this “history” is itself a mimetic object. The author
enters the text and procreates the characters. Besides this literary duplication, there is a
cosmological one: all the characters in the world described in the epic are “descended”
from certain prototypes: gods and titans.
The idea of mimesis plays a crucial and enduring role in the Mahābhārata and in the
Indian textual tradition. Brahmā, the creator god, always creates the universe according
to a paradigm, symbolically “given” to him by the One Being, called Nārāyaṇa in the
epic. The universe is always an artefact, created and recreated, endlessly in cycles.
Coming- to- be and passing away is the ultimate indicator of the mimetic nature of our
perceived and lived reality. And the epic is careful to present this repetitive cycle, rather
than a naïve linear history: one that takes luxing time as a permanent framework. It is
precisely by overcoming history that the epic “lies less.” Likewise, ideas of rebirth, lack of
ultimacy of phenomenal reality and the soteriological presence of Being are ubiquitous
elements with which all Indian philosophical systems grapple.
Lurking behind the issue of any witness text of the epic are the usual problems ger-
mane to all ancient texts, for example the Nibelungenlied from the German tradition or
Euripides’s Iphigenia in Aulis in the Greek. These include textual variations and insertions
and emendations, bequeathing to philology the task of coping with multiplicity in the
textual tradition. But the Mahābhārata seems to anticipate and absorb these issues into
its very composition. The question of a “lost” original is trumped not only by the various
xxivii
xxviii PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
“versions” narrated within the text, but more seriously, any historical event is also divested of
originality (the characters of gods and titans are merely enacting roles). In fact, the universe
itself is a mimetic process, hardly a static object. Originality does not belong in the universe;
it remains a feature of “unfallen” Being (Brahman). To seek either an original event (his-
tory) or an original narrative (text) violates the epic’s understanding of itself. Those who
seek an “original” Mahābhārata (as opposed to the original of any other text) are not like
the blind men who variously represent the elephant as a snake or a pillar or a wall with
respect to its various parts. They are the fools searching for a barren woman’s son.
Sukthankar therefore carefully distinguished “older” from more developed forms of
the texts, and discovered not an “original” but an archetype. The “archetype” in Kupka’s
painting is not any particular circle but the concept circle, which is essentially abstract,
and which “lies less.” The plural depictions of circles and their variations are essen-
tial to the recognition of the concept. Similarly, the plural witness texts are “recogniz-
ably” the Mahābhārata with respect to the archetype recovered in its critical edition.
Sukthankar’s “critical” project negotiates between a method that prefers a fetish original
to an actual text and the text’s obsessive disavowal of the category “original” in its lit-
erary and its philosophical vision. Any great philologist can recover a most “ancient”
text, but Sukthankar’s stemmatic arrangement of a plurality of texts as an astrolabe is
the work of a philosophical and artistic genius.28 The critical edition does not replace
the witness texts; it makes us more conident in appreciating them, and seeing them as
singular/ plural.29
Unfortunately, few have seen these abstract yet “less untrue” dimensions of the
Mahābhārata critical edition project. This is not surprising. Mahābhārata scholarship
has been ravaged by the crudest sort of butchers, untrained in philosophy and aesthetics
and lacking the minimal sentience required to distinguish history from iction. Therefore
the need for this book, which serves to remind scholars of the brilliance and rigor of the
critical edition scholars’ work, and which hopes to teach the scholars of the future to
appreciate the critical edition as a creative project of great subtlety, abstraction and truth
that guides the thinker in the textual universe of the itihāsa purān ̣a.
Notes
1 Kupka, a pioneer of abstraction in art along with Piet Mondrian, Vasily Kandinsky and
Kazimir Malevich, is less well known today than his peers. Yet he was one of the most impor-
tant igures for the development of the movement known as “abstractionism.” See Ludmila
Vachtová, Frank Kupka, Pioneer of Abstract Art, trans. Zdeneǩ Lederer, with an introduction by
J. P. Hodin (New York: McGraw-H ill, 1968) and William R. Everdell, The First Moderns: Proiles
in the Origins of Twentieth- Century Thought (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press,
1997). Kupka was also an inluential theoretician of twentieth- century art, expressing his views
widely in articles and magazine interviews. Leighten considers his main work, La Création dans les
arts plastiques (1912), “the central text of anarchist aesthetics in the modernist period.” Patricia
Leighten, The Liberation of Painting: Modernism and Anarchism in Avant- Guerre Paris (Chicago and
London: University of Chicago, 2013), 15. Many of Kupka’s other writings can be found in
the one- volume complete edition of untitled articles written between 1932 and 1936 for the
journal Abstraction, création, art non-i guratif (Paris): František Kupka, Abstraction, création, art non-
iguratif, 1932– 36 (New York: Arno Press, 1968). See also Pierre Brullé and Marketa Theinhardt,
xxxi
PROLOGUE xxix
“Painting Despite Everything: František Kupka on Creation in the Plastic Arts,” in Painting the
Universe: František Kupka, Pioneer in Abstraction, ed. Dorothy Kosinski and Jaroslav Andeľ (Ostildern-
Ruit, Germany: Verlag Gerd Hatje, 1997), 151– 77 for a discussion.
2 Margit Rowell, ed., František Kupka 1871–1 957: A Retrospective (New York: Solomon
R. Guggenheim Foundation, 1975). This is the catalog for the exhibition Margit Rowell
curated, for which Meda Mládek served as the consultant. Containing articles on the painter,
his context and his contribution and a discussion of the formal and metaphysical aspects of his
work, this volume remains the best resource on Kupka available in English.
3 A stemma (plural: stemmata) is a visual representation of genealogical relationships that takes
the form of lines drawn between manuscripts and subfamilies of a work. It is also known as a
textual tree or a genealogical tree and usually represents the descent of manuscript copies or
apographs from their sources though it may also be used to diagram other sorts of relationships
(for example, contamination between two manuscripts).
4 That is to say, the relationships themselves (for example, that a scribe A copied a manuscript
a from source b) do not have any basis in matter; not that the relationships do not exist or that
there is no material basis (manuscripts, etc.) for positing these relationships.
5 See, for instance, Otto Stählin, Editionstechnik, Completely Revised Second Edition (Leipzig: B.
G. Teubner, 1914); Louis Havet, Manuel de critique verbale appliquée aux textes Latins (Paris: Libraire
Hachette, 1911); and Paul Maas, Textkritik (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1927), with successive
editions. (All references in this work are to the 4th edition of 1960.)
6 See Leah Dickerman, Inventing Abstraction, 1910– 1925: How a Radical Idea Changed Modern Art
(New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2013).
7 Meecham and Sheldon note that “years before the irst photographs of the earth from space,
Kupka was painting what he believed to be ‘visions’ of the cosmos. Although Kupka never
claimed that his ‘inner visions’ were any more than fragments which ‘loat in our heads,’ he
believed that his clairvoyant vision lent him a transcendence which enabled him to survey
the cosmos.” Pam Meecham and Julie Sheldon, Modern Art: A Critical Introduction, 2nd edn.
(Oxford: Routledge, 2005), 56–5 7. It is as such a visionary, who had a total, synoptic vision
of the Mahābhārata tradition in his head, that we shall try to present Sukthankar here—a nd
defend him against his critics.
8 Of course, we might have studied other Indologists. Extending our analysis back in time, we
might have looked at the work of critics Edward W. Hopkins and Adolf Holtzmann Jr. or at
Hermann Oldenberg. Likewise, we might have extended our analysis forward in time to study the
work of James L. Fitzgerald or Georg von Simson or any other member of the so- called analytic
school. The reason we did not do so is that their work has already been subject to a critique in
our earlier book The Nay Science: A History of German Indology (New York: Oxford University Press,
2014).
9 Sukthankar received a BA degree in mathematics from the University of Cambridge in 1906;
we do not know why in 1911 he went to Berlin to study philology, but he must also have con-
tinued the association with Cambridge, for he received an MA from that university the following
year. See S. M. Katre, “Vishnu Sitaram Sukthankar and His Contribution to Indology,” in
V. S. Sukthankar Memorial Edition, vol. 2: Analecta, ed. P. K. Gode (Bombay: Karnatak Publishing
House, 1945), 464. Incidentally, Katre also arrives at substantially the same assessment: “The
scientiic training which Sukthankar received at Cambridge while preparing himself for the
Mathematical Tripos, stood him in good stead during his Berlin days. Although he took up
Indian Philology and Philosophy as his main branch of study, this Mathematical training pre-
pared him for a scientiic outlook on matters literary or historical, and there was no study or
investigation which he considered was low enough for a scholar if it led to proper utilisation of
the material available.” Ibid., 465– 66.
10 For an articulation of this insight within philology, see Sean Alexander Gurd, Iphigenias at
Aulis: Textual Multiplicity, Radical Philology (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2005), 188.
Gurd’s “goal is to assess the realities involved in the multiple productions of a classical text
xxx
xxx PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
so as to facilitate a literary philology alive to the fact of plurality. I call this a radical philology.”
Ibid., 72. Gurd succinctly lays out various theoretical perspectives (Augustine, Marx, Foucault,
Derrida, Goldhill, Finley, Page, Diggle, etc.) to show how the valorization of a singular original
is a misguided fetishism. He recommends a more complex approach. “My central proposition
is that critical texts are singular plural— that every single edition models and relects a plurality of
other versions and variants— and that this singular plurality of the critical edition constitutes
its sense.” Ibid., x. Gurd distinguishes the “core of textual criticism” from “the fetishism of the
critical text” by analysis that “must oppose variability to stability, plurality to unity, and a con-
crete to a nostalgic idealism.” Ibid., 35.
11 Theosophy provided artists of his generation an avenue whereby they could challenge the
narrow deinitions of rationality and the dehumanizing materialism that were part of the
Enlightenment’s legacy. For example, all four pioneers of modern abstract painting were
inluenced by theosophy, but the list is quite extensive. Through the channels of philosophy
opened up by Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, and through channels of art opened up by theos-
ophy, a living dialogue of ideas progressed, in contrast to the obsession with historical facts and
the pseudoscience of Indologie being forged in Germany. Their forensic science (who, why or
what killed the Kṣatriya Urepos) remains one of the most spectacular blemishes on the human
sciences to date.
12 Meda Mládek and Margit Rowell, “Chronology,” in František Kupka 1871– 1957: A Retrospective
(New York: Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, 1975), 306.
13 Increasingly in the 1930s and into the 1940s, mystical and occult beliefs came under suspicion
because of their political associations, which were clear and well known. The Nazi theory
of Aryan supremacy, for example, was indebted to various versions of theosophy, such as
theozoology, which pertains to birth by electric shock into the astral ether, and ariosophy, which
fuses ideas of karma, the ether and sun worship with idolatry of Aryan ancestry. “Adolf Hitler’s
conidant Otto Wagener explained to Hitler the nineteenth-century occult writer Karl von
Reichenbach’s theory of Odic force, according to which ‘every human being has an unknown
source of power that produces rays. These not only inhabit the body but also radiate from it, so
that a person is surrounded by something like a ield laden with this Odic force.’ Hitler immedi-
ately applied these ideas to the potential reviviication of society by ‘the invisible strength which
is transferred from them [storm-trooper divisions] to us like an aura.’ No doubt the perception
of a link between alternate belief systems and fascism made critics and historians in these
decades reluctant to confront the spiritual associations of abstract art. To use the word spiritual
in the late 1930s and 1940s, as Richard Pousette- Dart recently acknowledged, was near- heresy
and dangerous to an artist’s career.” Maurice Tuchman, The Spiritual in Art: Abstract Painting
1890– 1985 (New York: Aberville Publishers, 1986), 18. Albeit for diferent reasons, even today,
Indology remains in the grip of political paranoia whenever spiritual aspects of Hinduism are
presented. It is virtually taboo for scholars of Hinduism to engage in its theology, ontology or
ethics except with great afectations of “critical” distance.
14 This was true not only in Europe but also in America. “The historian T. J. Jackson Lears
has recently argued that anti- modernism is the central notion unifying the leading American
thinkers from the transcendentalists through Walt Whitman and William James. Modernism
was regarded as something to be fought because it was synonymous with the loss of inner spiri-
tual values. [William] James emphasized that the only way to attain true supremacy and higher
consciousness was by losing oneself, by breaking down the conines of personality, and he
pointed to the ‘immense elation and freedom as the outlines of conining selfhood melt down.’
In The Varieties of Religious Experience (1902) James stated, ‘Our normal waking consciousness as
we call it, is but one special type of consciousness, whilst all about it, parted from it by the ilm-
iest of screens, there lie potential forms of consciousness entirely diferent.’ He acknowledged
that sensory, symbolic elements could ‘play an enormous part in mysticism.’ ” Ibid., 34.
15 While the Indological philologist earned his bread and butter by laboriously deconstructing
texts to separate material “fact” from spiritual insight, the artist had already moved beyond this
xxxi
PROLOGUE xxxi
distinction, sensing that it was problematic and ultimately untenable. These echoes were felt as
deeply as in Nietzsche’s The Gay Science, which declared the death of God (section 108) and as
far away as Tahiti, where the French-b orn Paul Gauguin wrote: “The Word remains. Nothing
of this Word is dead. The Vedas, Brahma, Buddha, Moses, Israel, Greek philosophy, Confucius,
the Gospel, all exist. […] From a religious point of view, the Catholic Church no longer exists.
It is now too late to save it.” Paul Gaugin, Gaugin’s Intimate Journals, trans. Van Wyck Brooks
(Mineola, NY: Dover Publishing Company, 1997), 79.
16 Margit Rowell, “František Kupka: A Metaphysics of Abstraction,” in František Kupka 1871–
1957: A Retrospective (New York: Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, 1975), 76.
17 Kupka, Manuscript II, 28, cited in Rowell, ed., František Kupka 1871– 1957: A Retrospective, 77.
18 Tuchman, The Spiritual in Art, 19.
19 The banal, self- serving, self- congratulatory and unscientiic theories of the Indologists
regarding the Mahābhārata have been suiciently discussed in our earlier book The Nay Science.
Against the contributions of a genius such as Kupka these tired ruminations appear even more
facile and pointless.
20 The Museum of Modern Art in New York acquired this painting in 1956 and it remains there
to this day: The First Step, MoMA no. 562, 1956; 83.2 x 129.6 cm.
21 Roger Lipsey, The Spiritual in Twentieth Century Art (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2004),
101, 103.
22 Kupka, cited in ibid., 103.
23 Here also, referring to Gurd is useful. In his book, he makes “an attempt to characterize textual
criticism as a ield deined by multiplicity and variation. It also contains a series of attempts to
attend carefully and heedfully to each of its objects. Thus it shares its ambition with every other
philological project. But if philology consists for some in training the vision ‘to see a whole
landscape in a bean,’ I have tried to see each critical version pulsing with the rich plurality of
many others: ‘the universe in a grain of sand.’ ” Gurd, Iphigenias at Aulis, ix.
24 See Tuchman, The Spiritual in Art, 36. Tuchman continues: “Years earlier Kupka had written of
a mystical experience in which ‘it seemed I was observing the earth from the outside. I was in
great empty space and saw the planets rolling quietly.’ ”
25 A. K. Ramanujan, “Repetition in the Mahābhārata,” in Essays on the Mahābhārata, ed. Arvind
Sharma (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007), 419– 43.
26 Ibid., 421– 22.
27 This painting, also known as Graduated Red, was completed between 1919 and 1923. It is cur-
rently in the collection of the Musée National d’Art Moderne, Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris,
France. It features on the cover of our edited volume Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee, eds.,
Argument and Design: The Unity of the Mahābhārata (Leiden and Boston, MA: Brill, 2016).
28 Sukthankar was aware of these aspects of his project. He explicitly notes that “the Mahābhārata
is the whole of the epic tradition: the entire Critical Apparatus. Its separation into the consti-
tuted text and the critical notes is only a static representation of a constantly changing epic
text— a representation made for the purpose of visualizing, studying and analyzing the pan-
orama of the more grand and less grand thought movements that have crystallized in the
shape of the texts handed down to us in our Mahābhārata manuscripts.” V. S. Sukthankar,
“Prolegomena,” in The Ad̄ iparvan for the First Time Critically Edited, vol. 1 (Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1933), cii (Sukthankar’s italics). German Indologists, no less than
Sukthankar’s Indian detractors, have therefore misunderstood him when they suggest that
Sukthankar reduced the Mahābhārata to and/o r extracted a core text. Actually, he preserved
all its available versions, creating the superset of Mahābhāratas and thus a text embodying,
more than ever, its claim: yadih āsti tadanyatra yanneh āsti na tatkvacit (“whatever is here […]
that is found elsewhere. But what is not here is nowhere else”; Mahābhārata 1.56.33cd and
18.50.38cd).
29 The critical edition does not eliminate the need to look carefully at witness texts. These serve
again and again to reine and gloss over the more “archaic” material recovered by archetype.
xnexwxigienprepdf
xxxii PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
To give one example, Hudson’s spectacularly erroneous reading of the Mahābhārata (see Emily
T. Hudson, Disorienting Dharma: The Aesthetics of Sufering in the Mahābhārata [New York: Oxford
University Press, 2013]) could easily have been prevented had she looked at the vulgate, which
contains the Kaṇikanīti, an insertion of 230 lines in the vulgate that is moved to the appendices
(App. 1, no. 81) in the critical edition. See Vishwa Adluri, “Ethics and Hermeneutics in the
Mahābhārata,” review of Disorienting Dharma: The Aesthetics of Sufering in the Mahābhārata, by
Emily Hudson, International Journal of Hindu Studies 20, no. 3 (2016): 385– 92 and, in still greater
detail, Vishwa Adluri, “Hindu Studies in a Christian, Secular Academy,” International Journal of
Dharma Studies 5, no. 1 (2017), doi:10.1186/ s40613- 016- 0037- 5.
1
CHAPTER SUMMARIES
Introduction: Ad Fontes, Non Ultra Fontes!
About This Book
The aim of this book and its connection with our irst book; the central problem
confronting Mahābhārata studies
Why a Critical Edition?
Why a critical text is required and what problem it attempts to solve
What Is a Critical Edition?
A description of the critical edition: its components, how it reduces the plurality of
readings to one and what the status of the resultant text, the constituted text, is. Three
misconceptions about the critical edition: (1) it is eclectic, (2) it is not a text and (3) it can
be replaced by a text with an apparatus of variants
How to Interpret the Critical Edition
The text reconstructed in the critical edition is the archetype of the tradition, deined
as the latest common ancestor of the manuscripts examined for that edition. This sense
of archetype should not be confused with the archetype as an especially authoritative or
unique exemplar, for our stemma is merely hypothetical and models only a part of the
historical reality— the part that is either preserved in or can be reconstructed from our
manuscripts.
Conclusion
The hypothetical ancestor of our manuscripts was probably one of several exemplars in
existence at the time. It is solely by chance that only its descendants, rather than those
of other manuscripts, survived, resulting in its apparently unique position in the history
of the text. This uniqueness is only apparent: it is a consequence of the fact that our
stemma models only a part of the history of the text. From the apparently unique nature
of the archetype, we may not conclude there was an actual reduction in the number of
exemplars at the time. A fortiori all theories that attempt to explain the reduction in terms
of the actions of putative “redactors” at the time are false. The idea of a conscious redac-
tion (of oral epic materials) arises only because some scholars do not know how to read
the stemma correctly.
2
2 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Chapter One: Arguments for a Hyperarchetypal Inference
The Normative Redaction Hypothesis
The constituted text is not the archetype of the tradition but merely a “normative
redaction,” deined as “a redaction that had a normative efect and overgrew all other
versions.” The critical edition reconstructs “a text that was a historical fact at a certain
period in time,” but precisely because it is not the archetype, it should not hinder us from
exploring “the prehistory of the normative redaction.” Above all, we should consider
“passages rejected from the constituted text,” as they could be evidence of a “parallel
transmission” of the Mahābhārata.
Normative Redaction, Archetype and Original
Textual criticism allows us to reconstruct the archetype of the tradition, which represents
a constriction in the tradition attributable to a “normative redaction.” This reconstructed
archetype, however, only gives us access to the oicial Brahmanic text resulting from the
redaction of an earlier oral tradition. It neither accurately models the contents of the
tradition nor can it be seen as a copy of the original, since the tradition was plural above
the archetype and a single original never existed.
Criticism: Higher and Lower
The redeinition of the constituted text as a normative redaction rather than an arche-
type permits us to reconstruct earlier stages of the tradition using “higher criticism.” In
contrast to textual criticism, which is a rigorous and mechanical procedure that begins
with the manuscript evidence and attempts to infer the manuscripts’ likely sources based
on shared errors of transcription, higher criticism uses subjective, a priori criteria to
identify certain passages as older than others and therefore as part of the “genuine” epic
tradition.
The Argument from Spread and the Argument from Resilience
Textual criticism only permits us to reconstruct the source of the irst branching. However,
this ignores the possibility that the tradition was plural before the apex. The reconstruc-
tion of the archetype is thus an error, arising from the fallacious assumption that all
readings derive from a unique text (argument from spread). Our reconstructed archetype
is based on readings that passed through the constriction between the two cones, whereas
readings that fell directly from the upper cone to the lower without passing through the
apex could be older (argument from resilience).
Refutation of the argument: The argument from spread fails because it overlooks that
the shape of the tradition before the archetype is irrelevant for the reconstruction of the
archetype, which remains ex hypothesi the oldest ancestor of the extant witnesses that can
be reconstructed. In fact, the archetype makes no claims about whether the tradition
spread away from the original or all readings fell through one particular manuscript.
3
CHAPTER SUMMARIES 3
It only claims that all our manuscripts are descended, however remotely, from this one
source. Likewise, the argument from resilience fails because it erroneously infers the exis-
tence of a real constriction in the tradition from the archetype’s apparently unique posi-
tion in the stemma and further argues that some readings at least could have escaped the
archetype’s constricting efect.
The Argument from Empty Reference
The critical edition contains references to events, whose description no existing passages
meet. However, these “empty references” must once have had a referent. If suitable
descriptions occur in the apparatus, we may assume that they were the original referents,
contained in a version of the Mahābhārata distinct from the normative redaction. The
critical edition discards these passages as unique to one branch of the tradition, but this
is false because they are actually older than the normative redaction it reconstructs. The
normative redaction eliminated the passages, but they later reentered the tradition, thus
occurring in some manuscripts only. Restoring the referent to the constituted text restores
the text to a state before the normative redaction.
Refutation of the argument: The argument sufers from the fallacy of proof by
assertion, because it is tantamount to asserting that a passage A is old because it is con-
sidered old. Its fallacious nature is not immediately apparent because, rather than state it
simply, Bigger asserts that A is actually Rʹ, the referent of passage R, whereas the reading
R → Rʹ reconstructs an original R → Rʹ; as the surviving referent of this original refer-
ence Rʹ is thus old. The equivocation between Rʹ as a passage in the extant witnesses
thought to correspond to a reading R (that is, Rʹ) and Rʹ as the referent of an original
1
R (that is, Rʹ) permits him to “infer” Rʹ’s antiquity, even though, actually, he has only
2
asserted it. The empty reference plays no role in demonstrating A’s antiquity; it merely
conceals the illegitimate shift from Rʹ to Rʹ.
1 2
The Argument from Loss
The argument from loss entails the claim that certain passages, though contained in
the Mahābhārata’s hypothetical “normative redaction,” were lost from part of the
subsequent manuscript tradition. They are therefore not found in the constituted text,
although, as typical of Brahmanic concerns, they should have been included in it.
Refutation of the argument: The argument from loss replaces a critical principle—
agreement between independent families— with a subjective and prejudicial principle
for reconstruction. It uses this dogmatic principle—p assages considered “Brahmanic”
should be restored to the constituted text, even if they lack manuscript support—t o
assimilate the constituted text to a hypothetical Brahmanic redaction. It then uses this
restored text, in turn, as evidence for the reality of the Brahmanic redaction. Given its
circularity, the argument should persuade no one. That it does illustrates the truth of the
observation that if “the circle that has been constructed [is] large and confusing, […] the
logical mistake goes unseen.”
4
4 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Chapter Two: Reconstructing the Source of Contamination
Understanding “Contamination”
Mahab̄ har̄ ata critics understand “contamination” not as textual critics do (for whom it refers
to the addition of readings from a second source besides the one the scribe copied), but as
the interpolation of Brahmanic elements into an original Ksạ triya epic. They thus interpret
contamination to mean a kind of pollution (namely, with the Brahmans’ religious ideology).
Contamination: Hyperarchetypal and Extra- stemmatic
This section distinguishes between extra- stemmatic contamination, intra- stemmatic
contamination and hyperarchetypal contamination. We examine Bigger’s view that
the hypothetical Kṣatriya epic underwent contamination from Brahmanic sources
prior to the formation of the archetype (hyperarchetypal contamination) and that the
resulting Brahmanic text then itself underwent contamination beneath the archetype
with remnants of the Kṣatriya epic that survived either in folk traditions or in the poets’
memory (extra- stemmatic contamination).
Identifying the Source of Contamination
This section contrasts the Mahābhārata critics’ arbitrary and tendentious arguments for
Brahmanic “contamination” with objective criteria for identifying the source of con-
tamination. We show that the minimum condition to identify interpolations is a stemma
of the form 3+1, where three manuscripts descend from the contaminated source and
a fourth descends from an independent source. If any two manuscripts descended from
the contaminated source agree against the manuscript descended from an independent
source, then their reading is the reading of the source of contamination.
The Argument from Uncertainty
Mahābhārata critics often try to undermine the stemma by positing contamination from
a nonextant oral source (extra- stemmatic contamination). They claim that as our stemma
does not accurately represent historical reality, we cannot deinitively exclude earlier,
nonextant sources.
Refutation of the argument: The argument from uncertainty fails because intro-
ducing uncertainty into a system afects all outcomes equally. Introducing uncertainty
into the stemma does not make it likelier that a Kṣatriya epic existed. It only appears to
favor the Kṣatriya epic because the critics assume its existence in advance and that they
can know its contents without a stemmatic reconstruction.
The Argument from Oral Source
If the oral tradition survived past the Brahmans’ seizure and destruction of the original
epic, elements from it could have trickled back into the manuscript tradition. This could
5
CHAPTER SUMMARIES 5
have occurred if a scribe either recollected an oral version or possessed a transcript of it.
In that case, we are justiied in thinking that some of the readings in our manuscripts (and
mutatis mutandis the constituted text) are older than others, and some at least as old as the
oral epic.
Refutation of the argument: The argument does not address the question of how we
can identify the alleged remnants of the oral epic. Every manuscript contains readings
of varying antiquity but, without the stemmatic method, we cannot sift between them.
The argument also does not address the problem that the alleged remnants could be later
innovations or inaccurate recollections. Indeed, in a long chain of transmitters such as an
oral tradition presumes it is especially likely that the readings underwent deterioration.
The analytic critics fail to perceive the problem because they focus on passages rather
than readings, and do not ask how, even if we grant that the passages were original, their
readings could have been transmitted unchanged.
The Argument from (Postulated) Antiquity and the
Argument from Ideology
This concluding section examines two related arguments, the argument from (postulated)
antiquity and the argument from ideology. The irst refers to the Mahābhārata critics’
habit of declaring that certain passages are old because they are postulated as old. The
second refers to their ideological reasons for doing so, namely, proving the baleful nature
of Brahman domination for India.
Refutation of the argument: Neither argument is actually an argument. The argu-
ment from (postulated) antiquity merely asserts the antiquity of certain passages without
demonstrating it. The argument from ideology elevates the German scholars’ anti-
Semitic prejudices to a irst principle and uses this, in turn, to sustain the kind of circular,
counterfactual and logically fallacious arguments we have seen. These prejudices hold
the key to understanding the German scholars’ work, speciically their insistence on a
tendentious Brahmanic redaction of an earlier heroic epic.
Chapter Three: Confusions Regarding Classiication
Classiication: Typological and Genealogical
Many criticisms of the Mahābhārata critical edition arise from a misunderstanding about
how editors classify manuscripts, how they determine iliation and how they reconstruct—
via eliminating either the readings of witnesses or entire witnesses— the archetype.
Crucially, arguments for diferent classes of manuscripts (or entirely new “recensions”)
are based on the erroneous assumption that because a group of manuscripts lacks certain
passages characteristic of other manuscripts, the former constitute a family, even though
the dichotomy is merely typological, not genealogical, and as yet no iliation has been
established between the manuscripts so separated.
6
6 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Determining Filiation
Filiation can be established only through shared errors, which permit us to identify two
manuscripts as more closely related than others of that family (all of which will contain
the same text, but not the same errors, which are unique to this branch of the tradition).
It is hence incorrect to establish iliation on the basis of shared readings, as they identify
the two manuscripts only as members of the family chosen for study (manuscripts of the
Mahābhārata), but do not permit us to deine them as a speciic branch of that family—
manuscripts descended from the irst source of the error or errors.
Eliminating Witnesses
A comparison of the constituted text with variant readings or passages rejected from it
will not permit us to establish an earlier stage of the transmission. At most, we might
establish that a reading rejected by the editor is preferable and restore it in our text, but
this text will still be, by deinition, the archetype and not a supra- archetype of the kind
critics think they can produce by randomly selecting passages from the appendices (on
the grounds of their presumed “Kṣatriya” origins).
The Argument from Brevity and the Argument from False Premises
In creating the critical edition, Sukthankar followed the evidence of the shortest witness,
the Ś āradā codex, and reprinted the readings of this manuscript as his constituted text.
However, as the Ś āradā codex was not the shortest witness (for the Nepālī manuscript
NAK 5/ 356 is shorter by 63 passages), the critical edition must be begun anew.
Refutation of the argument: This conclusion would be justiied only if the editor actu-
ally reprinted the readings of the Ś āradā codex as his constituted text. In point of fact,
he compared manuscripts of diferent classes to reconstruct the reading of the archetype.
He showed in several cases that the Ś āradā codex itself contained interpolations and
additions. This means that what is decisive is not the length of the Ś āradā codex over
the Nepālī manuscript NAK 5/ 356, but whether passages in the constituted text exist,
which are not attested in the latter, something Grünendahl (who raises the objection) has
not shown.
The Argument from a Misapprehension Concerning Classiication
( Schriftartprämisse)
The Mahābhārata manuscripts were classiied into versions on the basis of their script,
according to a principle Lüders irst articulated in 1908 (the script is characteristic of
the version). However, this classiication is erroneous, inasmuch as the script proved not
characteristic of the version and neither the variant readings nor the additional passages
were consistently characteristic of speciic versions.
Refutation of the argument: The Mahābhārata manuscripts were classiied not by
their script, but by their text. The term version is a synonym for a manuscript’s text. If
the editors nonetheless looked to the script as a irst, extrinsic indicator of a manuscript’s
7
CHAPTER SUMMARIES 7
text, this is because, in practice, it was often a reliable guide to the text contained in a
manuscript. The editors were not blind to the circumstance that sometimes a manu-
script, contrary to their expectation of it, could contain the text of another version. They
often reassigned manuscripts assumed to belong to one version on the basis of their
scripts to another (whose members were all in a diferent script). If the editors had merely
looked to the script they could neither have drawn up a stemma nor reconstructed the
reading of the archetype.
The Argument from Extensive Contamination
The widespread presence of contamination between Mahābhārata manuscripts
(evinced by the existence of interpolated passages across recensions) makes a satisfactory
classiication impossible.
Refutation of the argument: In practice, no editor found contamination such a
problem that he could not establish the manuscripts’ true iliation. Though present, con-
tamination was restricted largely to the additional passages, which, indeed, were often
transmitted horizontally. The manuscripts’ true iliation almost always became obvious
in terms of the signiicant errors in the text. Grünendahl errs because he considers only
the interpolated passages rather than readings. His understanding of contamination is
also peculiar: according to him, the absence of interpolation is also a kind of “contami-
nation” (namely, non-contamination), for how (he reasons) could two manuscripts agree
in featuring the same text if not for the fact that one of them “contaminated” the other?
The answer is simple: the manuscripts contain the identical text, because the same text
was handed down to them and no inluence of the one upon the other needs to be pre-
sumed to explain the circumstance that they lack the same interpolations. Interpolations,
except when interpolated, tend not to be present, so that no special circumstance is
required to explain their absence in a manuscript.
The Argument from Independent Recensions
Since widespread contamination between Mahābhārata manuscripts makes it impossible
to draw up a stemma, the editors should have concentrated on a regional recension and
produced an edition using one manuscript, preferably the shortest, as the base.
Refutation of the argument: The argument overlooks the fact that, even if the editors
had chosen to produce a critical edition of one of the regional recensions, they could not
have done so without considering its place in the overall tradition. Further, if contam-
ination makes it impossible to produce a critical edition of the Mahābhārata tradition
as a whole, this is especially true of a critical edition of a regional recension, since con-
tamination was most pronounced between the manuscripts of a recension. Grünendahl’s
proposed edition (based on the Nepālī manuscript NAK 5/3 56) would be not a critical
edition but a pseudo- Bédierist edition. He could neither draw up a satisfactory stemma
nor proceed in cases of crux or where the Nepālī manuscripts contained inconsistent
readings. His edition opens the loodgates for conjectural criticism, which is all he seeks
to do.
8
8 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
The Argument from Expertise
The argument from expertise refers to the replacement of argument with expert tes-
timony. The mere fact of citation, without an attempt at paraphrase much less clar-
iication, serves to validate an author’s views. Rightly speaking, the argument from
expertise is not an argument at all. It merely relects the institutionalized prejudice in
favor of certain authors and positions. It reveals the broken system of preferment at
Mahābhārata studies’ core. The scholars entrusted with discriminating between correct
and incorrect scholarship have proven incapable of distinguishing objective research
from ideological views.
9
10
Dr. V. S. Sukthankar (1887–1 943), scholar, mathematician, Sanskritist, editor and the archi-
tect of the Mahābhārata critical edition.
Source: Reproduced from Katre, “Vishnu Sitaram Sukthankar and His Contribution to Indology,” 462.
11
INTRODUCTION: AD FONTES,
NON ULTRA FONTES!
Many believe stemmata to be accurate depictions of the historical vicissitudes of transmission, but it is the few
who believe that this is not the case who are right.
— Paolo Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method
About This Book
The aim of this book and its connection with our irst book; the central problem confronting Mahābhārata
studies
The Mahābhārata critical edition, which was begun in 1931 and completed in 1966, is
now more than ive decades old. This is an appropriate moment to revisit the history of this
edition and its reception. It is also an appropriate moment to create the scholarly tools and
auxiliary materials required to use this edition, something the edition’s creators envisaged
but never carried out in the past.1 Philology and Criticism addresses this need by discussing
criticisms and misconceptions of the critical edition. It also carries forward the criticism
of German Mahābhārata studies undertaken in The Nay Science, whose unscientiic and
ideologically motivated theories of the Mahābhārata pose the greatest single obstacle to
the correct reception, interpretation and use of the edition.2 As will become clear, contem-
porary objections to the critical edition are essentially restatements of theoretical positions
German critics staked out in the nineteenth century.3 Addressing these objections, there-
fore, requires us to understand the original reasons for these claims, as well as to grasp the
reasons scholars continue to resurrect them.
Why a Critical Edition?
Why a critical text is required and what problem it attempts to solve
To a scribe working in the thirteenth century, the question of which Mahābhārata man-
uscript to copy would have been an easy one to answer: as a rule, he would not have had
access to more than a few manuscripts, mostly descended from the same source, and so,
barring a few variants, he would have had little to choose from among them. He might
have chosen the one most easily available to him, or the most complete, or the best pre-
served, and produced a copy, inserting the variants of other manuscripts (if he chose to
consult them at all) in the margins or perhaps on separate sheets (the śodhapatra, as they
12
12 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
are called). Occasionally, a scribe working in one of the centers of Hindu intellectual life
(like the seventeenth-c entury commentator Nīlakaṇṭha) might have had access to a larger
number of manuscripts, indeed, to an overview of the manuscript tradition from across
the subcontinent. In that case, the scribe, being more concerned with preserving the tra-
dition and regarding himself as a part of a living tradition entitled to make selections
and to emend and rearrange the texts, might have selected the best narratives, creating
a composite manuscript that would, in turn, have generated further copies, establishing
a new tradition. In time, new verses might have entered the tradition through the inevi-
table processes of exegesis and commentary or new episodes might have been composed
for places where narrative lacunae were felt, but this augmentation would not have been
considered a problem: it was evidence of the tradition’s vitality, of its ability to renew and
translate itself for a new circle of readers each time.
The irst printed editions of the Mahābhārata continued this practice by reprinting
the available manuscripts.4 Their editors were not concerned with establishing a critical
text. They saw themselves as part of a living tradition and their sole concern was to make
available in the new medium what previously existed only in the manuscript tradition.
Besides employing teams of learned śāstris or pan ̣ḍits to check and possibly emend the
source manuscript, they were not overly concerned with the text’s accuracy or with rec-
onciling variations between their edition and the other printed editions.
A new set of concerns emerged in the late nineteenth century, as the Mahābhārata
became an object of specialist concern: What is “the Mahābhārata”? What was the
oldest form of the text? Between two competing versions, which one must be judged
more authentic? It was partly to resolve these questions and partly to bear out their
own theories about an original epic (the so- called Urepos) that calls for a single, sci-
entiically validated text arose.5 As Moriz Winternitz, an Austrian Indologist and
a leading advocate for a Mahābhārata critical edition, declared, “What we really
need, and what seems to me to be the sine quâ non for historical and critical researches
regarding the text of the Mahabharata, is a critical edition which should neither satisfy
the people of Northern India nor those of the Dekkhan, but which should satisfy the
wants of Sanskrit scholarship. I repeat what I said at the last Congress in Paris, that
‘a critical edition of the Mahabharata made by European scholars according to the
principles followed in editing any other important text, is wanted as the only sound
basis for all Mahabharata studies— nay, for all studies connected with the epic litera-
ture of India.’ ”6
What Is a Critical Edition?
A description of the critical edition: its components, how it reduces the plurality of readings to one, and what
the status of the resultant text, the constituted text, is. Three misconceptions about the critical edition: (1) it is
eclectic, (2) it is not a text and (3) it can be replaced by a text with an apparatus of variants.
A critical edition circumvents the problem of multiple versions of a text by subjecting
the diferent readings of the available manuscripts (called variae lectiones or variant
13
INTRODUCTION 13
readings) to a rigorously hierarchical procedure: readings thought more likely to
represent the reading of the ancestor of all manuscripts examined for the edition
(known as the archetypus or archetype) are printed above the line as the critically consti-
tuted text (constitutio textus), while the remaining variants (which hence are considered
“corruptions” of the former) are printed below the line (where they form the apparatus
criticus or critical apparatus of the edition). A critical edition thus creates an overview
of the entire tradition, assigning the available readings a speciic place either above
or below the line depending on how archaic they can claim to be. Reading the stemma
codicum (the genealogical tree of manuscripts) from top to bottom provides an overview
of everything the tradition contains—n ot only the inferred (that is, hypothetical) texts
posited as having existed on the basis of the available manuscript evidence but also the
actual, physically extant manuscripts that remain our only source of evidence for the
tradition.
A critical edition thus represents the easiest and most elegant way to arrange the
available information. As Gianfranco Contini observes, “a critical edition is, like any
other scientiic act, a mere working hypothesis, the most satisfactory, namely, the most
economic one, and one which proves apt to connect a system of data.”7 This view has
replaced the earlier tendency to regard a critical edition as a facsimile of an existing text,
that is, either the text of the author’s hand, the so- called autograph, or a copy of this text,
that is, an apograph that was the irst source of the surviving tradition. This tendency
became unsustainable not only because to maintain that the reconstruction corresponds
in all its particulars to an actual text requires a leap of faith but also because of the pos-
itive evidence that not all elements of the constituted text are of the same antiquity. As
V. S. Sukthankar observes, the Mahābhārata critical edition “precisely like every other
edition […] is a mosaic of old and new matter. That is to say, in an average adhyaya of
this edition (as of any other edition) we may read a stanza of the second century BC
followed by one written in the second century AD. Sometimes the gap will occur in the
middle of a line, precisely as in every other edition.”8
In fact, every line or every word of the genealogical-r econstructive edition or the
reconstructive edition, as we shall refer to it henceforth, occurs at a point on a continuum
that we, along with Lino Leonardi, might describe as anchored between the text and its
extant manuscripts that attest to or witness to the text (hence called witnesses). In each
case, a line either “[goes] back to a stage of the transmission as close as possible to the
original text” or it “[represents] one or more outcomes of the process of transmission
materially attested in the surviving tradition.”9 See Figure 1.
a b c ... n
text witness
Figure 1 The two options of a philology oriented toward the text and a philology oriented
toward the witness
Source: Modiied from Leonardi, “Il testo come ipotesi,” 7.
14
14 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
A critical edition is thus the living image of the text’s diachronic history, with each
of its elements corresponding to a deinite stage of the text. This will be either the
archetype of the tradition in the cases that we can reduce the plurality of readings to
one, or one of its descendants in the cases that we can unify only some branches of the
tradition and encounter a crux (that is, two competing readings, either of which could be
original). In all cases, the critical edition will exhibit greater historical continuity (pro-
vided the editor has read the evidence correctly) than any of the competing editions,
simply because of its concern with accurately modeling the history of the text. Thus,
the text will be continued for the most part at the same level, namely, at the level of the
archetype, except where the editor could not determine the reading that is the ancestor
of all the others, at which point it will descend to the level of one of its hyparchetypes.10
But even in respect of these passages the constituted text is less eclectic than any of its
witnesses, since it prints the next most proximate reading, rather than permitting the
fall to continue uncontrollably through centuries. As Michele Barbi notes, “It is not
a matter of treating as certain what is only probable, or forcing everyone to accept
our conclusions; but when one has illustrated to scholars the state of things and the
reasons for and against a given conclusion, has one not done what science allows and
demands? […] Why should we give up considering each case for itself, and why should
we not be allowed to substitute our cautious and reasoned judgment for that of a tran-
scriber whose judgment […] we do not see the reasons for and cannot measure the
extent of?”11
Understanding a critical edition in this more sophisticated way also permits us to
clarify some pervasive misconceptions of the Mahābhārata critical edition. The critical
edition is not an artiicial text, a “Frankenstein’s monster, pieced together from various
scraps of diferent bodies,” as some suggest.12 It is, rather, a particular arrangement of
textual materials (as every edition is) undertaken to expunge centuries of scribal error and
variation, and to provide as close an approximation of the original text as possible.13 It
is furthermore a rigorously scientiic text in that it follows a rational logic and that each
of its steps is clearly documented. Contrary to the charge that it creates a new text, one
that lacks either an organic community or continuity with the tradition, every line of the
reconstructive edition is validated by the tradition.14 Recall that each line of the consti-
tuted text occurs at a point on a continuum deined by the two ends of the text and its
witnesses. If the editor can resolve the diferent manuscript readings and derive them
from the presumed original, the resultant text is that of the author’s hand or one as close
to it as possible. It is thus better and more accurate than any of the surviving variants.15
If the editor cannot do so, the reading he prints is nonetheless materially attested in one
of the witnesses. More likely, it will be attested in several since it represents the consensus
of at least one branch of the manuscript tradition. The reading is also better than the
alternatives, which the editor after careful evaluation discarded. In both cases, the con-
stituted text represents a better text than available in any of its witnesses.16 A verse found
in a Telugu manuscript, for instance, has only that manuscript to attest to it. In contrast,
every line of the critical edition of the Mahābhārata is of greater antiquity than any of
the surviving witnesses. And while the constituted text of a critical edition is eclectic in
15
INTRODUCTION 15
the sense that it preserves readings of difering antiquity, it is no more so than any other
edition. The argument can be made that it is less so because, as Sebastiano Timpanaro
describes, “to this random and irrational eclecticism [of the tradition],” “we must oppose
our choice, which is based on rational judgment and therefore is not eclectic in the pejo-
rative sense.”17
The charge of Frankensteinism is thus misguided. In contrast to the transmitted texts
of the tradition, which are composites of the author’s intention and what the copyist
understood or chose to write down in the speciic case (and this over centuries), the crit-
ical edition ofers a more legible and scientiic text.18 In his activity, the editor seeks to
eliminate conlated sources (manuscripts copied from two or more sources, which are truly
hybrid editions), he disentangles readings of doubtful or difering antiquity that have been
commingled through the scribes’ activity, and he attempts to put in place, as much as is
possible, materials of similar antiquity. He does so, furthermore, using all the knowledge
and judgment about the tradition at his disposal.19 And while his edition is an interpre-
tation of the text, it is no less naïve to imagine a copyist faced no interpretive choices
when transcribing his exemplar than it is to maintain “we can and must edit [recensere]
without interpreting” (Lachmann). In the absence of a critical procedure, the choice of
one version over another, no matter how justiiable in terms of the text’s contents, must
remain arbitrary.20 The emphasis on eclecticism thus obscures the real question: which is
the more scientiic and more legible text and which is the truer image of the tradition’s
diachronic reality? Inverting Doniger’s metaphor, we could rather say the editors of the
Bhandarkar Institute were like doctors who took of bandages and laid bare the patient’s
sores, bringing to light what had been concealed and restoring what had been incorrectly
joined or separated.21
A second pervasive misconception that is the mirror image of the irst is that the
Mahābhārata critical edition is merely an “Arbeitsinstrument” or working tool.22 This mis-
conception, found most often in the work of the German Mahābhārata critics whose
Protestant makeup disposes them against the very idea of a text,23 arises from a misun-
derstanding regarding the nature of the editor’s activity.24 To the critic, it may appear as
though textual criticism’s primary purpose is merely to provide “rational procedures for
advancing the most likely hypothesis about what the original was like and how, in rough
outline, it was transmitted down to its preserved witnesses.”25 But textual criticism also
seeks to provide “an edition of an ancient text that is accessible to the modern reader
and, at the same time, conforms to the intention of its author.”26 Without this aspect,
the editor’s activity would be diminished. It would be reduced to proposing hypotheses,
without contributing in any way to the text’s preservation. It would lead to the rad-
ical separation of the critic’s activity from the text’s readers, a possibility that no one
can seriously contemplate.27 As Leonardi reminds us, “The concept of a critical edition
[also] implies a responsibility to propose a text that, while meeting the requirements of
science and elucidating the manuscript tradition, is not merely accessible to specialists,
but recovers a work of the past for a contemporary public to read; one that does not
reproduce a document, but interprets the tradition as a whole as a means to transfer its
textual reality into something that is readable today.”28 What was said earlier about the
16
16 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
critical edition ofering the most scientiic, the most legible and the most transparent text
(in terms of its diachronic history) also applies here: to say the critical edition ofers the
best possible text implies a concurrent responsibility to read the constituted text and not
merely regard it as an object of specialist investigations. A text that cannot be read is not
a text.
A third misconception consists in thinking the Mahābhārata critical edition
merely provides a text of the Mahābhārata along with an apparatus of variants.
As we have already dealt with the misconception that the critical edition provides
just a text, we focus here on this statement’s second half. This misconception is evi-
dent in Sylvain Lévi’s suggestion to Sukthankar, made in a 1929 review of the irst
fascicule of the critical edition, that he could just print the text of the vulgate (the
edition of Nīlakaṇṭha, called the vulgate, because it is the most widespread) along
with a list of the variants in other manuscripts.29 The problem with Lévi’s proposal,
which he apparently advocated to reduce the scope of editorial judgment (that is,
the use of subjective iudicium), is twofold.30 First, even if the editor is not supposed to
select the best manuscript (the bon manuscrit, as it is called) and is supposed to merely
reprint the vulgate rather than edit it, the proposal does not avoid the problem of
choosing between variants. Which version of the vulgate should the editor reprint?
As Sukthankar observes, the printed editions are inferior to the manuscripts of the
vulgate.31 While the editor could, in theory, correct the printed editions using the
manuscript sources, such an approach is hardly warranted, as Sukthankar notes.
“It would, however, hardly repay, now, the trouble to re edit, from manuscripts, the
version of Nīlakaṇṭha, as there are far better versions that could be edited instead,
for instance, the Kaśmīrī.”32 Correcting the printed editions would, furthermore,
reintroduce the necessity of making editorial choices.33 Second, and more signiicant,
Lévi seriously underestimates the value of a critical edition. A critical edition, as we
saw, is not just a text with an apparatus of variants. It is, rather, the living image of
the text’s diachronic history. By considering on what manuscripts a reading is based,
the reader can intuit not only the attestation for it but also its relative antiquity and
authenticity. Inversely, by seeing how far back a variant or an episode can be traced,
she can infer its date or even its geographic origin. A critical edition represents the
editor’s best understanding of the tradition, based on his years- long digestion of the
manuscript evidence. Granted an average reader may never read a critical edition
in this nuanced way. She may never, for instance, appreciate that when a reading
is attested in both the northern and southern recensions of the Mahābhārata, it is
unambiguously the reading of the archetype. But the edition itself contains much
more information than a mere list of variants would: it contains information on the
families to which these variants belong, the classiication and genealogical relation-
ship of manuscripts and the codicological weight of individual variants. In contrast,
a mere list of variants—w ithout any attempt to organize the information, that is,
to classify the manuscripts into families, to group variants and to subordinate some
of them to others—c ontains no information beyond the mere fact of the existence
of variants.34 It can hardly be considered a substitute for the true critical edition.35
See Figure 2.
17
INTRODUCTION 17
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
S´ K Ñ V B D T G M
K5, D10.11, T2, G1.2.4–6 (G3.7 part.), M1–4
K2, D10–12, Cd, T1.2, G1–7, M1–4
K0.3 (part), K1.4–6, V1, B, D (part) a b c . . . n
text witnesses
Figure 2 The constituted text along with its critical apparatus: understanding what one is
reading
Note: The text of the critical edition represents the text of the archetype, as best reconstructed by the editor
on the basis of the available manuscript evidence. It is thus running text and is both more continuous and
less eclectic than the other editions. Only in places where the editor is uncertain of the reading (indicated
by a wavy line under the text) is the text discontinuous, based not on the consensus of the tradition but only
a part of it. In the example, verses 20 and 21cd are unambiguously the reading of the archetype; a part of
verse 21ab is marked as uncertain and represents, in this case, the reading of only some manuscripts. A look
at the critical apparatus suices for the reader to know exactly on which manuscripts the text is based and
thus the stage of the tradition reconstructed or represented in the text before her. Reading a critical edition,
then, is a matter of constant triangulation between three elements: the constituted text, the stemma and the
critical apparatus. Additionally, a reader may wish to keep in mind implicitly a diagram such as Leonardi’s
line, which allows her to represent in space the successive transformations of the text. If a reader knows
how to use these elements, she will never be in any doubt about what she is reading (and will never make
the mistake of thinking her text is “pieced together from various scraps of diferent bodies”).
How to Interpret the Critical Edition
The text reconstructed in the critical edition is the archetype of the tradition, deined as the latest common ancestor
of the manuscripts examined for that edition. This sense of archetype should not be confused with the archetype
as an especially authoritative or unique exemplar, for our stemma is merely hypothetical and models only a part of
the historical reality— the part that is either preserved in or can be reconstructed from our manuscripts.
18
18 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Having examined three misconceptions of the Mahābhārata critical edition in the pre-
ceding section— namely: (1) the critical edition is eclectic; (2) the critical edition is not
a text; and (3) the critical edition can be replaced by any other text with an apparatus
of variants— let us turn to its interpretation. The correct interpretation of the consti-
tuted text is that it is the archetype of the extant tradition, that is to say, the latest common
ancestor of the extant manuscripts that can be reconstructed based on their evidence and
therefore also the earliest form of the text that can be reconstructed based on these
manuscripts.36
The extant witnesses will have older ancestors in common (for example, the source
of the latest common ancestor and its source in turn and so on), but nothing can be said
about these texts because, once we have interpreted all the evidence and drawn the nec-
essary inferences, no data remain for us to arrange. We have accounted for all the variant
readings in the manuscripts (eliminating, for instance, the errors found only in individual
branches of the tradition or in individual manuscripts), and so what we have is the ear-
liest and most authoritative text we can reconstruct.37 Thus, while we might assume that
some of the readings in our archetype are themselves corruptions, we could not show
that they are.38 There is no reason to interpret the constituted text of the Mahābhārata
critical edition as anything other than what Sukthankar declares it, “the oldest form of the
text which it is possible to reach, on the basis of the manuscript material available.”39
This sense of archetype, which we call the logical sense, must be distinguished from a
second sense, which we refer to as the material or historical sense. As Timpanaro shows,
before the term archetype acquired the meaning it has today in textual criticism,40 it had
an earlier meaning. “Scholars used to think that the Humanists (like the ancients before
them; cf. Cicero, Ad Att. 16.3.1) meant by the term archetypum or codex archetypus only the
‘oicial text’ checked by the author and intended to be published afterward in further
copies.”41 Trovato discusses how this older sense of archetype, which he calls archetype and
1
glosses as “oicial text, prepared by its author for publication,” is sometimes crossed with
the irst sense (archetype) to yield a third sense of the term: the archetype as “an especially
2
authoritative exemplar, or as the result of a sudden and inexplicable bottleneck in the
ancient and medieval tradition whereby only one copy survived.”42 Even highly experi-
enced critics sometimes make this mistake. Hermann Kantorowicz writes that:
[I] t is possible, and often necessary, to distinguish from the original an “archetype,” with
a “textual history,” often centuries long, separated from the original, and which was saved
by chance, or because it carried an erudite version, until it came down, alone or with only a few
companions, to a time closer to our own.43
Giorgio Pasquali also states:
Lachmann founded his method on the assumption that the tradition of every author always
and in every case harked back to a single exemplar that was already disigured by errors and
lacunas, which he called the archetype. No one doubts that this is mostly the case. […] On
careful consideration, it must appear unlikely that in every case only one exemplar of each surviving work
had been saved in the Middle Ages, whether Western or Byzantine, while all the others had perished
with the fall of ancient civilization.44
19
INTRODUCTION 19
The error lies, as Trovato observes, in confusing “two conceptual spheres that we need
to keep distinct: the history of the tradition, with its unattainable real trees, that is, the often
very rich ensemble of mss. that historically existed, including those that disappeared
without leaving traces, and textual criticism, with its very tangible although perfectible stem-
mata codicum, based on the few mss. that have come down to us.”45 The ambiguity in the
meaning of archetype, meaning once a hypothetical ancestor of the surviving manuscripts
and once an actual manuscript that alone survived the reduction in the number of
exemplars in the “medieval” period, is responsible for much of the confusion in the
interpretation of the critical edition.46
This ambiguity also underlies an erroneous interpretation of the Mahābhārata critical
edition, as we ind it in the work of Georg von Simson.47 Observing that the Mahābhārata
“cannot be regarded as the direct transcription of oral poetry,” von Simson asks, “How
then is the emergence of our text to be understood?”48 He suggests “these people [the
Mahābhārata’s hypothetical redactors], after they had put together a irst, rough version
of the text [from the oral materials in circulation], continued to work on it and inserted
additional passages, which we today recognize as interpolations.”49 Then he adds:
If, however, we proceed from the assumption the redactions had before them older versions
of the Mahābhārata, then we must reckon with the fact that these older versions were
already revised in various ways and that interpolations entered into them before they were
evaluated for our Mahābhārata [the critical edition]. Further, we may assume that even after
the completion of the inal redaction, for a certain period of time until the inal separation
of the north and south Indian recensions, interpolations entered into the text, and which
hence could not be eliminated using the editorial principles of the Poona edition [the critical
edition].
The history of development of our Mahābhārata text can then be outlined as follows: (1) In
the beginning there was […] the short epic transmitted as an oral, improvised composition in
the tradition. Here it is meaningless to inquire into the original text and the author: the poem
was realized by several epic bards in constantly changing form; bard and author were identical
in this stage. From this period arise many of the formulaic expressions of our Mahābhārata, the
technique of the adhyāya introductions and conclusions, the schematic development of the small
battle- scenes, etc. (2) There followed a period of written ixation of the text [schriftliche Fixierung
des Textes]; indeed, we can also assume with certainty that diferent versions of the poem were
written down at diferent times [zu verschiedenen Zeiten verschiedene Fassungen des Gedichts aufgezeichnet
wurden], of which remains can still be traced in our text. (3) Finally, an individual diaskeuast or
a committee of diaskeuasts, compilators, or redactors took up the task of forging together from
the diferent written versions in circulation [verschiedene umlaufende schriftliche Fassungen] a great epic
intended to exceed all previous versions in both extent and comprehensivity. The result was a
text one can characterize as the goal of the Poona edition, a goal that could, of course, only be
partially attained due to the inadequacy of the written transmission.50
Von Simson commits the very error Trovato cautions against. From the fact that the lines
in our stemma converge at the apex, giving us a codex unicus, he concludes the constriction
in the tradition must have been real, and he uses this to open up the tradition again above
the archetype, giving the tradition the form of an hourglass. He explains the absence of
any other descendants from the pre- archetypal tradition in terms of the inluence or the
20
20 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
dominance of the archetype, which he calls “the inal redaction” and attributes to the
redactors’ desire to ofer “as comprehensive a text as possible.”51
Unfortunately, the constriction in the tradition is only apparent. As Trovato observes:
Tracing a tradition back to an archetype dating, say, from the fourth century, does not at
all mean that “in antiquity” (or in the Middle Ages, or in the early modern period) a single
witness of our text was preserved, or a single copy that was authoritative for one reason or
another. What it means is that the witnesses available today do not allow modern philologists
to trace their way any further back than a given manuscript (usually lost), often far removed
from the original, and sometimes datable with fairly reasonable approximation.52
From the apparently unique nature of the archetype,53 we may not conclude that only one
exemplar of the text was in circulation, nor that this exemplar represents a “inal redac-
tion.”54 Von Simson is clearly interpreting archetype in the second of our two senses listed
earlier, that is, as “an especially authoritative exemplar, or as the result of a sudden and
inexplicable bottleneck in the ancient and medieval tradition whereby only one copy sur-
vived.”55 But no evidence exists that such a constriction occurred and hence also no evidence
appears of a concerted inal redaction responsible for reducing the number of copies of the
work to one. Von Simson’s error consists of not realizing “the archetype of the stemma has
nothing to do with the history of the tradition (oicial copies, if any; copies commissioned
for circulation by the author himself, etc.), but only with the ensemble of manuscripts that
happen to be available today, used by the philologist in the stage of recensio.” This is why
Trovato recommends textual critics “use the word archetype [only] to designate the point in
the stemma beyond which the surviving tradition does not allow them to reach.”56
Conclusion
The hypothetical ancestor of our manuscripts was probably one of several exemplars in existence at the time.
It is solely by chance that only its descendants, rather than those of other manuscripts, survived, resulting in its
apparently unique position in the history of the text. This uniqueness, however, is only apparent: it is a conse-
quence of the fact that our stemma models only a part of the history of the text. From the apparently unique
nature of the archetype, we may not conclude there was an actual reduction in the number of exemplars at the
time. A fortiori all theories that attempt to explain the reduction in terms of the actions of putative “redactors”
at the time are false. The idea of a conscious redaction (of oral epic materials) arises only because some scholars
do not know how to read the stemma correctly.
Von Simson is not simply confused about the meaning of archetype; he also intentionally
exploits the ambiguity in its meaning to contest the editor’s choices. From the fact
that the number of variants decreases as we approach the archetype, he concludes
the archetypal variants must be the result of careful selection, and thus opts for poly-
genesis of variants above the archetype. The constituted text is retained as the arche-
type, although it no longer refers to archetype either in the technical sense (the latest
common ancestor of the extant manuscripts that can be reconstructed on the basis
of their evidence) or in the historical sense (the oicial text of the author’s hand), but
is understood to mean “the late work of relatively untalented compilers.”57 Bizarrely,
von Simson holds on to the aim of a reconstruction of the archetype,58 even though
21
INTRODUCTION 21
his suggestion undermines the logical relationships on which the reconstruction is pre-
mised, and proposes to resurrect an earlier stage of the tradition through a subjective
evaluation of variants. According to him,
Since the older Bhārata or Mahābhārata versions were not suppressed by the gigantic epic
all at once but only bit by bit, some of the regionally attested manuscript versions could go
back to their inluence. The hypothesis of an Ur-t ext is not signiicantly impaired by this
assumption; but our attitude towards the readings will quite likely change, since they, in many
cases, could easily be older than the Ur- text envisaged by the critical editor.59
Scholars will recognize this passage as the source not only of Andreas Bigger’s “nor-
mative redaction” hypothesis or his hypothesis of a “parallel transmission” of the
Mahābhārata but also of his idea that some of the readings rejected from the constituted
text could actually have a greater claim to antiquity than the archetype.60 This passage
is also the source of Reinhold Grünendahl’s thesis that the text “was transcribed directly
from the oral tradition in a particular script.”61 His claim that “the text could have been
ixed in a script from the oral tradition repeatedly and in completely diferent periods
[der Text kann mehrmals und zu ganz verschiedenen Zeiten aus der mündlichen Tradition heraus ixiert
worden sein]”62 practically repeats verbatim von Simson’s idea that “diferent versions of
the poem were written down at diferent times [zu verschiedenen Zeiten verschiedene Fassungen
des Gedichts aufgezeichnet wurden].” Finally, we may cite the work of James L. Fitzgerald, who
cites, without crediting, von Simson’s thesis:
The Pune text gives us an approximation of what must have been a very prestigious and
important written Sanskrit text that eclipsed prior versions of the Mahābhārata both oral and
written, though probably it did not eliminate them altogether.63
Fitzgerald adds:
The critically established text is in part a “lowest common denominator,” and while
Sukthankar was right to posit that everything in this “Gupta archetype” (not his designation)
was faithfully transmitted everywhere (thus everything not found everywhere derives from
some source outside the Gupta archetype), that putative fact does not mean that any and all
textual elements not deriving from the Gupta archetype are posterior developments. In all
likelihood there were prestigious written redactions of a Sanskrit Mahābhārata prior to that of the Gupta
era as well as major and minor oral traditions. Many elements of such traditions not included in the “oicial”
Gupta era redaction no doubt found their way into many, or even all, of the particular manuscript traditions
through the normal processes of conlation.64
In spite of the widespread acceptance of von Simson’s thesis, it is unambiguously false.
The critical edition does not provide any support for the thesis of “older Bhārata or
Mahābhārata versions.” No justiication exists for thinking the text reconstructed in it is
an especially prominent exemplar, the product of an intentional redaction, compilation
of diferent narratives, replacement of oral versions and the like.65 As we have seen, these
interpretations are false, arising from a misconception regarding the nature of stemmatic
22
22 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
reconstruction, namely, that because the archetype occupies a prominent position on
our stemma, it must also have been an especially prominent exemplar for the tradi-
tion.66 In truth, the archetype may have been quite unexceptional from the perspective
of the tradition. It is only by chance that its descendants, rather than those of the other
manuscripts in circulation at the time, survived.
Further, in the absence of stemmatic arguments, how does von Simson know some
readings “could easily be older than the Ur- text envisaged by the critical editor”? The short
answer is: he does not. His selection of “older” readings relies on a priori ideas of an older
epic (for example, the war books or scenes rich in words for conlict are older than other
sections).67 The suggestion that “the older Bhārata or Mahābhārata versions” would have
been “suppressed by the gigantic epic [not] all at once but only bit by bit” ofers a super-
icially plausible model of how these allegedly older readings could have survived past the
constriction (or, as Bigger calls it, the “normalization”) in the tradition. But as no evidence
exists that such a redaction took place and the idea of a constriction is itself erroneous, the
thesis’s probative value is nil. The idea rests on a misunderstanding concerning the nature
of stemmatic reconstruction, coupled with creative theorizing. Likewise, the suggestion that
“some of the regionally attested manuscript versions could go back to their inluence [of
putative older oral versions of the epic]” is a feint, intended to provide a supericially plau-
sible model of how readings rejected from the constituted text as less archaic could be older
than the archetype. In reality, the stemmatic arguments for these readings as corruptions
is extremely strong, and anyone who wishes to contest them must do so: either (1) on the
basis of a diferent interpretation of the manuscript evidence, which von Simson has not
provided; or (2) by rejecting stemmatic arguments altogether, which von Simson has also
not done. His thesis is a transparent attempt to hold on, seemingly, to stemmatic recon-
struction, while advancing arguments for the antiquity of certain readings that are actually
non- stemmatic in nature, that is to say, his work is critical in name only.
At this point von Simson might interject that, although he was mistaken about the
constriction, the fact that several exemplars of the Mahābhārata were in existence at the
time of the archetype makes it especially likely that the critical edition represents just one
version of the work. It could therefore well be the case that the archetype was an author-
itative exemplar, speciically redacted by the Brahmans and thereafter copied assiduously
so that it replaced all other exemplars. Since our stemma models only a part of the his-
torical reality, we would be hasty to assume this version is an accurate representative of
the broader tradition. It may model just that part the Brahmans cared to preserve, and
hence he is not wrong to seek to discern the outlines of a heroic Aryan, Kṣatriya tradition
that preceded the Brahmanic one and was opposed to it.
The problem with this argument is threefold:
1. Von Simson’s argument only shifts the problem from above the archetype to either
adjacent to it or below it. It does not overcome the central diiculty that, in the
absence of manuscripts or positive historical information, we have no reason to
assume the existence of a heroic oral epic. If we have no evidence for a reduction
of a plural epic tradition above the archetype into it, we also have no evidence for
such a reduction alongside or shortly after it.
23
INTRODUCTION 23
2. Note also that the fact that we do not possess all exemplars ever produced does
not mean our stemma is not an accurate representation of reality. As Timpanaro
observes, “if it were possible to trace out the genealogical tree of all the manuscripts
of a given text that really existed (what Fourquet and Castellani call ‘the real tree’),
then this would almost always turn out to be much richer than the stemma we
end up reconstructing on the basis of shared corruptions.” But “for the purposes
of recensio this causes no problems: our simpliied stemmas function just as well for
reconstructing the reading of the archetype as they would if we were able to trace
out the ‘real stemmas.’ ”68 Although our hypothetical stemma models only part
of the reality, and our reconstruction would be richer if we had access to more
manuscripts (and it would take us back to an earlier stage of the tradition if we had
access to older manuscripts or manuscripts related to our witnesses through remote
ancestors), the text we restore would still be recognizably a text of this work.69 It
would not take us back to a diferent work altogether. At most we would be able to
identify some more latent errors in our archetype or ind that features we thought
our witnesses owed to it are owed to a still earlier ancestor. But we would not ind our
archetype is exceptional in any way. Consider, for example, the simpliied stemma in
Figure 3.
In the example, ω was copied at θ, δ, ε and ι. θ generated further copies at α, B
and γ; α generated copies at A and β, ε at η and ζ and ι at κ and λ. Δ was destroyed
before it produced further copies; A and B survived, but β, γ, η, ζ and κ and λ did
not. Our stemma would reconstruct only a part of the historical reality (θ– A– B).
The fact that we do not have access to α makes no diference to the reconstruc-
tion because, as Trovato observes, “the lines of stemmata, like geometrical lines,
are composed of ininite points,”70 that is to say, there could have been ininitely
many intermediate copies between θ and A (or α and A) without this making
any diference to the reconstruction. Access to β would also not help us, since
the errors unique to it are worthless for reconstructing the reading of the arche-
type and those it shares with A could be owed just as well to α as to θ. If we had
access to γ, we could be more certain of reconstructing θ, but we could still not
ω
ε
θ δ ι
η
α
κ λ
A β B Υ ζ
Figure 3 The part stands in for the whole
24
24 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
reconstruct an earlier stage of the tradition. Access to δ, ε or ι (or, if ε and ι are
destroyed, to η, ζ, κ and λ, since we could restore the reading of ε from η and ζ
and of ι from κ and λ) would permit us to reconstruct ω, and in this case we would
be reconstructing an earlier stage of the tradition. But ω remains the archetype
and the text we obtain, though older, would not be radically diferent, since θ, δ, ε
and ι are all copies of the same work.71 Although the versions more likely to survive
are those of successful editions (that is, the so-c alled vulgatae) or those that produce
the most descendants, unless we had a reason for thinking the text had undergone
a drastic change in the time it was copied from ω to δ (or ε or ι) and the time it was
copied from ω to θ, we have no reason for thinking δ, ε and ι represent Kṣatriya
versions of the epic and θ the Brahmanic version of it. As for the suggestion that
θ might itself be the “Brahmanic redaction,” what sense does it then make to
assert that it is a copy of ω? Θ would be a new work, and far from possessing just
the archetype of the surviving manuscripts, we would have the irst source of the
entire tradition, whether surviving or lost, that is, the original.72 Unless we can prove
θ is a completely diferent text (which requires another exemplar for comparison,
that is, δ, ε, ι or one of their descendants), we are justiied in thinking the part of
the tradition we have (AB) stands for the whole.73 It would be unparsimonious to
think otherwise.74
3. More serious, von Simson has not understood the way manuscripts are created and
destroyed at all. He thinks some exceptional event such as the destruction of the
heroic Kṣatriya culture and Brahmans’ concerted eforts to assert their own reli-
gious ideology is required in reducing the number of copies available to one. But in
truth, the process is less spectacular. As Vincenzo Guidi and Paolo Trovato show, at
almost all rates of decimation, the probability of a one-b ranched tradition is higher
than the alternatives.75 Although their analysis depends on the tradition studied,
they conclude that the calculations also apply to the study of real trees.76 Indeed,
Trovato notes:
Whatever the decimation rates used in our experiments, it is intuitively evident that, given any
real tree, with 2, 3, or exceptionally even 5 or 6 branches, the chances of survival for any of
its primary branches (which we can call real families) will be: a. high if it is a family crowded
with witnesses (and therefore in many cases with further branches of its own), b. low if it is a
family with few members, c. very low, or non- existent, if it is a family composed of a single
manuscript.77
Thus all that is required for other, hypothetically existent branches of the Mahābhārata
to have died out is for the number of copies in these branches to fall below a certain
threshold—w ithout the necessity of assuming the copies contained signiicantly diferent versions of the
epic. For the tradition of Sannazaro’s Arcadia, Guidi and Trovato show that it suiced “for
the decimation rate to be above 51.6% for there to be a high probability of ending up with
a two- branched stemma and the extinction of the archetype.”78 Given the vicissitudes
of manuscript transmission, it is quite plausible that all our surviving manuscripts are
descended, directly or indirectly, from a single source, without this source, for that
25
INTRODUCTION 25
12
10
15
16 13
12 13
18 21 32
27 31
22
28
23 25
941 CE 1144 CE
13
21
13 32
40 41 37
21 27 32 45
22 90 105 38
40 41 34 36 45 92 61
63
39 37 47 91 96 69
43 38
95 100
49 101
86
1287 CE End of process
Figure 4 The birth and death of manuscripts
Source: Reproduced from Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 139.
reason, being the sole manuscript in existence at the time,79 and without it being a special
Brahman-d ominated version, “relect[ive] of the[ir] view […] and […] to a great extent
driven by their interests and ideologically prejudiced.”80
Figure 4 illustrates the process of transmission of a work and clariies why the consti-
tuted text need not be as late as is often thought.
At 941 CE, three copies (10, 12 and 13) of the work survive and the tradition consists
of two branches. At 1144 CE, 12 is lost, but not before it set forth the tradition (of which
again copies 15, 16, 18, 23 and 25 are lost; only 22 survives). Copy 13 is about to disap-
pear, but has generated ive descendants. At 1287 CE, the last surviving manuscript of
the left branch (22) is about to disappear; without it, the original cannot be reconstructed
anymore. Nonetheless the surviving witnesses permit us to reconstruct 13, which as their
26
26 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
latest common ancestor is the archetype. If a part of the tradition descended from 13
was damaged (for example, 90– 92), this would not matter, because we could still infer
the existence of 21 from 96 and 105 (though not their intermediate archetypes), and
so reconstruct 13. If, on the contrary, 96 and 105 were destroyed as well, we could only
reconstruct 32, which in this case would be the archetype. Note that we do not need to
possess all the manuscripts ever produced to reconstruct the archetype. If 22 or any of its
descendants survived, we could still reconstruct the original itself: 22 is more valuable to
us than any number of descendants of 13 (provided we have at least one).
This example, though adapted from its original context,81 illustrates the danger of
thinking the Mahābhārata critical edition reconstructs a “Gupta-e ra text” (Fitzgerald)
and the like. The truth is we do not know, because the complete tradition is almost never
spread out before our eyes like this. 91 and 101 are very late copies, separated by seven
generations from the original, yet their agreement suices to give us the text of 13,
removed just two generations from the original. All that counts is that our manuscripts
model as wide a spectrum of the tradition as possible. One good manuscript deriving
from higher in the hierarchy brings us closer to the original than several lower down in
the stemma, and the lateness of our manuscripts should not be used as an argument for
the lack of originality of the text reconstructed in the critical edition.
In the example given earlier, a late sixteenth- or seventeenth- century copy of 22, pre-
suming it survived until then, was more valuable than fourteenth- or ifteenth- century
copies of 32. And since we do not know which manuscripts our witnesses are copies of,
and we have no way of estimating their distance from the original,82 we should place
much greater faith in the fact that we have some excellent manuscripts, whose text may
derive from eighth- or ninth-c entury CE sources, or even earlier ones, and that we appear
not to have lost any signiicant part of the tradition.83 If Sukthankar’s testimony—“ there
is nothing to suggest that our Mahābhārata manuscripts have sufered any serious loss
at any time. There never was any lack of manuscripts, many of which were preserved
carefully in temples, and which must have been copied repeatedly, for the enhancement
of merits. There is no evidence of any break in the tradition at any time or any place,
within the conines of India at least. The probable inference is that our manuscripts con-
tain all that was there originally to hand down, and more”84— is correct, then we have reason
to think the Mahābhārata as reconstructed in the critical edition is essentially the work
as it always existed: as we saw in the aforementioned example, all that matters is we
have one exemplar from the left branch of the tradition for us to reconstruct the orig-
inal. In other words, what is decisive is not the loss of individual manuscripts but the
annihilation of entire branches. As long as even one descendant of the branch survives, its
essential information is preserved and this means, provided none of the higher-l evel
branches has been fully decimated, that we can reconstruct a very early stage of the
transmission. If, as Sukthankar suggests, there was continuous copying of manuscripts,
it is entirely plausible that even higher- level branches of the Mahābhārata tradition
have been preserved (note that it is not the preservation of lower-l evel branches that
counts). It does not matter that these branches have been preserved through frequent
copying because the fact that our witnesses are three or four generations removed from
the source matters less than the fact that, when overlaid over each other, so to speak,
27
INTRODUCTION 27
they give us exceptional resolution of the original.85 There is no reason for thinking the
text we possess is anything other than the Mahābhārata as it always was: a work of phi-
losophy, law, cosmology and didactics.
Von Simson’s attempted “text-c ritical investigations” (textkritische Untersuchungen) into
the Mahābhārata mark a turn away from the methodological advances of the nineteenth
century— the introduction of a systematic recensio and replacement of emendatio ope ingenii
with emendatio ope codicum.86 They actually set the ield of textual criticism back 200 years,
to a stage before the discovery that the archetype can be reconstructed following a mathe-
matical and universally replicable procedure. In place of objective rules and calculations of
probability for deriving the reading of the ancestor of a given set of manuscripts, von Simson’s
work advocates a return to an arbitrary and subjective Quellenkritik, where readings are selected
at random because they conform to a preconceived notion of the original epic. As we demon-
strated in The Nay Science, the arguments for defending the greater antiquity of some readings
or passages over others are always the same four: (1) the bardic hypothesis, (2) the Ksạ triya
hypothesis, (3) the war narrative hypothesis and (4) the Brahmanic hypothesis.87 The redef-
inition of the constituted text of the critical edition as a conscious redaction of earlier oral
epic materials permits a recourse to a well- established German tradition of interpreting the
Mahābhārata as evidence of the enslavement of the Ksạ triyas by the Brahmans and the down-
fall of a heroic Aryan people.88
We cannot even argue that von Simson is advocating a return to the greater use of
subjective iudicium, the greater use of the editor’s subjective judgment of the authenticity
and quality of readings, because this presupposes a familiarity with criteria such as the usus
scribendi (the scribe’s habitual style) and lectio diicilior (the principle that the more diicult
or the more obscure reading is preferable), neither of which is applicable here because:
(1) von Simson does not think a single author existed and cannot be familiar with his style;
and (2) he does not know which the lectio diicilior is since he is not comparing two readings,
one of which represents the banalization of the other, but two readings, one of which is
supposed to represent the “oicial” choice of the Mahābhārata redactors and the other
the “original” content of the bardic narration. In fact, the only criterion applicable is the
critic’s sense of what may or may not have been appropriate to a heroic culture— a crite-
rion already applied in the work of Adolf Holtzmann Jr.89
As the unacknowledged source of almost all modern Mahābhārata criticism after the
completion of the critical edition, von Simson’s work has had a massive inluence on the
edition’s reception. Yet it is completely false. It has given scholars a way to recast or to
completely circumvent the evidence of the critical edition. As the earliest stage of the text
that can be reconstructed using scientiic means, the latter posed a major challenge to the
Mahābhārata critics’ theories of a heroic original epic, with later Brahmanic and bhakti
interpolations. The critical edition ofered no support for the distinction of “epic” from
“pseudo- epic” elements. It also did not justify scholars’ claims that parts of the constituted
text of the Mahābhārata could be earlier than others, or their attempted “layering” of the
epic. It did not support their contention that the Bhagavadgītā was not originally part of
the epic or that books such as the postwar S ́ānti and Anuśāsana parvans were added after
the formation of the original epic. There was also no evidence to support the thesis of
three historical versions of the epic corresponding to its three narrations—t he narration
28
28 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
by Ugraśravas to Ś aunaka, by Vaiśaṃpāyana to Janamejaya and by Vyāsa to his disciples.
Even though it rejected some of the most popular narratives in the Mahābhārata tra-
dition as later insertions, the text the critical edition produced was much closer to the
traditional reception of the Indian epic as a body of inspired literature than to the
German critics’ assertions. The Mahābhārata critics had hoped for a critical edition as the
best means for undermining the authority of the textual tradition,90 and the Bhandarkar
editors had countered with an edition bearing out the traditional reception of the epic. If
the critics were to survive, they would have to redeine the critical edition’s evidence in a way
conducive to their speculative views, and this explains the contemporary signiicance of the-
ories that the Mahābhārata critical edition captures but a late stage—s peciically the stage
of its irst transcription from an older, luid oral epic tradition— of its transmission.91 Von
Simson’s thesis ofered the critics a way to claim they were cognizant of the Mahābhārata
critical edition and took its evidence into account in their work, while continuing the kind
of subjective, unscientiic and only allegedly historical reconstructions they had previously
undertaken.92 As the basis of almost all claims about the Mahābhārata tradition in the con-
temporary period, the redeinition of the critical edition as either a “inal redaction” or as
a “normative redaction” (hereafter, we shall use Bigger’s term for it) is thus key to under-
standing contemporary Mahābhārata scholarship. In the next chapter, we therefore take a
closer look at it.
Notes
1 See P. L. Vaidya’s “Postscript” to the introduction to the Ś āntiparvan (S. K. Belvalkar, The
Śāntiparvan: Introduction [Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1966], ccxlviii).
Belvalkar intended to furnish his uninished introduction with a description of the
Mokṣadharmaparvan’s contents before his death.
2 Nineteenth- century German Indologists placed their trust in an oral Aryan epic, the so- called
Urepos. They argued this epic was the property of heroic Kṣatriya warriors, and they blamed
the Brahmans for turning it into a legalistic document concerning ritual, worship of ancestors
and theology. Although these views were anti- Semitic in inspiration and in intent (for Brahmans
read: priestly or Semitic; for heroic read: Aryan and Germanic), they still taint contemporary
Mahābhārata studies. For a discussion, see our The Nay Science: A History of German Indology
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2014), chapters 1– 2.
3 Thus, for instance, Fitzgerald, when he writes: “Between 400 and circa 50 BCE: the continued
circulation of that old narrative within a new oral Pāṇḍava epic, in which ive entirely new,
semidivine heroes were injected into the Bharata dynasty (depicted as incapable of sustaining
itself now) and then sufered exile from it, and, inally, allied with the old Pañcāla rivals, over-
threw the Kuru- Bharatas and established a new Bharata reign. This hypothesis thus agrees,
in part, with A. Holtzmann Junior’s thesis about a reversal of the polarity of the heroes and
villains (see Holtzmann, 1892),” and “Diferent versions of the ‘inversion’ theory were debated
at length by various authors pointed to in the last note. My historical focus on the epic’s history
is quite diferent from that of these earlier scholars, though clearly I think the ‘inversionists’
were on the right track.” James L. Fitzgerald, “Mahābhārata,” in Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism,
ed. Knut A. Jacobsen, Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar and Vasudha Narayanan (Leiden: E.
J. Brill, 2010); Brill Online, 2015; http:// referenceworks.brillonline.com/ entries/ brill- s- ency-
clopedia- of- hinduism/ mahabharata- BEHCOM_ 2020040 (accessed September 23, 2015) and
James L. Fitzgerald, “No Contest between Memory and Invention: The Invention of the
Pāṇḍava Heroes of the Mahābhārata,” in Epic and History, ed. David Konstan and Kurt A.
29
INTRODUCTION 29
Raalaub (Malden, MA: Wiley-B lackwell, 2010), 119, n. 18. But in less explicit ways as well,
contemporary Mahābhārata studies largely reprise nineteenth-c entury views: for instance,
when scholars insist the epic’s origins lie in a heroic, oral bardic tradition. In spite of the fact
that no evidence exists for this view and scholars have not found a way to combine textual crit-
icism, which presumes the mechanical transcription of written exemplars, with theories of oral
transmission, they still defend the oral origins hypothesis because of the unparalleled license
it gives them to make claims about the Mahābhārata. The entire problem of Mahābhārata
studies thus revolves around this one question: can scholars demonstrate the existence of an
oral epic in noncircular, non- self- referential or non- question- begging ways?
4 The Mahábhárata, an Epic Poem Written by the Celebrated Veda Vyása Rishi, 4 vols. (Calcutta: Education
Committee’s Press/ Baptist Mission Press, 1834– 39); Atmaram Khadilkar, ed., Mahābhārata
with Nıl̄akan ̣ṭha’s Commentary (Bombay: Ganpat Krishnaji’s Press, 1863); Vasudev Balacharya
Ainapure, ed., The Mahābhārata with the Commentary Bhāvadıp̄a of Nıl̄akan ̣tḥ a, 6 vols.
(Bombay: Gopal Narayan, 1901); T. R. Krishnacharya and T. R. Vyasacharya, eds., Sriman
Mahabharatam: A New Edition Mainly Based on the South Indian Texts with Footnotes and Readings,
19 vols. (Bombay: Javaji Dadaji’s “Nirnaya-s agar” Press, 1906–1 4); P. P. S. Sastri, ed., The
Mahābhārata (Southern Recension): Critically Edited by P. P. S. Sastri (Madras: Ramaswamy Sastrulu,
1931– 33); Ramachandra Kinjawadekar, ed., Mahābhāratam with the Commentary of Nıl̄akan ̣tḥ a,
6 vols. (Pune: Citrashala Press, 1929– 36). Two earlier editions, the Madras edition of 1855 and
the Sarfojirajapuram edition of 1896, seem not to have survived.
5 See Winternitz, expressing this precise anxiety in the bulletin of the 12th International
Congress of Orientalists: “This much, however, is clear even from the few extracts from
South- Indian MSS. hitherto published, that the text of the Mahabharata as found in
our Bombay and Calcutta editions is an utterly insuicient basis for critical researches
concerning the life of the great Hindu Epic, and that the text on which all Mahabharata
studies have hitherto been founded, is not the text but only one of the texts of the Mahabharata.”
Moriz Winternitz, “A Proposal for the Formation of a Sanskrit Epic Texts Society, to Be
Laid before the Indian Section of the XII International Congress of Orientalists, Held at
Rome, in October 1899,” XIIme Congrès International des Orientalistes, Bulletin no. 3 (1899): 46
(Winternitz’s italics).
6 Ibid., 47 (Winternitz’s italics) and see also Moriz Winternitz, “Promemoria über die
Nothwendigkeit einer kritischen Ausgabe des Mahābhārata, insbesondere der südindischen
Recension,” Almanach der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften 51 (1901): 207: “I therefore
already declared at the Paris Congress that a critical edition of the Mahābhārata organized by Western
scholars according to the principles of philological criticism valid in Europe is the conditio sine qua non of all
Mahābhārata research” (Winternitz’s italics).
7 Gianfranco Contini, “Ricordo di Joseph Bedier,” in Esercizi di lettura sopra autori contemporanei con
un’appendice su testi non contemporanei (Turin: Einaudi, 1974), 369 (Pugliatti’s translation).
8 V. S. Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” in The Ad̄ iparvan for the First Time Critically Edited, vol. 1 (Poona:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1933), ciii.
9 Lino Leonardi, “Il testo come ipotesi (critica del manoscritto-b ase),” Medioevo romanzo 35
(2011): 7.
10 Sukthankar’s earlier comment (see n. 8 of this Introduction) therefore must be relativized. The
critical edition is a “mosaic of old and new matter,” but to a lesser degree than the competing
editions, because of the editor’s concern with printing as archaic and as consistent a text as
possible. In fact, except for the places in which the text is forced to descend to the level of one
of its hyparchetypes (subarchetypes or archetype of only one branch of the tradition)—i ndicated
in the critical edition by a wavy line—w e have no reason for thinking the text is not continuous.
11 Michele Barbi, La nuova ilologia e l’edizione dei nostri scrittori da Dante al Manzoni (Florence: Sansoni,
1938), xxii– xxiii.
12 Doniger’s expression; see Wendy Doniger, “How to Escape the Curse,” review of The
Mahabharata, translated by John Smith, London Review of Books 31, no. 19 (2009): 17–1 8,
30
30 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
www.lrb.co.uk/ v31/ n19/ wendy- doniger/ how- to- escape- the- curse (accessed October 13,
2015). The complete passage reads: “There are several recensions of the Mahābhārata, each
preserved and cherished by a particular community. The critical edition, by contrast, is like
Frankenstein’s monster, pieced together from various scraps of diferent bodies; its only com-
munity is that of the Pune scholars, the Frankensteins. Moreover, it left out a great deal of
material that the Indian literary and religious traditions have continued to draw on, such as
the passage in which Vyasa dictates the entire text to the elephant-h eaded god Ganesha.”
13 These materials are not taken from the various manuscripts in existence. They are intel-
lectually intuited as belonging to their common source, based on well- understood rules and
calculations of probability. For instance, if we have a tripartite stemma consisting of three
extant manuscripts A, B and C deriving from a lost, common source α and two manuscripts
read m whereas the third reads n and m and n are not insigniicant variants, what is the like-
lihood two manuscripts simultaneously arrived at m whereas the third preserved the orig-
inal reading n? In restoring m to the constituted text, the editor does not “piece together”
the edition from m and similar passages: rather, he intuits with his mind’s eye what the
extant manuscripts’ common source must have contained, such that it can give rise to the
observed variants or such that the observed variation between the witnesses can be satisfac-
torily explained.
14 See preceding note. “Validated by the tradition” does not mean the line is taken from the
manuscript or manuscripts that contain it. Rather, the line is included in the constituted text
because it is logically understood as a feature of the archetype, and this logical understanding
is based on the tradition, although it then goes beyond it.
15 Sukthankar is aware of both aspects. See his “Prolegomena,” lxxxvi: “Our objective can only
be to reconstruct the oldest form of the text which it is possible to reach, on the basis of the manuscript mate-
rial available”; and ibid., ciii: “It only claims to be the most ancient one according to the direct line of
transmission, purer than the others in so far as it is free from the obvious errors of copying and
spurious additions” (all italics Sukthankar’s).
16 Note that adopting a particular recension of the Mahābhārata such as the Telugu recension,
as Doniger suggests, will not avoid the problem. First, the Telugu recension is a composite not
only in the sense that it is a mixture of good readings with scribal changes, obvious errors and
so on, but also because it includes much material from the neighboring Grantha recension.
The Telugu recension was found to be the most eclectic recension of the Mahābhārata. It
contained material not only from the Grantha but also from Devanāgarī, Bengālī and other
northern sources. Second, which of the available Telugu manuscripts should we use? The
Bhandarkar editors collected and examined 28 manuscripts of the Telugu recension, of which
three were included in the critical apparatus. Each contained a diferent mixture of readings
and episodes. Which should we take as representative of the “Telugu recension”? The task of
reducing the available readings to one cannot be avoided. Third, even if we restricted our-
selves to a single exemplar (for example, the manuscript T1), we would not solve the problem
of “[leaving] out a great deal of material that the Indian literary and religious traditions have
continued to draw on.” For this exemplar, like any other Mahābhārata manuscript, represents
just a selection of the material found in the complete tradition. It will also leave out certain
narratives. The problem can only be solved if we create an edition containing or representing
all Mahābhārata manuscripts, but how else to present this information and evaluate narratives
for their authenticity than by following a strictly hierarchical procedure, that is, by subordi-
nating the more recent readings to the more archaic?
17 Sebastiano Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, ed. and trans. Glenn W. Most
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 159, n. 3.
18 As Whitehead and Pickford also note. See Frederick Whitehead and Cedric E. Pickford,
“The Introduction to the Lai de l’Ombre: Sixty Years Later,” Romania 94 (1973): 153: “It is
exaggerated to represent a manuscript as preserving a state of the text that has enjoyed an
31
INTRODUCTION 31
authentic existence, since what we are dealing with is in most cases something as composite
as any reconstituted critical text produced by a scholar. A manuscript generally presents us
with several strata of alteration and behind many readings there is a complex history of
change.”
19 Giorgio Pasquali, Storia della tradizione e critica del testo (Florence: Le Monnier, 1952), 123,
expresses it beautifully: “The better the judge of […] a reading knows the language and habits
of the ages that transmitted his reading, or that may have coined it, the sounder his judgment
will be. The best critic of a Greek text handed down by Byzantine tradition will be the one
who, besides being a perfect Hellenist, is also a perfect Byzantinist. The best editor of a Latin
author transmitted in Medieval or post- Medieval mss. will be the one who is as knowledgeable
about the Middle Ages and Humanism as he is about the author and his language and times.
Such a critic is an ideal that no one can perfectly incarnate, but that it is everyone’s duty to
strive to come near to” (Trovato’s translation).
20 Bieler makes the same point: “Some scholars have gone so far as to forgo any attempt at a
classiication of manuscripts; they prefer to single out one manuscript that is on the whole more
satisfactory than the rest and follow this codex optimus except where it is defective or intelligible;
there, and there only, they would have recourse to other manuscripts or to emendations at their
own risk. This practice has no less a champion than Professor Bédier. […] To be sure, it does
away with a great deal of trouble—b ut is it really safer or more objective? Unless an extant
manuscript is demonstrably the original or at least the archetype (in which event it would be
treated as unique no matter what method the editor adopts), the choice for a basic text of
one manuscript rather than another rests on the same subjective considerations as does the
old- fashioned stemma codicum; and if this textus unius codicis is safe from the fallacies of recensio,
it has admittedly no determinable relation to the original— in other words, it is deliberately
uncritical. The inevitable improvements upon the basic manuscript must be arbitrary, even if
the editor has tact and taste; where these indeinable qualities are lacking, we may be prepared
for the worst. […] In the last analysis this is the abdication of reason in a sphere where it was
least expected.” Ludwig Bieler, The Grammarian’s Craft: An Introduction to Textual Criticism, 3rd edn.
(New York: The Catholic Classical Association, 1960), 18– 19.
21 The metaphor is F. A. Wolf’s. The complete passage reads as follows: “A true, continuous,
and systematic recension difers greatly from this frivolous and desultory method. In the
latter we want only to cure indiscriminately the wounds that are conspicuous or are revealed
by some manuscript or other. We pass over more [readings] which are good and passable
as regards sense, but no better than the worst as regards authority. But a true recension,
attended by the full complement of useful instruments, seeks out the author’s handiwork
at every point. It examines in order the witnesses for every reading, not only for those that
are suspect. It changes, only for the most serious reasons, readings that all of these approve.
It accepts, only when they are supported by witnesses, others that are worthy in themselves
of the author and accurate and elegant in their form. Not uncommonly, then, when the
witnesses require it, a true recension replaces attractive readings with less attractive ones.
It takes of bandages and lays bare the sores. Finally, it cures not only manifest ills, as bad
doctors do, but hidden ones too.” F. A. Wolf, Prolegomena to Homer, trans. with an introduction
and notes by A. Grafton, G. W. Most and J. E. G. Zetzel (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1985), 43– 44.
22 The term is von Hinüber’s. He voices the underlying objection thus: “Looking back, the
moment it [the critical edition] was planned turned out to be exceptionally fortuitous, as the
methodological advances that have been achieved in the recent period would have prevented
this edition [from being realized,] for its stated goal is to reconstruct the Ur- Mahābhārata,
a task of which we know in the meantime that it is completely unattainable. The text we
read in the ‘critical’ edition never existed in this form. What has arisen is not the Ur- text,
which could not have arisen at all, but a completely new normalized recension. […] It is
32
32 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
beyond question that they [the editors] have presented researchers with an extremely useful
working tool [Arbeitsinstrument], provided that it is used keeping in view its own methodo-
logical and historical conditions.” Oskar von Hinüber, “Der vernachlässigte Wortlaut. Die
Problematik der Herausgabe buddhistischer Sanskrit- Texte, Zur Überlieferung, Kritik und
Edition alter und neuerer Text,” in Kleine Schriften, Teil I, ed. Harry Falk and Walter Slaje
(Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2008), 436.
23 More precisely, since even German Indologists cannot fully dispense with a text, what they
really reject is the idea of a pregiven text, that is to say, a text that they have not given themselves
and hence could act as a check on their interpretations. Their eforts are thus directed against
the very idea of a transmitted text, be it the vulgate or the critical edition. Although this eleva-
tion of individual subjectivity over the text has complex roots, one source is clearly Luther’s
opposition to tradition as an independent source of revelation and, even more so, his valo-
rization of the historical context over other kinds of exegetic concerns. Luther’s statement,
“We do not illuminate the history (rem gestam) by the mysteries of Scripture, but [we illumi-
nate] the mysteries of Scripture by history, that means: [we illuminate] the Old Testament
by the Gospel and not vice versa,” could stand as the irst principle of the Indologists’ phi-
lology. Martin Luther, Commentary on Psalm 22, cited and translated in Siegfried Raeder,
“The Exegetical and Hermeneutical Work of Martin Luther,” in Hebrew Bible/Old Testament:
The History of Its Interpretation, vol. 2: From the Renaissance to the Enlightenment, ed. Magne Saebø
(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2008), 377–78. But it will take the dissolution of the
link between the text and divine inspiration in the transformation of the principle of scriptura
sacra est verbum dei (the holy Bible is the Word of God) into the principle scriptura sacra continet
verbum dei (the holy Bible contains the Word of God) in neo-Protestant theology to inally lib-
erate them from the dependence on not only the tradition but also the text. The primary fetter
to such a historicist hermeneutic is, of course, any form of traditional authority, including the
text itself insofar as it constitutes a source of authority heteronomous to their own, whereas the
primary obstacle to reading the text “historically” is the circumstance that the text interprets
itself. Hence their insistence on removing all parts of the text that explicitly state its purpose
including the Ādiparvan, the Bhagavadgītā and the Nārāyaṇīya.
24 We ind the same objection in a letter addressed to one of us, warning against the error of
reading the constituted text as running text. “The critical edition is no more than a conve-
nient working tool [Arbeitsinstrument], with whose aid one can survey what is (hopefully) a rep-
resentative selection of (hopefully) important manuscripts.” Michael Hahn, letter to Vishwa
Adluri, February 10, 2010, 4. But the constituted text is running text and can be read as such.
It was Sukthankar’s explicit intent that it be so. Against German critic Walter Ruben, who
recommended an indiscriminate use of the wavy line (indicating uncertainty), Sukthankar
objected: “even a constituted text is after all a text, meant to be read like any other text, and not
a chart of the aberrations of careless copyists of the last two millennia.” V. S. Sukthankar, “Epic
Studies III: Dr. Ruben on the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata,” Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Institute 11, no. 3 (1930): 280.
25 Alfredo Stussi, Introduzione agli studi di ilologia italiana, 4th edn. (Bologna: il Mulino, 2011), 116.
26 Lorenzo Renzi and Alvise Andreose, Manuale di linguistica e ilologia romanza (Bologna: il Mulino,
2009), 268.
27 Arrowsmith makes the same point. Philologists have been busy “keeping the texts pure and
uncontaminated” but without asking “for what and to whom.” William Arrowsmith, “The Shame
of the Graduate Schools: A Plea for a New American Scholar,” Arion: A Journal of Humanities and
the Classics, third series, 2, no. 2/ 3 (1992– 93): 173 (Arrowsmith’s italics). The philologist’s irst
concern must be to interpose himself as little as possible between the author and his readers.
28 Leonardi, “Il testo come ipotesi,” 6.
29 See Sylvain Lévi, review of The Mahābhārata. For the First Time Critically Edited, by Vishnu
S. Sukthankar, Journal Asiatique 215 (1929): 347: “Si j’osais me permettre une suggestion dans
ce domaine, je conseillerais à l’éditeur de renoncer, par pitié par nous, à la part même du
33
INTRODUCTION 33
travail qui lui tient le plus à coeur et qui apporte à son esprit le plus de satisfaction, la recon-
struction de l’Ur-M ahābhārata comme il se plait à dire, d’accepter la Vulgate— autrément
dit l’édition de Nīlakaṇṭha, par exemple—c omme point de départ, et de nous livrer au plus
tôt le dépouillement, comme il est fourni par ses notes, des manuscrits décrits et classés selon
l’excellente méthode qu’il a adoptée.”
30 Lévi’s proposal goes beyond Joseph Bédier’s. Whereas Bédier renounced Lachmannism only
for editing the bon manuscrit, Lévi requires the editor to renounce any attempt at interpreting
the manuscript material, including the identiication of the best manuscript. The editor is
not supposed to edit at all; he should merely reprint the vulgate. At most, his editorial
activity extends to collating manuscripts and collecting (not even ordering) the variants. Here
Lachmann’s dictum, “we can and must edit [recensere] without interpreting,” would truly be ful-
illed, but hardly in a way the elder scholar could have desired.
31 “The (printed) editions of Nīlakaṇṭha’s version leave much to be desired. They have arbitrarily
changed many of the readings and added a certain number of lines which are not found in the
Nīlakaṇṭha manuscripts hitherto examined.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxvii.
32 Ibid., lxviii.
33 Lévi could argue the editor should select one manuscript of the vulgate and stick rigorously to it.
But even here, he could not avoid providing a justiication of why this manuscript over another,
unless he wished to be perfectly arbitrary. A threshold of evaluative activity exists below which
an editor may not go. A critical edition can be made mechanical and free of subjectivity to a
great extent: it cannot be automated completely.
34 The same error occurs in Georg von Simson, Mahābhārata: Die Große Erzählung von den Bhāratas
(Berlin: Verlag der Weltreligionen, 2011), 688, when von Simson asserts: “The value of the
critical edition consists above all in the fact that it ofers a wealth of readings in its critical
apparatus and appendix that, in many cases, ease the task of interpretation, and that a not
insigniicant number of individual verses, groups of verses or even longer textual passages
that appear only in individual manuscripts or only in a few manuscripts have become recog-
nizable beyond reproach as late additions.” Von Simson seriously underestimates the value
of a critical edition when he thinks its primary function is to supply the reader with variant
readings “that lighten the task of interpretation.” The variants reprinted in the apparatus are
precisely those the editor rejected as of doubtful authenticity. Restoring them to the consti-
tuted text whenever the reader faces interpretive challenges undoes the point of establishing
a critical text. Von Simson’s understanding is closer to Lévi’s, for whom the apparatus
represented a mere spectrum of possibilities, from which anyone could choose. Von Simson
recommends this approach because his work consists primarily of identifying elements of
the “oral epic,” and hence he considers it important to portray the critical apparatus as no
more than a collection of readings of equal authority (and some of greater authority than the
constituted text).
35 Practically also, such a list would be less useful than Lévi imagines. In a true critical apparatus,
if the manuscripts a, b, c, d and e belong to the family A and for a given verse all of them feature
the variant x, the editor does not need to list them separately. He can merely note A x or A: x,
depending on his conventions. This principle holds true even if one or more of them vary. In
that case, he might note A (exc. b) x; b y or A (exc. b, e) x; b y; e z or A (d as in text) x. This approach,
of course, relies on his having completed a preliminary recensio or study of the manuscript
materials so that he knows a, b, c, d and e are descendants of a common source. In contrast,
Lévi’s proposed list will merely contain the raw data from the initial collations (the comparisons
of the manuscripts), without the all-i mportant preliminary digestion the editor will have done
for the reader. Since Lévi rejects genealogical analysis, this would be an apparatus without an
accompanying stemma and hence almost completely useless. It would inform the reader that
variants exist, but she would not know what the value of those variants is, what the genetic
relationship between them (or between the witnesses in which they occur) is and whether it is
legitimate to replace the printed text with a certain variant.
34
34 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
36 Reeve and Trovato ofer similar formulations:
Reeve: “a. (archetype of speciic witnesses) latest common ancestor; b. (archetype of
a work, or without qualiication) latest common ancestor of the known witnesses;
known witness when common ancestor of the rest.” Michael D. Reeve, “Archetypes,”
in Manuscripts and Methods: Essays on Editing and Transmission (Roma: Edizioni di Storia e
Letteratura, 2011), 117.
Trovato: “The archetype (archetype) [is a text that] can be reconstructed logically—w ith
2
varying degrees of accuracy—o n the basis of the number of conjunctive errors that are
common to all its descendants; that is, by subtracting from the total number of errors
attested in the tradition all separative errors that are exclusive to each family of witnesses,
and those characterizing individual witnesses.” Paolo Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted
to Know about Lachmann’s Method: A Non-S tandard Handbook of Genealogical Textual Criticism in the
Age of Post- Structuralism, Cladistics, and Copy- Text (Padua: Libreriauniversitaria, 2014), 64.
37 Barring divinatio (conjecture), of course. But for reasons that will become clear, neither does
much scope for divinatio in the Mahābhārata exist nor are the Mahābhārata critics’ attempts
to reconstruct an earlier stage of the transmission based on divinatio, at least as understood in
textual criticism.
38 Note that no new arrangement of the data will permit us to reach an earlier stage of the tradition.
We could, at most, restore some other variant or variants to the constituted text (moving ones
we previously thought were original to the critical apparatus), but this text would once again be,
by deinition, the archetype, and therefore the earliest form of the text that can be reconstructed
based on the available evidence. Note also that from the fact that the scribe committed error z
in moving from the archetype to one of its descendants, we cannot assume that he, or another
scribe, must likewise have committed error y in moving from the ancestor of the archetype to
the archetype. This would be an error of induction. And while testimonia such as fragments or
archaeological and other historical evidence may cause us to revise some of our judgments,
they will never justify us in editing our text drastically to it those testimonia, for testimonia
by their very nature are uncertain and could refer to a version of this text, an abridgment or
another text altogether. This is the error we ind in Dieter Schlinglof, “The Oldest Extant
Parvan- List of the Mahābhārata,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 89 (1969): 334–3 8 and
the literature based on his work. See John L. Brockington, “The Spitzer Manuscript and the
Mahābhārata,” in From Turfan to Ajanta: Festschrift for Dieter Schlinglof on the Occasion of His Eightieth
Birthday, ed. Eli Franco and Monika Zin (Lumbini: Lumbini International Research Institute,
2010), 75– 87.
39 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxxvi (Sukthankar’s italics).
40 That is, as a manuscript, detected through reconstruction, that stands at the apex of the
stemma and from which the branching of the tradition began.
41 Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, 50.
42 Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 64.
43 Hermann Kantorowicz, Einführung in die Textkritik: Systematische Darstellung der textkritischen
Grundsätze für Philologen und Juristen (Leipzig: Dieterich, 1921), 13 (italics added).
44 Pasquali, Storia della tradizione e critica del testo, 15, cited and translated in Trovato, Everything You
Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 65 (Trovato’s italics).
45 Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 65.
46 We have no reason to assume this except in an ininitesimal percentage of texts. In the majority
of cases that critics assumed such a reduction, it can be shown that they are confusing the
archetype in the irst sense with the second. Even Timpanaro occasionally commits this error,
as when he writes: “Some years ago, Courtney wrote a curious essay where he postulates a
fourth- century archetype for all the Virgilian codices that have come down to us. […] He
appears to be aware of the unlikelihood that a single copy of the Virgilian text was preserved
at a certain point in antiquity,” not noticing that the confusion he attributes to Courtney is
35
INTRODUCTION 35
his own. Sebastiano Timpanaro, Per la storia della ilologia virgiliana antica (Rome: Salerno
Editrice, 1984), 181, cited and translated in Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about
Lachmann’s Method, 65. Without other evidence (for example, the testimony of ancient scribes or
historiographers), we cannot know whether all the copies of a text were reduced at some point
to one. Only in cases where we possess only a single exemplar of a text can we assume such a
thing, but to call this witness an archetype of itself would be an unusual use of the term.
47 Georg von Simson, “Altindische epische Schlachtbeschreibung, Untersuchungen zu
Kompositionstechnik und Entstehungsgeschichte der Bücher VI bis IX des Mahābhārata”
(Habilitationsschrift, University of Göttingen, 1974).
48 Ibid., 282.
49 Ibid., 283.
50 Ibid., 283– 84. We have given the German because these phrases recur almost verbatim in the
work of Bigger and Grünendahl. Bigger: “zu irgendeiner Zeit in schriftlicher Form ixiert wurde”;
“die einzig schriftliche Fassung”; “Verschiedene Abschreiber fügten jedoch […] aus anderen
(jüngeren?) schriftlichen Fassungen— im Verlaufe der Zeit Passagen aus anderen Versionen in
die Abschrift ein.” Andreas Bigger, Balaram̄ a im Mahab̄ har̄ata: Seine Darstellung im Rahmen des Textes
und seiner Entwicklung (Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1998), 14 and 111. Grünendahl: “schriftlich
in einer bestimmten Schrift ixiert worden”; “mehrmals und zu ganz verschiedenen Zeiten […]
schriftlich ixiert worden sein.” Reinhold Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata-
Handschriften,” in Studien zur Indologie und Buddhismuskunde, ed. Reinhold Grünendahl, Jens Uwe-
Hartmann and Petra Kiefer- Pülz, Indica et Tibetica 22 (Bonn: Indica et Tibetica Verlag,
1993), 128.
51 Von Simson, “Altindische epische Schlachtbeschreibung,” 282.
52 Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 66.
53 Apparent only from the perspective of the tradition, for which there would have been many
copies, and not from our perspective, from which the archetype is really unique. Perhaps
corresponding to the distinction between the several senses of archetype we should introduce
a distinction between a text that is a codex unicus for us and one that is a codex unicus simply or
without qualiication.
54 It is irrelevant whether this supposed redaction is called a “inal redaction” (von Simson), a
“normative redaction” (Bigger) or a “Gupta redaction” (Fitzgerald): the error is the same. All
three authors commit the error of identifying this supposed exemplar with the constituted text
reconstructed in the critical edition, Fitzgerald most egregiously in Brill’s Encyclopedia, when
he introduces and discusses the critical edition under the heading: “The Written Sanskrit
Mahābhārata: The Gupta- Era Text Reconstructed from the Manuscript Tradition.”
55 Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 64.
56 Ibid., 66.
57 Von Simson, “Altindische epische Schlachtbeschreibung,” 285.
58 See ibid.: “All these features [errors in recollection, introduction of synonymous expressions, dis-
placement of verses, etc.], which, together with the efects of the contamination of manuscripts,
have made the creation of the critical edition so diicult appear to me, however, to exclude nei-
ther the hypothesis of an archetype of the extant manuscripts nor that of an Ur-t ext, to which
these would have to be traced back. One must only be clear about the fact that this Ur- text was
the late work of relatively untalented compilers. […] If there ever existed an Indian Homer,
then his work is not our Mahābhārata but an earlier version of the epic, now forever lost to us.”
59 Ibid., 285– 86.
60 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata; and see also Andreas Bigger, “The Normative Redaction
of the Mahābhārata: Possibilities and Limitations of a Working Hypothesis,” in Stages and
Transitions: Temporal and Historical Frameworks in Epic and Purān ̣ic Literature. Proceedings of the
Second Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purān ̣as, ed. Mary Brockington
(Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts, 2002), 21– 33.
36
36 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
61 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 128.
62 Ibid.
63 James L. Fitzgerald, “The Mahābhārata,” in The Hindu World, ed. Sushil Mittal and Gene
Thursby (New York: Routledge, 2004), 70.
64 Ibid. (italics added). And see also Fitzgerald, “Mahābhārata,” where Fitzgerald, combining von
Simson’s and Bigger’s hypotheses, presents this account: “The text established by Sukthankar
and his colleagues is an approximation of a written redaction of the text that became norma-
tive (Bigger 1998; Bigger 2002), which seems to have served as the actual written source of
most of the subsequent manuscript tradition, but which evidently did not function as the sole
source of the text of every parvan.”
65 Philipp Maas thinks “the inal redaction(s) of the MBh,” which, he argues, “would be the
archetype(s) of all manuscripts,” are “the result of a single authorial/r edactorial intention.”
He adds: “It is, however, improbable, in my view, that the comprehensive literary material
was created anew for this occasion. I would rather assume that a lot of material (written
and/ or oral) was reused, rearranged, and adapted to the intentions that guided the com-
position of the MBh [these ‘intentions’ can apparently be grasped in an act of immediate
intellectual intuition, an intuitus originarius].” Philipp A. Maas, message to Vishwa Adluri,
online session on Academia.edu, October 10, 2015. Why exactly he thinks the “inal redac-
tion” is the “archetype” of all manuscripts he does not explain: surely the archetype is the
latest common ancestor of the surviving manuscripts, and there is no reason it should be
the “inal redaction.” Then again, the text of the “inal redaction,” assuming one occurred,
could have existed in several manuscripts. Which of these was the archetype? Maas evidently
views transmission not in terms of mechanical transcription of written exemplars, but as an
oral epic tradition and its “Brahmanic” redaction or redactions. He uses archetype precisely
in the sense Trovato cautions against, that is, as “an especially authoritative exemplar, or
as the result of a sudden and inexplicable bottleneck in the ancient and medieval tradition
whereby only one copy survived.” Note also that if archetype is to have a deinable meaning,
it can only exist in the singular: there is no such thing as the “archetypes” of a tradition.
Likewise, the expression “inal redactions” is logically incoherent: if there were several, nei-
ther can be inal.
66 These claims are false for a second reason, namely, von Simson’s arguments for an oral epic
are merely suggestive and do not prove the existence of such an epic. As in his article “Die
Einschaltung der Bhagavadgıt̄ā im Bhıṣ̄maparvan des Mahābhārata,” Indo- Iranian Journal 11, no. 3
(1968/ 69): 159–7 4, he uses the fact that questions are not answered immediately or in the most
obvious way to impute the work of later “interpolators,” and from this he concludes that the
Mahābhārata, puriied of these passages, would correspond roughly to the original oral bardic
epic. The argument is doubly lawed, because:
1. Digression and a resumption of the original theme following a digression are not evidence
for interpolation: the Mahābhārata has a recursive style, and the repetition of groups of
words or phrases is not restricted to “interpolators.” Von Simson’s analysis assumes that
because the narrator resumes the narration with the same or similar words after a digres-
sion, the intervening passage must be an insertion and the repetition evidence of a hasty
attempt to smooth over the transition.
2. Even if von Simson could show these passages are interpolations, this would not prove the
existence of an earlier oral epic. Von Simson merely assumes one of the characteristics
of the oral tradition is its brevity, its focus on the main combatants and its emphasis on
warfare. But these could also be features of a written composition. His arguments also do
not succeed in eradicating or altering the story’s basic dimensions: its placement within
a mimetic universe, the yuga framework and its representation as another stage in the
perennial conlict between the gods and the titans. The following is a typical example
of his analysis: Noting that Saṃjaya does not respond directly to Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s “precise
37
INTRODUCTION 37
question” (ke ’rakṣan dakṣin ̣aṃ cakram ācāryasya mahātmanaḥ | ke cottaram arakṣanta nighnataḥ
śātravān ran ̣e ||, Mahābhārata 7.129.3) but instead describes how some Pāṇḍava heroes
attacked Droṇa and how the nighttime battle commenced in general terms, he suggests
this is evidence the following passages are an insertion into the original text. He further
notes that a few lines later Dhṛtarāṣṭra once again interrupts Saṃjaya to ask about the
combatants’ reactions to Droṇa’s appearance on the ield and for further details (tasmin
praviṣtẹ durdharṣe sṛñjayān amitaujasi | amṛṣyamān ̣e saṃrabdhe kā vo ‘bhūd vai matis tadā ||,
130.1). His conclusion is as follows: “Verse 130.5 of Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s question appears to be
connected directly with 129.3[:] Whereas the inal pāda of this verse corresponds word for
word with 129.3d, the diaskeuast attempts in another place to vary: he contrasts kathaṃ
mṛtyum upeyivān in 129.4 with a better chosen kathaṃ … pañcatvam upajagmivān in 130.7. In
the description of battle, death is spoken of often enough. However, when in spite of con-
sulting the Pratīka- Index, the word pañcatva is attested at the beginning of a pāda only out-
side of the battle, except for this one case, then we can consider this a deinite sign for the
latest origin of our passage.” Von Simson, “Altindische epische Schlachtbeschreibung,”
208. The literal repetition amounts to four words (nighnataḥ, śātravān, ran ̣e and kathaṃ), three
of which occur ive times in the Mahābhārata (the phrase nighnataḥ śātravān alone occurs
seven times and the singular form nighnataḥ śatrūn another seven) and are common enough
words in a description of battle, and the fourth is one of the commonest interrogatives in
the Mahābhārata. There is nothing surprising about Saṃjaya initially responding with a
general description of the battle: this is a common feature of the Mahābhārata, and von
Simson exaggerates the discrepancy when he suggests Dhṛtarāṣṭra is forced to restate his
question.
67 Von Simson’s 1974 Habilitationsschrift is rich in examples of subjective reconstruction. He
argues in the introduction that “if traces of the old, orally improvising heroic poetry are
to be found anywhere, then it is here [in the battle scenes].” He continues, “Precisely the
wealth of small duel-s cenes ofered the possibility of distinguishing the prosaic and the typ-
ical [elements] from the unique, the essayed original [elements], those leading to the artiicial
poetry that was conceived of in written form. The origins of the Mbh out of an orally impro-
vising epic poetry manifests itself in a wealth of details also demonstrable in the epic poetry
of other peoples. […] That the description of battle contains older and more recent sections
can be deinitively demonstrated in at least some places.” Von Simson, “Altindische epische
Schlachtbeschreibung,” 9. The methods he applies to this end are “statistical examinations
of vocabulary and metrical analyses” and “[the identiication of] repeated groups of verses”
(also occasionally a more nebulous criterion of “style”). Ibid., 10. Using these criteria he
eliminates several verses, even though the criteria are subjective and the argument is circular,
and his claim to “continue the text-c ritical work [already done by Sukthankar] on the basis of
the Poona edition [the critical edition]” (ibid., 7) amounts to a confusion of lower and higher
criticism.
68 Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, 164.
69 Something similar can be observed in the efort to sequence all the genes of the human in
the Human Genome Project. Even though every human carries a diferent combination of
DNA bases or “letters,” sequencing the genes of just a few sample individuals (in actual fact,
more than 70 percent of the reference genome came from a single male donor) still provides
us with an accurate picture of the human genome. If we added samples, we would obtain a
more granular picture (which is being done in the project to develop a haplotype map of the
human genome), but we would not suddenly arrive at the chimpanzee genome. We would
deepen our understanding of individual variation and the range of our analysis, but because
the individuals studied are members of the same family, we would still ind that the genome
initially sequenced accurately represents the whole.
70 Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 148.
38
38 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
71 In Figure 3, although we possess only the part θ– A– B (θ reconstructed on the basis of AB),
θ– A– B nonetheless stands for the whole because, as in a hologram, every part contains the
whole. Θ will give us the work x, which is contained in all of its exemplars without ever being
identical to any of them, including ω. It may give us that work with variations— as do all the
exemplars: even in ω, where x comes as close to being realized as possible, ω is never fully iden-
tical with x, the work in mente, even before we consider the possibility of scribal errors, authorial
revisions and the like— but it gives us that work nonetheless.
72 Could von Simson accept θ is the original, a work in ieri, the apex not only of our hypothetical
stemma but also of the historical tree (the arbre réel) and yet insist we must draw a dotted line
into θ from some point still higher than it, indicating contamination from an earlier source? He
could, but only if he had another manuscript for comparison, that is, either an apograph of
this source or a quotation from it or even testimony about it. But the Mahābhārata cannot itself
be both an example of a contaminated text and evidence for the source of contamination.
73 The following illustration may make things clearer. Let our nine regional recensions of the
Mahābhārata stand for higher-l evel branches, descending through one or two generations
from the original. If eight of these branches were lost through decimation and only the
Grantha branch was preserved, generating the descendants G1–7 , we could reconstruct their
archetype G through comparing their readings. We could identify some interpolations and
correct some corruptions, though perhaps not many, as the archetype is close in time to its
witnesses (the archetype for this reason would also be more diicult to identify). If we had
access to the Ś āradā codex, we could reconstruct not just G, but also the common ancestor of
the Ś āradā and Telugu manuscripts, by deinition the archetype of the entire Mahābhārata
tradition. We would ind this text is much shorter than G (the Grantha recension has a strong
tendency to inlation) and we could restore many good readings (Ś āradā is a better tradition).
But we would not ind Ś āradā was a Kṣatriya epic, whereas G contained a Brahmanic text.
At most, we would note a tendency to elaboration, speciication of the proper rites and rituals
and more extensive phalaśrutis in G. But no recension among our nine recensions would lack
entire books (for example, the Ś ānti or the Anuśāsana parvans) of the Mahābhārata. The idea
that if we could just ind another recension, at the same level in our stemma as the archetype,
we would suddenly see that the Mahābhārata was originally a Kṣatriya epic is an illusion, no
doubt arising from the earnest desire to possess such an epic.
74 It is also hardly credible that θ represented such a major innovation over ω yet no one noticed
the diference or that the other exemplars, which would now be not just better or worse copies
of the same work but completely diferent works than θ, were not conserved. The reasons for a
line’s extinction are varied and include natural catastrophes, unfavorable economic and social
conditions and so on, but one of them is clearly that successful editions that meet popular
demand lessen the incentive to continue copying earlier models. In this case, since θ is not just
an edition of ω but a completely diferent work, we have no reason for thinking ω would not
continue to be preserved from one of its other descendants. Von Simson’s argument assumes
just that blend of malevolence and destructiveness he attributes to the Brahmans, the proof of
which is supposed to be that the original has not survived!
75 Vincenzo Guidi and Paolo Trovato, “Sugli stemmi bipartiti. Decimazione, assimmetria e
calcolo delle probabilitità,” Filologia italiana 1 (2004): 9– 48.
76 Guidi and Trovato restrict themselves to the traditions of printed editions, which have the
advantage that the entire tradition, as well as the exact dates of creation and loss of exemplars,
is known.
77 Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 145.
78 Ibid.
79 To be very clear, we are discussing two diferent things here: the irst is whether the archetype
was the sole manuscript in existence at the time it was created or at the time copies were made
from it (it was not); the second is whether it is possible that branches of the tradition deriving
39
INTRODUCTION 39
from other exemplars in existence became extinct over time, leaving this branch as the sole one
in existence (it is highly probable, as Guidi and Trovato’s work and the experience of other
editors shows). Thus von Simson is wrong on multiple counts: irst, he thinks the archetype was the
only text in existence at the time; then, he imagines a special event was required to ensure it was the
only text in existence at the time; and inally, he also confuses the gradual decimation of exemplars
over time below the one exemplar that happened to generate copies that survived, leading to this
branch of the tradition becoming the sole branch we can reconstruct, with the extinction of the
Ksạ triya tradition all at once and alongside or just before the archetype (barring those “surviving”
elements, of course, that he thinks he can detect with higher critical means in the Mahābhārata).
80 Von Simson, Mahābhārata: Die Große Erzählung von den Bhāratas, 591.
81 See the note to the diagram. The original is from Michael P. Weitzman, “Computer Simulation
of the Development of Manuscript Traditions,” Bulletin of the Association for Literary and Linguistic
Computing 10, no. 2 (1982): 55–59, but we could not examine this work. Weitzman’s convention
is to designate lost exemplars by circles; dotted circles represent exemplars about to disappear.
Weitzman and Trovato both feature the diagrams in order to make a point about the frequency
of two- branched stemmata (namely, given random manuscript “death” a two-b ranched stemma is
the likeliest outcome). Our concern is not the likelihood of bipartite stemmata but the constantly
changing position or the constantly changing identiication of the archetype in the stemma.
82 Spencer and Howe argue we can “estimate […] the actual number of changes given the
observed number of changes, using a mathematical model for copying errors.” Matthew
Spencer and Christopher J. Howe, “Estimating Distance between Manuscripts Based on
Copying Errors,” Literary and Linguistic Computing 16, no. 4 (2001): 467. Their work is based
on deriving a relationship between observed and actual errors, but permits us neither to date
manuscripts nor to know the number of intermediaries separating an exemplar from a given
source. Distance, in their model, apparently refers to “the average number of changes per
location (word)” and is expressed literally as the length of the lines in the stemma. Ibid.,
467– 68.
83 The oldest dated manuscript of the Ādiparvan is the Nepālī manuscript Ñ3 dated 1511 CE.
Sukthankar estimates the S ́āradā codex S1́ is “three or four centuries old.” Sukthankar,
“Prolegomena,” xlvii. This would place it around the sixteenth century CE. The manuscript’s text
appears very old: it lacks many interpolations that characterize the other manuscripts; it is free of
their innovations; the language is archaic. Assuming birch- bark manuscripts last 300– 400 years
before they deteriorate and an upper limit for the age of palm- leaf manuscripts is 800– 1,000 years,
the scribe of the S ́āradā codex could have had access to a twelfth- century CE exemplar. If its scribe
in turn had access to an old exemplar, we could be looking at a text perhaps ive or six generations
removed from the autograph. The classic study on Indian writing materials is A. F. Rudolf Hoernle,
“An Epigraphical Note on Palm-L eaf, Paper and Birch-B ark,” Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal
LXIX, II (1900): 93–1 34. See also D. C. Sircar, Indian Epigraphy (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1965).
Stefan Baums, “Gandhāran Scrolls: Rediscovering an Ancient Manuscript Type,” in Manuscript
Cultures: Mapping the Field, ed. Jörg Quenzer, Dmitry Bondarev and Jan- Ulrich Sobisch (Berlin,
Munich and Boston, MA: de Gruyter, 2014), 183– 226, describes birch- bark manuscripts dating to
the second century BCE, but these appear to be exceptional cases.
84 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xcv (Sukthankar’s italics).
85 As always, frequent copying of manuscripts is the best remedy against loss of the tradition
and what frequent copying introduces in terms of errors it more than makes up in terms of
preserving the tradition. A lower signal-t o- noise ratio—t hat is, a higher level of noise—i s pref-
erable to no signal at all.
86 Recensio refers to the systematic review or examination of the available manuscripts (or at least
a large selection of them). Emendatio ope ingenii is emendation with the help of native wit as
opposed to emendation with the help of manuscripts (emendatio ope codicum).
87 Adluri and Bagchee, The Nay Science, 79– 83.
40
40 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
88 See von Simson’s introduction to his abridged translation—M ahābhārata: Die Große Erzählung
von den Bhāratas. After stating, “Researchers are still divided about the genesis of the Sanskrit
version, which dates back possibly to the middle of the irst century BC but was probably
brought into the form we know today only centuries later,” he writes: “as with the Trojan War
depicted in the Homeric Iliad, in the center of the Mahābhārata is a war we cannot locate politi-
cally and historically.” Ibid., 583 and 585. Then he continues: “The Brahman authors and
redactors to whom we owe the epic’s latest revisions sought to legitimize with all the rhetorical
means [at their disposal] a social structure in which they could claim the dominant role. Already
since the late Vedic period the battle for supremacy between the Kṣatriyas and Brahmans was a
constant topic. […] The picture we encounter here is by no means a balanced one, but rather,
relects the view of the epic’s Brahmanic revisionists, and this view is to a great extent driven
by their interests and ideologically prejudiced. The interests of the Brahmans, that is, the class
interests of the priests and intellectuals, are clearly expressed above all in Books III, XII and
XIII where there was rich occasion for reminding the Kṣatriyas, that is, the members of the
warrior class, of their duties and for warning them by means of suitable narrative examples of
the punishments that threaten for overstepping bounds. Such reprimands can even be put in
the mouths of Kṣatriyas, as is the case, for example, of Kṛṣṇa in the ‘Bhagavadgītā’ or Bhīṣma
in Books XII and XII— probably they attained even greater signiicance in this way.” Ibid.,
591. See also ibid., 603: “Such textual passages, which retard [the action] and invite one to
relect [on it] and provide a commentary on the main narrative from moral and philosophical
perspectives, could hardly have belonged to the oldest poem, which appears to have known
only an articulation of the plot into ‘the quarrel,’ ‘the forest- exile,’ and ‘the war,’ as is appro-
priate to a heroic poem”; ibid., 638: “He [Vyāsa] is a Brahman, priest, seer and ascetic—h is
introduction as the author of the Mahābhārata thus probably irst occurred in the period when
the Brahmans had taken over the poem from the sūtas, the epic bards”; ibid., 639: “The great
battle, however, in which we may see the core of the old heroic poem, is narrated by the char-
ioteer (sūta) Saṃjaya to his master, the blind King Dhṛtarāṣṭra”; ibid., 640: “the ixation of the
text in writing was, in fact, preceded by a phase in which epic materials were transmitted by
orally improvising epic bards, whom we can thus identify with the sūtas”; ibid., 641: “Although
indications of early precursors of the Mahābhārata exist that were possibly transmitted only
orally [and were] perhaps closer to ballads than to an epic, [precursors] that may have emerged
in the milieu of the sūtas which was closer to the Kṣatriyas, the text we possess places so much
emphasis on the Brahmans’ superiority over the Kṣatriyas (founded on their spirituality and
ascetic lifestyle) that one can infer an extensive revision by the Brahmans”; “Here [in the ifth
book] the talk is still of the glory of the warriors, which may have been the genuine topic of the
old bardic poem”; ibid., 643: “The Brahmans’ animosity toward the warrior nobility expressed
here indicates just how far the Mahābhārata had traveled from its origins in a bardic poem that
probably had a much closer connection with the Kṣatriyas. The repeated destruction of the
Kṣatriyas occurs as a punishment for their arrogance and their insuicient respect toward the
Brahmans. It is thus not a glorious victory as in the old heroic poem”; ibid., 644: “certainly,
this was the main objective of the Brahmanic revisionists of the heroic poem transmitted of
old, namely, to impel the Kṣatriyas to accept the Brahmanic legal order”; and ibid., 645: “there
once existed diferent versions of the Bhārata poem in competition with another, be they oral
or be they written, which were at some point combined into a [single] text by the Brahmans’
redactional activity.” And see also ibid., 632 and 664 for references to “Indo- Germanic” and
“Aryan,” respectively as characterizing the epic’s earliest stage.
89 See Adluri and Bagchee, The Nay Science, c hapter 2. The key passage from Holtzmann Jr.
is: “We thus ind some similarities in the conditions of the most ancient Indian and the most
ancient Germanic periods; here as there we encounter a battle- lusty warrior race with all the seeds
of culture alongside a cruel crudeness of passion. Whether here one must suppose [the epic is] a
recollection of a primordial age during which they lived together or a further development
41
INTRODUCTION 41
that ran parallel under similar existential conditions, I cannot decide here. [But] it is certain
the Mahâbhârata has preserved traces for us that reach back to a very early period of Indian
antiquity; that therein recollections of an Indo-G ermanic primordial age have been preserved,
is, at least so far, at best plausible.” Adolf Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahābhārata
(Kiel: C. F. Haeseler, 1892), 51 (italics added).
90 The relevant passages appear in Winternitz’s article “The Mahabharata,” The Visva- Bharati
Quarterly 1 (1924): 343–4 7. See especially ibid., 343: “[I]f I wished to show you the diference
between the Indian and the Western attitude of mind in studying things Indian, I could not do
better than showing you what the Mahábhárata is to us, why we study it and how we study it”;
“Every Indian is justly proud of the Mahábhárata, and every Indian probably knows some-
thing of the story and the characters of the great Epic. But I venture to doubt whether many
Indians know what the Mahábhárata really is and all that it contains in its hundred thousand
slokas. For, as I have said, it is rather a whole literature than a single poem”; “Mahábhárata
is an abbreviation of Mahábhárat- ákhyána, and means ‘the great story of the battle of the
Bháratas.’ The Bháratas are mentioned already in the Rigveda as a warlike tribe, and in the
Bráhmanas we irst meet with Bharata, the son of Duhsanta and Sakuntalá, who is considered
as the ancestor of the royal family of the Bháratas”; ibid., 344: “In consequence of some family
quarrel in the royal dynasty of the Kauravas, there arose a great and bloody war, in which the
old family of the Kauravas or Bháratas was almost entirely annihilated. Although we know of
this war only from the Mahábhárata, and not from any other sources, we shall have to look
upon it as most probably a historical event. The story of this battle was sung in ballads, and out
of these ballads some great poet of name unknown created a great historic epic of the battle of
Kurukshetra. This old heroic poem forms the kernel of the Mahábhárata”; ibid., 345– 46: “To
the present day this gigantic work in spite of all the divergent elements which have entered into
it, is generally considered in India as one uniform poem, composed by the venerable Rishi,
Krishna Dvaipáyana, or Vyása, who is also credited with the arrangement of the four Vedas
and the authorship of the Puránas. (This is about the same as if one were to believe that the
whole of Sanskrit literature from Kalidasa to Jayadeva was composed by one man.)”; ibid.,
346: “These statements [regarding the epic’s multiple narrations] prove that, even in India, in
spite of the pious belief in the authorship of Vyása for the whole poem, some recollection was
yet retained of the fact that the Mahábhárata had gradually grown from an originally smaller
poem to its present size. Of this fact there can not be the least doubt that our Mahábhárata,
as we have it now before us, is a very diferent work from the original epic poem of the battle
of the Bharatas”; and ibid., 347: “The critical historian of Indian literature will not join in this
praise of the Mahábhárata. He will not see in it as a whole, a work of art at all, but a literary
monstrosity. The Mahábhárata, as we have it now, is a vast compilation of the most heterog-
enous [sic] matter, a very jungle of poetry and learning in which the most beautiful lowers of
poetry grow side by side with weeds of no beauty at all; and the profoundest wisdom is found
by the side of the silliest rubbish” (Winternitz’s italics throughout).
91 Referring to the text as “the epic as we have it” is another way to achieve the same end. If the
expression merely refers to the text we have, it is unobjectionable, for the epic we have is obvi-
ously, though trivially so, the epic as we have it. Actually, however, what Fitzgerald (who uses
the expression) intends therewith is the presumed contrast with another version, diferent from
the one we presently have. Here is how he glosses it: “By ‘the epic as we have it’ and ‘text of the
Mahābhārata’ I mean the written redaction of a Sanskrit text of the MBh that was composed
and promulgated sometime around the time of the Gupta empire. This text was approxi-
mately recovered in the unsuccessful efort to arrive at a critical edition.” James L. Fitzgerald,
“The Rāma Jāmadagnya ‘Thread’ of the Mahābhārata: A New Survey of Rāma- Jāmadagnya
in the Pune Text,” in Stages and Transitions: Temporal and Historical Frameworks in Epic and Purān ̣ic
Literature. Proceedings of the Second Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purān ̣as,
ed. Mary Brockington (Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts, 2002), 89, n. 1. We
42
42 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
discuss the problems with thinking the critical edition represents a “written redaction” and with
the idea that an archetype must have been specially “composed and promulgated” in the next
chapter.
92 This is neatly illustrated by Fitzgerald’s comments in the introduction to his translation of
the Ś āntiparvan. Contrasting himself with Madeleine Biardeau, he writes, “Readers may see,
however, that I am, at least in principle, much more concerned than she is with matters of
history. Where Biardeau sees in the Mahābhārata some instance of a uniied epic- purān ̣ic cos-
mology and theology, I see it as situated in particular circumstances, as a pragmatic utterance
which certain agents used to some advantage. I also see it as having a diachronic history— that
is, as containing within it various later developments of some of its own earlier formulations.”
James L. Fitzgerald, “Introduction [to the Book of Peace],” in James L. Fitzgerald, trans., The
Mahābhārata, vol. 7:11. The Book of the Women; 12. The Book of Peace, Part One (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2004), 127, n. 198. The problem is: a study of the text’s diachrony must
begin with the archetype and what develops from it as the history of the text and not earlier.
This history is captured in the critical edition, which thus presents the only objective basis for
its study. The diachronic history of the text is precisely what the stemma and apparatus of
variants record. To seek to study it prior to the text’s irst recorded emergence (or what can be
reconstructed as such) is the study not of diachrony but of pseudochrony. In that it exceeds the
domain of what can be said, it is not even pseudochrony but simply nonsense.
43
44
The irst editorial board of the Mahābhārata critical edition
Source: Reproduced from the frontispiece of the Prospectus of a Critical and Illustrated Edition of the
Mahābhārata, India’s Great National Epic.
45
Chapter One
ARGUMENTS FOR A
HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE
Our only source is the manuscripts themselves, and therefore, in the inal analysis, these stemmata. We therefore
do not have the right to repudiate their evidence on the pretext that it appears absurd to us.1
— Robert Marichal, “La critique des textes”
The Normative Redaction Hypothesis
The constituted text is not the archetype of the tradition but merely a “normative redaction,” deined as “a
redaction that had a normative efect and overgrew all other versions.” The critical edition reconstructs “a text
that was a historical fact at a certain period in time,” but precisely because it is not the archetype, it should not
hinder us from exploring “the prehistory of the normative redaction.” Above all, we should consider “passages
rejected from the constituted text,” as they could be evidence of a “parallel transmission” of the Mahābhārata.
We commence our review of post- critical edition Mahābhārata scholarship with a look at
Andreas Bigger’s work. Although the thesis that the critical edition reconstructs merely
the Mahābhārata’s “inal redaction” rather than its archetype is not new—a s we have
seen, it originated in 1974 with Georg von Simson2— its contemporary renaissance can
be traced almost exclusively to Bigger,3 speciically his hypothesis that the constituted
text reconstructs the “normative redaction” of the Mahābhārata, deined as “a uniform
redaction that was ixed in a written form at some time and to which further texts and
streams were added by later copyists.”4 The characteristic feature of this redaction, how-
ever, and the feature that lends it its name, is that it “had a normative efect and overgrew
all other versions.”5
As an example of such a version, Bigger cites Nīlakan ̣ṭha’s seventeenth- century vul-
gate edition. He argues, “if in the seventeenth century a commentator could compile a
text of the Mahābhārata that disseminated itself in certain circles and thereby doubtless
suppressed other versions, it is also conceivable that a much earlier redaction attained
such authority that it dominated the entire written transmission.”6 Apparently, the oicial
text of the Mahābhārata in the normative redaction decimated other versions in exis-
tence, both oral and written, thus enabling a new Brahmanically authorized version—
and, concurrently, a Brahmanic vision of society—t o take hold.7 The salient feature of
the normative redaction, however, and the reason Bigger advances the hypothesis, is
that it permits him to reinterpret verses found only in some manuscripts as remnants of
an earlier oral epic tradition. Although rejected from the constituted text as of doubtful
authenticity, Bigger argues, “from the perspective of a theory of a normative redaction
[…], some of them represent a parallel transmission. The normative redaction admittedly
46
46 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
suppressed the other versions in these cases. But some copyists incorporated parts of
these versions in their copy of the normative redaction.”8 Identifying and collecting these
passages thus not only permits him to reconstruct an earlier stage of the transmission
than what is represented in the critical edition (the so-c alled prehistory of the normative
redaction);9 it also undermines the critical edition’s claims to accuracy and authenticity.
If Bigger’s thesis is correct, it will reveal, as Oskar von Hinüber postulates, that “what
has arisen [in the critical edition] is not the Ur-t ext, which could not have arisen at all, but
a completely new normalized recension [eine ganz neue normalisierte Rezension].”10 Ultimately,
the normative redaction hypothesis validates the German Mahābhārata critics’ suspicion
that “much of what [we] would like to count among the characteristic content of the poetry,
proves ultimately the inferior, derivative work of later copyists [Schreibermachwerk],” thereby
reinstating their authority.11 Hence their interest in embracing it.
Normative Redaction, Archetype and Original
Textual criticism allows us to reconstruct the archetype of the tradition, which represents a constriction in the
tradition attributable to a “normative redaction.” This reconstructed archetype, however, only gives us access to
the oicial Brahmanic text resulting from the redaction of an earlier oral tradition. It neither accurately models
the contents of the tradition nor can it be seen as a copy of the original, since the tradition was plural above the
archetype and a single original never existed.
Before we consider Bigger’s normative redaction hypothesis in greater depth, let us irst
understand why the stemma codicum indicates a narrowing—b ut only apparently so—
of the tradition. Consider V. S. Sukthankar’s stemma of the Ādiparvan (Figure 5).12
Vya¯sa’s Bha¯rata
Ur-Maha¯bha¯rata
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
S´a¯rada K Nepa¯l¯ı Maithil¯ı Bengali Devana¯gar¯ı Telugu Grantha Malaya¯lam
S´1 K0–6 N˜ 1–3 V1 B1–6 Da1.2, Dn1–3, T1.2 G1–6 M1–5
D1–7
Figure 5 Textual tree of Ādiparvan versions, illustrating the stemmatic relationships
47
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 47
The Mahābhārata editors used the common- error method, so called because it is based on
the insight that only shared errors prove manuscripts related, to identify the genealogical
relationships between the witnesses.13 Once these relationships were identiied and the
manuscripts it into a stemma, they used simple rules to determine the reading of their
probable ancestor, known as the archetype. Because all extant manuscripts were descended
from a single source, by eliminating innovations or secondary readings unique to a speciic
branch of the tradition, the editors could arrive at a codex unicus, the unique manuscript
that represented their best conjecture of the text of this source. The circumstance that
the editors reduced the multiple readings in evidence to a single one for every line of the
Mahābhārata, thus creating a unique text, explains the apparent narrowing of the tradi-
tion as we ascend toward the archetype.
We must remember, however, that this narrowing is only apparent. In reality, the
archetype was not the sole source in existence at the time. It just so happens that its
descendants rather than those of other manuscripts survived, giving it its apparently
unique position in the stemma. If we wished to represent the “true” state of afairs, our
stemma would probably look like Figure 6.
From this diagram, it should be immediately clear that the archetype was nei-
ther the sole exemplar in existence at the time nor does it represent a constriction
of the tradition.14 It is therefore incorrect to assume that the tradition was plural
above the archetype, but underwent a reduction at the time of the archetype, as the
many versions in existence were assimilated or standardized into one oicial copy.
Yet Bigger commits this precise error. From the fact that the archetype occupies the
vertex of the stemma, he concludes that the tradition was reduced to a single exem-
plar, and uses this fact to open up the tradition again above the archetype. Let us read
his own words:
The MBh, which presents itself in the manuscripts, goes back to a uniform redaction that was
ixed in a written form at some time and to which further texts and streams [sic] were added
by later copyists. In that case a critical edition makes sense, since it represents an attempt to
reconstruct this normative redaction.15
Concurrent with this redeinition of the archetype as a “normative redaction” (and the
identiication of this so-c alled redaction itself with a real, historically existing text),16
Bigger also argues for reconsidering the relationship of the archetype and the original.
Rather than view the archetype as editors have traditionally done—t hat is, as a copy,
however remote, descended from the original so that if we can reconstruct it, we will
come as close as possible to the author’s text17— he argues that it represents a deliberate
revision of the original. Indeed, this revision is so extensive that it represents a break
in the transmission and the original epic survives only as fragments that the normative
redaction could not erase.18 Bigger explains:
At the time of its creation, the normative redaction was not the sole version of the
Mahābhārata. Rather, there existed other versions parallel to it, which, however, were
suppressed in the course of time by the normative redaction. It is conceivable that, in its time,
the normative redaction was the sole written version of the Mahābhārata, which allowed
48
K
55
13 56 57 72 73
1 14 46 47 71
9 12 15 484950515253 70 78 79
2
3 4
1011
16
22
252627
40 4344 54 7677 7574 8188 820
38485
5 171819 3941 61
20 28 2930 42 4558 63
21 2324 59 60 62 646566
6 78 313233 343536 37 38 6768
Figure 6 The “real” stemma
newgenrtpdf
49
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 49
it to dominate the written tradition of this work. In the course of time, however, diferent
copyists inserted passages from other versions—p artly from direct recollection, partly from
other (younger?) written versions— into the transcript.19
If we imagine the tradition as two cones placed one on top of the other apex to apex,
we come closest to understanding Bigger’s view of the tradition. Above their common
vertex, the tradition was oral and plural. Rather than a single authorial text, several
versions existed. The normative redaction interrupted this variable tradition and
created, instead, a single text. It not only led to a reduction in the number of copies
or versions in circulation but also exercised a normative efect on their contents in the
sense that, henceforth, only the authorized version (or versions in conformity with it)
was preserved. Repeated copying of this new version caused the tradition once again to
spread beneath the archetype, but the relationship of the archetype to the original is no
longer that of a copy and its source. Rather, the archetype represents a new tradition
connected only tenuously to the earlier one through elements accidentally preserved in
the archetype. Proceeding in reverse, we irst encounter several manuscript versions
of the Mahābhārata. As we successively eliminate their unique readings, the tradi-
tion keeps narrowing until we reach their common source, the archetype. However,
because this work is neither the irst origin of the tradition nor a faithful reproduc-
tion of the preceding tradition, the critical edition does not provide us an accurate
insight into the Mahābhārata.20 It merely occupies a prominent place on the stemma
because it reconstructs a deliberate redaction that reduced the number of copies in
existence. The Mahābhārata editors erred in privileging this work, and, in at least
one instance, for similar reasons as its hypothetical architects, the Brahmans.21 Using
“the methods of higher textual criticism,” we can and must go beyond its text to at
least a partial original by identifying remnants of the older oral tradition surviving
either in the archetype or through other means.22 As “the most complete collection of
Mahābhārata versions,” the critical edition presents an invaluable aid in this task, but
no more than that.23
Criticism: Higher and Lower
The redeinition of the constituted text as a normative redaction rather than an archetype permits us to recon-
struct earlier stages of the tradition using “higher criticism.” In contrast to textual criticism, which is a rigorous
and mechanical procedure that begins with the manuscript evidence and attempts to infer the manuscripts’ likely
sources based on shared errors of transcription, higher criticism uses subjective, a priori criteria to identify cer-
tain passages as older than others and therefore as part of the “genuine” epic tradition.
Although every single one of Bigger’s contentions is false—t he critical edition does not
attempt to reconstruct the Mahābhārata’s “normative redaction”; there is no evidence
that such a redaction existed; it is erroneous to assume that the archetype was the sole
exemplar in existence at the time; the apparently unique nature of the archetype must
not be confused with a real reduction in the number of exemplars in circulation; and it
is illicit to use this hypothetical reduction to open up the tradition once again above the
archetype, giving the tradition a funnel shape— we nevertheless take a closer look at his
50
50 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
work, as it permits us to delineate a truly critical approach from one that merely appears
critical. We shall focus on the distinction between historical criticism, sometimes called
higher criticism in contradistinction to lower criticism and identiied with the reconstruction
of stages before the archetype,24 and textual criticism—t he stemmatic method proper,
which culminates with the reconstruction of the archetype.25
Textual criticism proceeds from the assumption that our manuscripts are copies
of an original, whether extant or not, and seeks on the basis of the genealogical
relationships between them to identify their descent from it. If the original is no longer
extant, these relationships can be used to conjecture the reading of the archetype, the
(latest) common ancestor from which all extant manuscripts are descended, and to recon-
struct this archetype by eliminating the innovations unique to one branch of the tradi-
tion or to speciic manuscripts. We begin with the witnesses and attempt, on the basis
of their evidence, to reconstruct the text from which they derive (the ancestor or source).
For example, if we have three witnesses A, B and C arranged in a tripartite stemma of
the form
α
/ | \
ABC
and A and B ofer the reading x and C ofers the reading y, it is likelier that A and B pre-
serve the original reading and C contains the innovation, provided neither A nor B is the
source of the other’s reading (horizontal transmission or contamination) and x is not such that
A and B could have arrived at it independently (simultaneous innovation, polygenetic innovation
or polygenesis of errors). Fitting manuscripts into a stemma thus presents editors a mechan-
ical way of choosing between the available variants for a variation place rather than using
subjective criteria such as sense or style.26 Above all, it lets us identify latent errors, that
is, readings that, due to their unexceptional nature, might have escaped our notice as
innovations over the original in the absence of the stemmatic method. Gianfranco Contini
describes stemmata as “an objective and mechanical tool, invented to sort out, in the
irst instance, the quarrel between variants that are in themselves equally acceptable: [...]
variants that are pronounced erroneous serve to brand as erroneous those that have
remained equally acceptable.”27 Paul Maas irst formalized the principles by which editors
make these choices in his classic Textkritik. He used the hypothetical stemma shown in
Figure 7 to illustrate the basic principles.
We do not review these principles here, but it is important to note the special status
of α in his stemma. Maas noted that α, as “the source from which the irst branching
occurred,” is called the “archetype” and that “the text of this archetype is free of all
errors that arose after the branching; it is thus closer to the original than the text of all
witnesses. If we thus succeed in securing this text, the constitutio is signiicantly advanced.”28
Although Maas conceded that in three of the four possible outcomes—“ recensio thus leads
either to an extant codex unicus or to an archetype that can be reconstructed with certainty
or to two variant texts that are either extant or can be reconstructed and ensure the text
of the archetype only when they agree but not when they vary”— we must examine the
51
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 51
(Original)
α (Archetypus)
β (Hyparchetypus) γ (Hyparchetypus) (K)
δ
A B C (D) E
ε
F
H
G
J
Figure 7 Maas’s hypothetical stemma, illustrating the distinction between hyparchetype,
archetype and original
Source: Modiied from Maas, Textkritik, 7.
transmission to see if it is original, reconstruction typically aims not at an original, but at
an archetype.29 Thus he noted:
In this examination, the transmission proves to be the best conceivable, or equivalent to
others we can conceive, or worse than others we can conceive but still tenable, or untenable.
In the irst of these four cases the transmission must be considered original, in the last one as
corrupt, in the two middle ones one may or must doubt. […] If the archetype of an entire
work proves completely free of corruptions, it can be the original, that is, the branching could
have begun with the original itself. I know of no major work of a classical author in which this possi-
bility must be considered.30
Maas allowed a limited scope for divinatio (conjecture), through which the editor can
attempt to improve the text and thus in some respects come closer to the irst source of
the entire tradition,31 but he remained skeptical of historical criticism:
The methods of historical source criticism are closely related. But whereas the literary trans-
mission leads back to an original essentially identical with all witnesses in that it is likewise
52
52 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
a manuscript, at the beginning of the historical transmission stands an event that by its very
nature resists being given a written form and is already colored or falsiied by the irst witness,
indeed often intentionally so. Whereas the literary art work’s organic nature, which we expe-
rience as necessary in every element, can survive millennia without severe damage, espe-
cially in a culture subject to its efect, often only the roughest outline of the historical event
transcends doubt, and often not even this. […] But nowhere will the path be as clear, the goal
as attainable as in textual criticism of the classical authors.32
Whereas textual criticism typically culminates with the reconstruction of the arche-
type, the German Mahābhārata critics saw the critical edition as merely preliminary
in their search for the hypothetical original epic. They argued that it represented a
beginning or a base from which they could reconstruct, using criteria such as style,
hypothetical concerns and social and ideological features, the heroic oral epic posited
as the Mahābhārata’s distant and lost source. Here is how Bigger encapsulates the
distinction:
Lower criticism alone demonstrates a passage as not belonging to the normative redaction.
Higher criticism cannot change anything regarding this inding. But it can help interpret this
passage and locate it text- historically. One could say lower textual criticism is the scenery on
a stage, which fundamentally structures the space. In contrast, higher textual criticism is [like]
the lighting, which admittedly cannot alter the scenery and its structure, but can enlarge and
intensify its efect through casting the appropriate light on it.33
We later examine Bigger’s arguments from higher criticism for reconstructing an ear-
lier stage of the transmission than the critical edition. But note the redeinition of tex-
tual criticism in terms of lower criticism as merely a propaedeutic to higher criticism.
Textual criticism does not “alone demonstrat[e] a passage as not belonging to the norma-
tive redaction.” It gives us a reconstructed archetype that is the latest common ancestor
of all extant manuscripts and, barring its errors of transcription, a descendant of the
author’s copy of the work. It tells us about the reading of this archetype, rather than
merely determining which passages belonged to it.34 It does not say anything about their
belonging to a “normative redaction,” because no evidence exists for such a redaction
and it is prejudicial to redeine the critical edition thus. Higher criticism not only “cannot
change anything regarding this inding”; it also cannot “help interpret this passage and
locate it text- historically.”35 As we saw in the introduction, absent extrinsic historical evi-
dence only lower criticism permits us to evaluate the antiquity of readings. Indeed, all
Bigger means by “interpret” is that we can determine whether a given passage relects a
Ks ̣atriya or a Brahmanic worldview. In contrast, we saw in the introduction that a study
of the text’s diachrony must begin with the archetype and what develops from it as the
history of the text and not earlier. The idea that, beyond the reconstructed archetype,
we can identify a textual history for certain passages is a misconception, arising from the
German critics’ faith that they can identify remnants of the oral epic based on subjective
and a priori criteria. Insofar as it seeks to demonstrate that readings rejected from the
constituted text are older than the archetype, higher criticism is not even a method, but
merely a bombastic name for their prejudices. Sukthankar succinctly summarizes these
prejudices:
53
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 53
A careful analysis of the poem from this view- point reveals the fact that in its present form
at least, the work has a radical defect in so far as it consists fundamentally of two mutually
incompatible elements, namely, a certain “epic nucleus” and an extensive and undigested
mass of didactic- episodical matter, elements which are but loosely hinged together and
which form moreover an unbalanced combination. The irst element, the epic nucleus, is
naturally the older component and is presumably based on an historical reality, which is pre-
served in a highly distorted and tendentious form but which retains nevertheless certain gen-
uine archaic features in fossilized condition such as polyandry and levirate, which latter are
of immense interest and importance for the study of Indian ethnology and prehistoric antiq-
uity. The nucleus mentioned above was now unfortunately used— or rather misused— by
wily priests, tedious moralists and dogmatizing lawyers as a convenient peg on which to hang
their didactic discourses and sacerdotal legends, which have naturally no organic connection
with the epic nucleus. This nucleus of the epic, a Kṣatriya tale of love and war, does possess
a sort of unity, which is lacking entirely in the other element, the priestly episodes and
the moralizing discourses, which latter by themselves, loosened from their moorings, would
neatly and automatically fall apart. The epic story is in part at least a fairly well- constructed
narrative, worthy of our attention, and produces the impression of having been yet more
virile— a real “human document”— before it was distorted in the process of assimilation
with the moralistic pabulum and legal claptrap of a grasping and degenerate priesthood.36
His review of the German scholars’ so-c alled higher criticism ironically mocks the
German “savants”:
The Mahābhārata is in short a veritable chaos, containing some good and much useless
matter. It is a great pity that a ine heroic poem, which, may even be found to contain precious
germs of ancient Indian history, should have been thus ruined by its careless custodians. But
it is not quite beyond redemption. A skillful surgical operation— technically called “Higher
Criticism”— could still disentangle the submerged “epic core” from the adventitious matter—
known to textual critics as “Interpolation”—i n which it lies embedded. The Mahābhārata
Problem thus reduces itself to the discovery of criteria which will enable us to analyse the
poem and to dissect out the “epic nucleus” from the spurious additions with which it is
deeply incrusted. This is the “Analytical Theory” of the origin and the character of the
Mahābhārata, which was espoused by the majority of the Western critics of the Great Epic of
India, chief among them being Lassen, Weber, Ludwig, Sörensen, Hopkins and Winternitz.37
We do not trace further criticisms of the German scholars’ so- called higher criticism.
It suices to note that Bigger’s attempted reinterpretation of the constituted text as the
Mahābhārata’s “normative redaction” is not disinterested.38 It actively undermines the
relationships on which the critical edition is based for a racially and anti-S emitically
charged hypothesis of a Brahmanic takeover of a Kṣatriya epic.39 The normative redac-
tion difers from both the archetype and the original in that it refers neither to an appar-
ently unique source from which all surviving witnesses are descended nor to the irst
source of the entire tradition or a copy of this irst source. Once this hypothesis is
granted, the stemmatic reconstruction cannot stand. The critical edition becomes pre-
cisely what Bigger and von Simson declare it: evidence of Brahmanic mischief. In the
next three sections, we examine Bigger’s arguments for a Ks ̣atriya layer. We show that
none of them meets standards for objective, dispassionate analysis. Indeed, not one is
text- critical.
54
54 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
The Argument from Spread and the Argument from Resilience
Textual criticism only permits us to reconstruct the source of the irst branching. However, this ignores the
possibility that the tradition was plural before the apex. The reconstruction of the archetype is thus an error,
arising from the fallacious assumption that all readings derive from a unique text (argument from spread). Our
reconstructed archetype is based on readings that passed through the constriction between the two cones, whereas
readings that fell directly from the upper cone to the lower without passing through the apex could be older (argu-
ment from resilience).
Refutation of the argument: The argument from spread fails because it overlooks that the shape of the
tradition before the archetype is irrelevant for the reconstruction of the archetype, which remains ex hypothesi the
oldest ancestor of the extant witnesses that can be reconstructed. In fact, the archetype makes no claims about
whether the tradition spread away from the original or all readings fell through one particular manuscript. It
only claims that all our manuscripts are descended, however remotely, from this one source. Likewise, the argu-
ment from resilience fails because it erroneously infers the existence of a real constriction in the tradition from
the archetype’s apparently unique position in the stemma and further argues that some readings at least could
have escaped the archetype’s constricting efect.
Neither von Simson’s nor Bigger’s claims are tenable on stemmatic grounds, but to grasp
the precise source of their error we must irst understand exactly how they redeine
the critical edition. As we have seen, neither thinks the critical edition reconstructs a
text descended more or less immediately from the irst source of the entire tradition.
Likewise, they do not think the critical edition represents the archetype in the sense of
the latest common ancestor to which the extant witnesses owe their text. In one sense, the
witnesses owe their text to it, because they are clearly descended from it, but, in another
sense, they do not owe their text to it, because some of their readings— speciically, the
passages they identify as “Ks ̣atriya” passages— derive from an earlier, oral epic tradition.
Von Simson and Bigger use this circumstance to claim that, whereas the archetype— or,
as they call it, the inal or the normative redaction40— exercised a constricting efect on
the tradition, controlling the number of Ks ̣atriya elements that lowed past this constric-
tion to its descendants, it is the irst source of only some of their readings. Crucially, it
is not the source of the readings that lowed through it. Reconstructing the archetype
therefore gives us access neither to the tradition before it nor to the tradition after it, since
we owe only a part of this tradition to it. In fact, the only moment in the text’s history
the archetype accurately models is the moment of its inception—p recisely the moment
the redaction occurred.41 Hence its limited value. Mutatis mutandis the critical edition is
useful only as a base for further investigations. It recovers a certain stage of the transmis-
sion, permitting us to identify everything included at this point in the text, but we must
be prepared to unfold the tradition both before and after it, identifying, on one hand,
everything eliminated from it and, on the other, everything composite in it suggesting
remote origins.
Although unexceptionable from the perspective of their theory of editing, several
problems exist with von Simson and Bigger’s interpretation of the critical edition. Let
us address them individually. First, the view that the archetype is not the source of all
the readings it contains, since some of them originated with its ancestors in a chain
of manuscripts leading back to the original is true, but irrelevant for the deinition of
the archetype, which remains the latest common ancestor to which the extant witnesses
55
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 55
owe their text. Second, the idea that the archetype’s apparently unique position in the
stemma derives from its constricting efect on the tradition is a misconception. As we
saw, the narrowing of the tradition as we ascend toward the archetype is only apparent.
The impression of a constriction only arises because von Simson and Bigger open up the
tradition before and after the archetype, giving it the form of an hourglass, but not at
the archetype. Third, insofar as they are aware of it, they misinterpret Maas’s deinition
of the archetype as “the source from which the irst branching occurred.”42 They think
it correct provided it is applied only to the tradition after the archetype, that is to say, the
archetype is the source from which the irst branching of the later tradition occurred, but
because it is not the source from which the irst branching simpliciter occurred— which, if
it occurred at all, would have begun with the original or the moment of its irst copying—
it is erroneous to treat it as the archetype. The archetype is the irst starting from below
or it is the irst before the extant tradition, but because editors reconstruct only the tra-
dition from below, they overlook its perfectly provisional position. As Michael D. Reeve
has already addressed all three fallacies in an article on reconstructing archetypes, let us
look at his work.43
Reeve examines Enrico Flores’s argument for treating the archetype not as the source
of conjunctive errors common to the entire surviving tradition, but as a manuscript that
editors reconstruct by accident because they approach the tradition from below.44 He irst
notes Flores’s problematic deinition of the archetype:
Before tackling the fallacy itself, I must say how Flores understands “archetype.” He begins
by citing Maas’s deinition, “the exemplar from which the irst split began” but takes it out of
context. […] In context, […] “the irst split” means the earliest of the splits revealed by analysis
of the extant witnesses; but “in reality,” says Flores, “the irst split or splits, a fact apparently
all too often forgotten, began from the moment when a text was written down and started to
circulate and spread in a number of copies.” He therefore understands Maas’s “irst” as the
irst from below, or in other words the irst reached in the process of reconstruction from the
extant witnesses; but since in this process many points of convergence may be reached before
the archetype, he has to gloss “the irst” as “the irst before the extant tradition.” […] Equipped
with this lopsided distinction between the irst from above and the irst from below, Flores goes
on to allege that scholars have deined “archetype” either from above as “the oldest witness, a
lost one, common to the whole manuscript tradition of a text” (presumably he means all the
manuscripts that have ever existed) or “the lost witness from which descend more or less imme-
diately all the oldest witnesses that survive and the rest of the derivative manuscript tradition.”
The second deinition, as he says, is Maas’s; but whose is the irst? Quite apart from its poor
wording (since a witness cannot be common to a tradition), what it deines is the original, unless
the original is preserved or only its descendants count as witnesses. When Flores says that for
Maas the two deinitions are equivalent […], how is he taking this irst one?45
Reeve resumes:
Already, then, Flores’s remarks about the meaning of “archetype” betray misapprehension
and confusion. Confusion persists when he tries to prove Maas’s notion of “archetype” inco-
herent, and it is in these attempts that he repeats in various forms a fallacious argument
about conjunctive errors. […] In a later passage, Flores sets out to show that the origin of
56
56 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
conjunctive errors can be pushed back ever higher in the transmission, so high indeed that it
may lie in the original. […] To that end he constructs an example in which three witnesses,
ABC, share signiicant errors, xyz, “which take one back to the archetype α.”
α
A B C
x, y, z x, y, z x, y, z
For the moment he is using ‘archetype’ in a sense that he attributes to his opponents,
“witness without which ABC would not have existed”; and from the example he argues that
α is not “the only copy that survived, without which ABC would not exist.” Actually the
conclusion follows immediately from the deinition because any ancestor of α, for instance
the original, would satisfy it no less than α. Before I examine this argument, therefore,
the deinition must be tightened so that α is the latest witness without which ABC could
not have existed. That is essentially how Maas deined “archetype” and surely how must
people deine it; and Flores too, since he is discussing one reconstructed witness, namely
“the archetype α,” and not a line of reconstructed witnesses, presumably had that deini-
tion in mind.
His argument runs as follows: since all the ancestors of α as far back as a copy of the
original could have had the error z, it may well be that ABC derive in various ways from that
copy without any need to postulate an archetype. By deinition, however, B (say) cannot have
inherited any of the errors xyz from an ancestor of α down a line of tradition that did not pass
through α; and if ABC derive in various ways from a copy of the original but not all through
any later witness, then that copy of the original was α.46
So far, von Simson’s and Bigger’s views resemble Flores’s in that they think the identii-
cation of the archetype is an error arising from the fact that editors reconstruct the tra-
dition from below. Like Flores, they think what the critical edition reconstructs cannot
be the source of the irst branching, because several such existed. More precisely, the
critical edition cannot do so because, given the tradition’s oral nature, a irst branching
never existed: what the critical edition therefore reconstructs is the irst branching of
the extant tradition.47 More important, they understand archetype, like Flores, to mean “the
oldest witness, a lost one, common to the whole manuscript tradition of a text,” that
is, the original, albeit of only the manuscript tradition. The second stage of their argument
again resembles Flores’s in that they seek to show that the origin of certain readings
can be pushed back ever higher in the transmission, so high indeed that it may lie in
the original, except, whereas in Flores’s case xyz referred to conjunctive errors, for von
Simson and Bigger, they represent remnants of the oral epic predating its redaction.
Bigger writes:
[T] he passages rejected from the constituted text are by no means insigniicant. From the
perspective of a theory of a normative redaction that was reconstructed by the critical
edition, some of them represent a parallel transmission. The normative redaction admittedly
57
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 57
suppressed the other versions in these cases. But some copyists incorporated parts of these
versions in their copy of the normative redaction.48
Note the parallel. For Bigger as for Flores, since all the archetype’s ancestors as far back
as a copy of the original could have had the reading z (a remnant of the Kṣatriya epic),
ABC could derive in various ways from that copy— in fact, he explicitly notes, “some
copyists incorporated parts of these versions in their copy of the normative redaction”—
without any need to postulate an archetype. With the exception of one possibility we
must examine later—z could have entered the witnesses without passing through the
archetype—t he argument is exactly the same and Reeve’s objection holds. By deini-
tion, the witnesses cannot have inherited any of the readings xyz from an ancestor of
the archetype down a line of tradition that did not pass through it; and if ABC derive in
various ways from a copy of the original but not all through any later witness, then that
copy of the original is the archetype.
Let us look at Flores’s third argument for redeining the archetype, for it presents the
closest parallel to Bigger’s work. Reeve writes:
Flores’ third version of the fallacy about conjunctive errors occurs earlier in his book than the
other two. […] Though hypothetical again, xyz this time are not errors but manuscripts, and
from an archetype θ they inherit the errors abc. Some of these errors, however, are older than
others. The error a arose in the original and passed on to all its descendants, θ included. The
error b arose in a copy of the original called α and passed to β and any other copies of α that
there might have been; it too reached θ. “Ma θ” (and to this sentence he adds an exclama-
tion mark) “non è la somma delle serie complete” [is not the sum of the complete series] of
all the manuscripts copied from the original, from α, from β, and so on. It derives ultimately
from α, because it has the error b, but is wrongly imagined to be “l’unico sopravvissuto di una
serie sterminata di atti di copia” [the unique survivor of an endless series of acts of copying].
If we move up the stemma from θ to α, we shall keep inding errors common to the whole
tradition, but their number will gradually fall until in the original either none remain or only
those that arose in it. The archetype, therefore, since it is always constructed “dal basso e dalla
tr. ms. conservatasi, come portatore degli errori comuni (o congiuntivi)” [from the bottom or
from the manuscripts that have been preserved, as the bearer of the common (or conjunctive)
errors], will always be a copy “apparentemente unico” [apparently unique], and he spaces
out “apparentemente” for emphasis. He goes on to call θ a constriction, the bottom of one
funnel and the top of another inverted below it: the errors abc drop to the bottom of the upper
funnel and by dispersing in the lower funnel reach xyz. The problem, he says, is that the con-
striction does not exist, because the errors in the upper funnel do not collect at the bottom but
disperse. The apparent uniqueness of the archetype therefore results from the reductive logic of reconstructing
a unique copy in reality non-e xistent “as such” the further one moves up from the extant manuscripts to the
original. “That is the real explanation.”49
To understand Flores’s argument, consider the hypothetical stemma in Figure 8. The
error a arises in the original ω and descends via α, β and θ to the witnesses XYZ. The error
b likewise arises in a descendant of ω called α and descends via β and θ to the witnesses
XYZ as well as to any other descendants of α that might have existed. The error c arises
in θ and descends to the witnesses XYZ. Because we reconstruct the tradition “dal basso”
58
58 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
ω a
α a, b
first spread
β
θ (normative redaction)
second spread
X Y Z a, b, c
Figure 8 Flores’s argument from the spread of errors, and Bigger’s normative redaction
hypothesis
(from the bottom), XYZ appear to owe the errors abc to θ, which thus appears to be the
sum of the complete series of α, β and so on, even though it is only one of α’s descendants.
Indeed, although “it ultimately descends from α, it is falsely imagined to be the unique
survivor of an endless series of acts of copying.”50 Its apparently unique position can
be explained by the fact that the errors ab and any others that might have arisen before
the archetype appear to pass through it, even though they do not actually drop into the
bottom of the upper funnel as the dashed lines suggest, but rather were transmitted
also to α’s descendants and to whatever descendants of the other manuscripts before θ
might have existed— a fact we cannot see because we begin with the extant witnesses and
these other descendants did not survive. Stemmatic reconstruction thus always leads us to
reconstruct an apparently unique copy—t he archetype— even though the constriction is
not real and this copy does not “really” exist, because it is not the source of all the errors
attributed to it.
Flores’s error can be dismissed easily, because since at least the nineteenth century
editors have recognized that a reconstructed archetype does not imply a constriction or a
bottleneck. Rather, as we have noted, the archetype is deined as a manuscript, detected
through reconstruction, that stands at the apex of the stemma and from which the
branching of the tradition began. In fact, if the descendants of the other manuscripts
had survived, their common ancestor would in turn have been the archetype and we
would reconstruct this manuscript regardless of whether we thought the tradition had
an even greater spread. In other words, all Flores has done is posit a constriction in
order to argue it did not exist, and all this to demonstrate that the archetype was not
the sole manuscript in existence! The error arises from forgetting the deinition of the
archetype, which has nothing to do with the real number of exemplars in existence,
but merely speciies the point at which stemmatic reconstruction comes to an end. As
Reeve notes:
59
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 59
[T] he argument contains two fallacies, of which the one that I have been discussing is the
irst. It occurs in his [Flores’s] remarks about moving up from the extant manuscripts to the
original. First one meets the archetype θ, which had the errors abc, but as one moves up
through β and α to the original, c and b fall away until only a remains. The argument seems to
be like this: like θ, its ancestors β and α are reconstructed from below and therefore qualify for
the name “archetype,” from which it follows that there was no single archetype θ. The fallacy,
elementary again despite its complex setting, lies in not sticking to the original deinition of
“archetype,” namely “latest common ancestor of xyz” or “latest witness to which xyz owe the
errors abc,” but instead allowing β and α to count as archetypes even though ex hypothesi the
oldest ancestor of xyz that can be reconstructed is θ, a descendant of β and α.51
Likewise, the second fallacy arises from forgetting that the shape of our stemma is unre-
lated to the shape of the real, historical stemma, and if there was a reduction in the
number of copies, then it is all the likelier that our manuscripts derive from a single source:
The second fallacy in the argument occurs when he [Flores] introduces the image of the two
funnels, which has been given memorable expression elsewhere […]:
It is probably true to say that the classical tradition as it expands and contracts in its course
from Antiquity to the end of the Renaissance does conform to a basic pattern. In its crude
and essential form it appears to the imagination to follow the traditional lines of the hour-
glass, which funnels down to a narrow middle and then bellies out again, or the simpliied
shape in which the female form is often represented— broad shoulders, tiny waist, full
skirt. The vital statistics of the igure will vary considerably from text to text; but these
diverse patterns, when superimposed one upon the other, should still produce a dominant
type. The slender waist is the most permanent feature, for the Dark Ages so constricted the
low of classical learning that for a time it was universally reduced to a trickle.
Flores transfers the image from history to stemmatic logic. For him θ could have been “of
the 9th century or the 3rd– 5th,” and what matters to him is its deinition as a single manu-
script, something narrower, that is, than the network of its earlier or later relatives. Now it
may be that if one were to represent schematically, with the original at the top, the network
of all the manuscripts that had ever had any of the errors abc up to the production of θ, it
would look more like a pyramid than a funnel; but why should the extant manuscripts not
all derive from a single point in the pyramid, especially if, by the time that the earliest of
them was produced, attrition had turned the lower section of the pyramid into something
more like a funnel? When Flores exclaims that θ is not the sum of all the manuscripts that
ever had any of the errors abc, who does he suppose holds that it is? Or is he demanding
it should be?52
In either case, at no point does our stemma make a claim about the “real” shape of the
tradition, whether pyramidal or funnel shaped. It simply makes the claim that our extant
witnesses all derive from a single point in the tradition, and if more witnesses existed that
did not derive from this point they would all derive from some other— higher— point on
the stemma and this would then be the archetype.
Once we understand that the shape the critic posits for the tradition is irrelevant
to our reconstruction of the archetype, we can also address von Simson’s and Bigger’s
criticisms. Both scholars think that the circumstance that the reconstruction culminates
60
60 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
with the codex unicus of the archetype is evidence that only one manuscript existed at
the time. This manuscript, they reason, can only be of the Brahmanic version and the
reduction in the number of exemplars in existence the result of a Brahmanic redaction
of the epic’s oral versions. Whereas Sukthankar began from the extant witnesses and
identiied the shared readings of independent branches of the tradition as the readings
of their common ancestor, they argue that this approach leads only to a reconstructed
ancestor that is the source of the irst branching of the extant tradition—t hat is, of
Flores’s second spread. Actually, however, the editor should have kept in mind that the
tradition before this ancestor was not single but multiple, since θ’s ancestors—t hat is,
α, β and so on— also produced copies— Flores’s irst spread. The reconstruction “is a
constriction […] at whose base the common errors a, b, c […] collect, and whence they
fall from above so that we ind them in the surviving witnesses x y z.” Actually, however,
“the constriction does not exist because the errors that fall from above do not collect at
the base of the funnel, but fall dispersing in a radial pattern.”53
It is only here that the analogy between Flores’s and Bigger’s arguments breaks
down, because, whereas Flores thinks the constriction is only apparent and uses this to
argue against the historical reality of an archetype, Bigger thinks the constriction was
real and uses this to redeine the archetype as a normative redaction. In his view, the
stemmatic method only takes us back to the archetype, but, using the “methods […] of
higher criticism,”54 we can demonstrate the existence of a “parallel tradition” of the
Mahābhārata.55 Consider Figure 9.
Abcdefghi are textual passages. The original ω contains a. A copy of the original α
contains abg, while other copies contain defghi (only one additional copy is shown at β).
The creation of a normative redaction at θ artiicially constricts the tradition and only
def make it past θ. The passages ghi are lost, but abc reenter the manuscript tradition via
a parallel transmission. The surviving witnesses XYZ contain abcdef but not ghi, which
are lost for good. Using the stemmatic method, the editor reconstructs the archetype θ in
the belief that it accurately represents the tradition before it. Actually, however, θ is not
the archetype but a conscious redaction; the editor restores def but not abc thinking they
are later than def, even though θ is, as Flores notes, not the sum of the complete series of
manuscripts copied from the original. But whereas, for Flores, θ only appears the sum of
the complete series of manuscripts copied from the original because the descendants of
α, β and so on did not produce any surviving witnesses, for Bigger, θ is not the sum of the
complete series of manuscripts copied from the original because α, β and so on contained
a diferent text than θ and produced descendants, albeit ones whose existence must irst be
identiied in the surviving manuscripts.56 If the editor can identify these remnants of the earlier
oral tradition in the larger manuscript tradition, he can reconstruct a partial text αʹ that
includes abc (but not g, which is lost for good) and presumably also ω, the irst source of
the entire tradition. We refer to this text as the supra- archetype in the following.
Both Bigger and Flores employ an argument we might call the “argument from the
spread of errors” to deny the existence of a single archetype. Both interpret the arche-
type as a constriction in the tradition rather than as Maas deines it— that is, as “the
source text with which the irst branching began”—a nd both use this confusion about
the deinition to deny that all our manuscripts descend from a single archetype. Like
61
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 61
a ω Original
a b g α Copy
d β Copy
e
c
h
f
i
Normative
θ
redaction
Witnesses
a b f e d c X Y Z
Figure 9 Bigger’s argument from the resilience of tradition
Flores, Bigger assumes that the tradition consists of two “spreads.” His normative redac-
tion corresponds to θ in Flores’s scheme. Like θ, the normative redaction exercises a
constricting efect on the tradition. The increase in versions may begin with the orig-
inal ω if multiple copies of the original existed or after the original if only one copy of
the original existed, but because we construct the archetype “dal basso,” it appears as
though all these readings passed through the archetype, when some at least could have
descended through other means. Note that what we earlier called the irst spread is irrel-
evant for Bigger, as he does not assume a single origin: for him, what is decisive is not
the spread away from ω but the narrowing of the tradition into θ. Thus whereas Flores’s
concern is that the errors abc could have arisen in the ancestors of the archetype θ (in ω,
α, β and so on) before passing through it, Bigger argues that abc, which for him are not
errors but “parallel versions” of the Mahābhārata, may not have passed through θ at all
and could still be older than the material that passed through it.
The argument from spread fails, as Reeve shows, because it continuously shifts the
deinition of archetype, illicitly extending it to sources that can be posited, but for which no
evidence exists, behind the archetype. Even if we posit a series of manuscripts α, β and
so on before the archetype and suppose that the errors abc arose with the original or with
one of its copies, all these errors would pass through θ such that α and β and whatever
other sources we posited between ω and θ fall out of consideration. As the “latest witness
[recte: source] to which xyz owe the errors abc,” θ remains the archetype.
62
62 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Likewise, the argument from resilience fails because it illicitly redeines the archetype to
mean the irst source of the extant tradition where, instead of meaning all that exists, extant
tradition is taken to mean: that part of the tradition the Brahmans did not erase. Like Flores,
von Simson and Bigger interpret the archetype to mean not the latest ancestor without
which the surviving tradition could not exist, but an exemplar editors for some reason
single out in a long line of witnesses that can be reconstructed. Like Flores, they attempt to
transfer an understanding of history to stemmatic logic and, again like Flores, what matters
to them is that the inal or the normative redaction is a single manuscript (Bigger calls it
the “sole written version […] in its time”), narrower than the tradition before or after it.57
But as Reeve shows, what is decisive is not whether the dissemination of all manuscripts
containing the errors or readings abc from the original to the archetype traced a pyra-
midal or a funnel shape, but whether the extant manuscripts could have derived from
a single point in the pyramid. In fact, a narrowing of the tradition such as Flores and
Bigger posit makes it especially likely this was the case.
But whereas Flores’s error arises from a simple albeit common confusion about the
archetype, von Simson and Bigger use this confusion to posit a perverse and purposeful
Brahmanic redaction of an earlier heroic Ks ̣atriya epic. They argue that this redaction
decimated the other versions of the Mahābhārata in existence (speciically, those in
conlict with the Brahmans’ ideology), and they claim that these versions represented
the older and genuine epic tradition. They agree with Flores that the identiication of the
archetype is an error, but not because the tradition is wider than our stemma indicates—
in fact, they think, moving backward in time, that the stemma replicates the tradition
precisely until the moment the normative redaction occurred. In contrast to Flores, who
attacks the stemma because he thinks it does not depict the historical reality accurately,
they criticize it because they think it does not represent a section of the tradition, equiva-
lent in all its parts, but the whole of that tradition.58 In other words, they reject the distinction
textual critics make between the arbre réel and the arbre généalogique,59 and argue that the
interpretation of the critical edition as an archetype is false.60 For them, the stemma is not
an idealized representation of a reality necessarily more complex such that it can stand
in for any part or, maximally, the whole. Rather, it is a literal depiction of the epic’s travails
after it entered the Brahmans’ hands. As the living image of the epic’s defacement after the
Brahmans gained control over it, the critical edition is a necessary step for tracing this
history of collusion, but no more than that.61
Despite their seeming self-e vidence, von Simson’s and Bigger’s theories are easily
refuted. First, the stemma is not an image of historical reality. As Ben Salemans argues,
It would be wrong to interpret a stemma as an exact historical picture of the history of the
deliverance of the versions. One should bear in mind that a stemma is a minimal picture
relating only to the text versions that still exist. Thus, a stemma can only be considered as a
hypothesis about (a part of) the historic reality. On and around the lines of descent, we can
imagine lost manuscripts whose contents are unknown.62
Second, the stemma reconstructs the historical vicissitudes of transmission only in general
terms. It does not let us pinpoint speciic events or contingencies because of the paucity
63
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 63
of our data points. It can, for example, tell us that all our manuscripts are descendants of
a common source; it cannot tell us exactly when this source was created or who its author
or scribe was. If we imagine that the 1,319 manuscripts in the stemma in Figure 6 repre-
sent all the manuscripts that ever existed and manuscripts 1–8 5 our extant witnesses—t he
groups Ś āradā through Malayālam— then Sukthankar’s stemma represents the minimal
architecture necessary to connect the manuscripts based on what we observe about their
shared errors of transcription. Performing eliminatio codicum descriptorum and extending the
lines from our reconstructed hyparchetypes backward to their hypothetical source, we
would arrive at the stemma in Figure 10.63
The posited hyperarchetypes are nodes from which the transmission is assumed to
have branched,64 but they do not resemble a historical exemplar in all its particulars.
It is therefore false to identify a reconstructed archetype with a historically existing
source and this itself with a Brahmanic redaction.65 Third, the constriction does not
exist, as we know. If we wished to trace the real tree, which would include not only
many more exemplars before and after the archetype but also alongside it, we would
arrive at either no shape at all or a meaningless rectangle—o ur sheet of paper.66 Real
trees trace complex shapes.67 Although it is tempting to relate their shape to the trans-
mission, we must remember that what they depict is a two- dimensional representation
of a reality that unfolded in space and time.68 In Figure 10, we retained the positions
of the main nodes from the “real” tree. Actually, since we do not often draw stem-
mata using real trees as our template, our stemma would be more abstract as shown
in Figure 11.
Fourth, even if we had access to the real tree and a part of it depicted a severe dec-
imation of the tradition, we could not so easily conclude that this was due to an ideo-
logically motivated redaction. The causes of manuscript loss are complex. We could not
say anything about a sudden reduction in the number of exemplars in existence (ire?
destruction of a library? abandonment of a workshop?) without corroborating histor-
ical information. The German scholars do not know who the patrons were, what their
tastes were or who the scribes were. They know nothing about the conditions of copying
or even the main centers of copying. Yet they postulate a generic “Brahmanism” as the
explanation for all manner of textual decay. The only reason their theses appear compel-
ling is the biased and question-b egging redeinition of the critical edition as a normative
redaction.69
But, ifth, even if we grant the German critics that the tradition traced exactly the
shape they postulate—a cinched skirt with the inal or normative redaction occurring
at the exact point the sides are drawn in— how do they know that the critical edition
reconstructs this source? Bigger claims that “the critical edition […] represents an
attempt to lay hold of this normative redaction.”70 Johannes Bronkhorst does not think
“the written archetype of the surviving manuscripts” reconstructed in the critical edition
is “identical with the irst written version of the Mahābhārata,”71 but only because he
wishes to postulate a irst written version completely devoid of Brahmanic philosophy.72
In his view, the archetype was more likely a popular commentarial version, whose “pres-
tige” caused it “to overshadow all others.”73 Either way, he thinks the text reconstructed
in the critical edition represents a consciously redacted archetype. “[T] here are good
64
W
O
N
P S
1F 3 E J M L 55 56 57 QR 72 x UV
14 D 46 47 71 T
15 I K 70 78 79
C 22 H 40 4344 74 8180
16B 252627 G
1819A 3941
2324
Figure 10 The stemma as a minimal architecture
newgenrtpdf
65
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 65
θ
W
O
S
N P
F M
55
R V
13 E J 56 57
L Q 72 73 U
14 46
D I 71
47 81 T 79
K 70 74
C 1522 H 78 80
40 43 44
2526 27 G
16 B
39 41
18 19
A
23 24
Figure 11 Our abstract stemma
reasons to think that the core of the Mahābhārata of the critical edition was composed
and written down at some time during the two centuries preceding the Common Era.
Parts were subsequently added until approximately the time of the Guptas, when the
archetype of our critical text was established.”74 Apart from the infelicitousness of the
expression “the archetype of our critical text,” we now know that the idea that an arche-
type is “established” is a fallacy. The archetype is a manuscript identiied “by chance” as
the latest common ancestor of the extant witnesses: it does not represent either a more
authoritative version or one assiduously copied.75 It just so happens that its descendants,
rather than those of other manuscripts, survived. It is therefore false to claim that its text
represents “a Brahmanical reworking of earlier material” and the like.76 It is especially
misleading to argue that the critical edition reconstructs just this exact source, as though
through some magical leap it would reach exactly this point—t he assumed constriction—
in the tradition. Consider Figure 12.
Even if we grant the German critics that a real constriction occurred, whether called
the inal redaction (von Simson), the normative redaction (Bigger) or the bottleneck
(Bronkhorst), how do they know the critical edition reconstructs the source of this con-
striction? The critical edition reconstructs an archetype that occurs somewhere in the tra-
dition, but whether it occurs higher up or lower down in the tradition will depend on the
manuscripts that survived.77 As the apex of the stemma, the archetype could be located
at any point on the real tree. When the German scholars speak of a constriction in the
66
66 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
ω ω
Original Original
θ
Archetype
Normative
Normative
redaction
redaction
θ N S
Archetype
Witnesses
K V B D T G M
Witnesses
Figure 12 Making the archetype and the normative redaction coincide
tradition or the “irst written version” of the Mahābhārata, however, it is the apex of the
real tree they mean. The only condition under which the two— that is, the apex of the small
triangle representing the part of the tradition represented in our stemma and the apex
of the larger triangle representing the Brahmanic tradition following the hypothetical
establishment of an “oicial text”— could coincide is if no part of the tradition was ever lost.
In that case, the archetype of the tradition would be identical with the original, and what
the critical edition reconstructs would not be an archetype identiied “by chance” during
recensio, but the archetype as the source from which all manuscripts that ever existed
descended. This is represented on the diagram’s right: the dotted triangle is displaced
minimally to show that two triangles exist.78
In other words, what the German scholars have done is take our stemma, which
represents a part of the tradition only, and identiied it with the whole of that tradi-
tion. In their view, no part of the Brahmanic tradition was ever lost such that when
we take the extant witnesses and attempt to reconstruct their lost source, the manu-
script we arrive at is not a random exemplar located somewhere lower down on the
tree, but the irst source of the entire tradition. Bigger’s identiication of the critical edition
with a hypothetical normative redaction holds on this condition and this condition only. From the
German scholars’ perspective, the critical edition’s sole law is that it overlooks the
fact that this work is not the irst source of the Mahābhārata tout court, but only
its irst Brahmanic revision, and they seek to ameliorate this by positing a second
triangle that is the reverse of the irst. Like Flores, they think they can thereby ill
in the “vast expanse between archetype and the original text.”79 The only problem
with this thesis is: all their arguments for a Brahmanic redaction are a priori, based
on what they think the work is.80 No evidence exists for such a redaction, and the only
reason it appears plausible is that the German scholars have redeined the critical edition as
a Brahmanic redaction.
67
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 67
The evident circularity of this procedure did not hinder them from drawing “evidence”
from the critical edition of this hypothetical redaction. On the contrary, proceeding from
the premise that the archetype reconstructed in the critical edition represents a nor-
mative redaction, they identiied strata, interpolations, further redactions and so on—
conclusions that “logically” followed from their redeinition of the critical edition as a
Brahmanic redaction.81 This circularity, rather than any arguments, explains the seeming
self- evidence of their work. In their unchaste desire to see a Brahmanic redaction at work
in the text, the German critics do not realize that they themselves created its reality!
Despite the German critics’ complicated analyses, their error actually relects a simple
misunderstanding: a failure to keep separate “two conceptual spheres that we need to
keep distinct: the history of the tradition, with its unattainable real trees, that is, the often
very rich ensemble of mss. that historically existed, including those that disappeared
without leaving traces, and textual criticism, with its very tangible although perfectible stem-
mata codicum, based on the few mss. that have come down to us.”82 When the German
critics use the term archetype, they mean it in the irst of Trovato’s two senses: archetype, the
1
“oicial text, prepared by its author for publication,” but they then confuse this with the
critical edition, which is an archetype in the second of Trovato’s two senses: archetype, a
2
manuscript that “can be reconstructed logically— with varying degrees of accuracy—o n
the basis of the number of conjunctive errors that are common to all its descendants.”83
From this identiication of the irst sense of archetype with the second one, they then
conclude “a sudden and inexplicable bottleneck in the ancient and medieval tradition
whereby only one copy survived,”84 and identify this bottleneck not with a chance reduc-
tion in the number of exemplars as has been postulated for the classical tradition,85 but
a willful and malicious Brahmanic “takeover” of an earlier, heroic oral epic tradition.86
It is but a short step thence to establish a “prehistory of the normative redaction”87— a
prehistory that, according to the German scholars, cannot but be the history of the
Brahman domination of India.88
Once we remember that no evidence exists for such a redaction and that the con-
stituted text is the earliest text that can be reconstructed using objective, noncircular
methods, their work loses its aura of unimpeachability. Since we have no evidence of a
Brahmanic “takeover” of the epic beyond what the German critics erroneously deduced
from the apparent constriction in the tradition at the archetype, it is best to interpret the
critical edition as what it is: a reconstructed archetype, where archetype simply means the
latest common source from which all extant manuscripts more or less immediately derive.
In the next section, we examine Bigger’s arguments for claiming that abc are older than θ.
The Argument from Empty Reference
The critical edition contains references to events whose description no existing passages meet. However, these
“empty references” must once have had a referent. If suitable descriptions occur in the apparatus, we may
assume that they were the original referents, contained in a version of the Mahābhārata distinct from the nor-
mative redaction. The critical edition discards these passages as unique to one branch of the tradition, but this
is false because they are actually older than the normative redaction it reconstructs. The normative redaction
eliminated the passages, but they later reentered the tradition, thus occurring in some manuscripts only. Restoring
the referent to the constituted text restores the text to a state before the normative redaction.
68
68 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Refutation of the argument: The argument sufers from the fallacy of proof by assertion, because it is tan-
tamount to asserting that a passage A is old because it is considered old. Its fallacious nature is not immediately
apparent because, rather than state it simply, Bigger asserts that A is actually Rʹ, the referent of passage R,
whereas the reading R → Rʹ reconstructs an original R → Rʹ; as the surviving referent of this original refer-
ence Rʹ is thus old. The equivocation between Rʹ as a passage in the extant witnesses thought to correspond
to a reading R (that is, Rʹ) and Rʹ as the referent of an original R (that is, Rʹ) permits him to “infer” Rʹ’s
1 2
antiquity, even though, actually, he has only asserted it. The empty reference plays no role in demonstrating A’s
antiquity; it merely conceals the illegitimate shift from Rʹ to Rʹ.
1 2
Let us return to Bigger’s thesis. As we saw, he interprets the archetype’s apparently
unique position in the stemma as a real constriction and, from this, infers a Brahmanic
“redaction” of an earlier oral epic tradition. More important, he argues that some
readings could have escaped the archetype’s constricting efect if they fell directly from
the upper cone to the lower without passing through the archetype. These readings,
which he interprets as evidence of the Kṣatriya tradition’s resilience, are his basis for
reconstructing a partial supra-a rchetype θʹ, which, he argues, best approximates the con-
tent and form of the earlier oral epic. In chapter four, Bigger explains how he intends to
identify these readings using “empty references.” He introduces his notion of empty
references in the Mahābhārata thus:
In my assessment, parallel versions of the MBh can be demonstrated by one means
only: namely, if references to them exist in the normative redaction without this reference
being satisied in the normative redaction itself (that is, a so- called empty reference). How
do such empty references enter the normative redaction? The likeliest explanation is that
a redactor borrowed a passage from another version without being aware this passage
contained a reference to another passage contained in the other version but not his own
version of the text.89
He continues:
But it is also possible that such a reference was not considered an internal (that is, text-
immanent) reference by its composer (or the redactor who inserted it) but an external (that is,
text- transcendent) reference, that is to say, he [the composer] was aware that the passage he
referred to was not present in his text but it was so familiar to his readers that he could be con-
ident that the reference would be recognized as such. We thus have two types of references,
the text- immanent reference (which is never empty), which refers to another passage in the
extant MBh, and the text-t ranscendent (which is always empty), which refers beyond the
extant MBh. It is important that in the course of time a text-t ranscendent reference can
become a text- immanent reference in that a later redactor considered it necessary to insert
the external passage that is referred to into the text.90
If we wish to formalize these relationships, we can express them as follows:
A: R → Rʹ and R→( )ʹ
B: R → Rʹ and R→( )ʹ and R→( )
69
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 69
where R is a reference in a source A, Rʹ is its referent, B is a target text or copy and the
empty parentheses indicate the absence of a referent. We adopt the following convention
to distinguish between Bigger’s two hypothetical situations— intentional and accidental
absence of referent: in the former case, we insert a prime symbol after the empty paren-
theses to indicate that the author was aware a referent could be expected but chose not to
include it; for the latter, we use the empty parentheses alone. The source A by deinition
cannot contain an empty reference; it can only contain either a complete reference (R→
Rʹ) or a text-t ranscendent reference (R→ ( )ʹ).91 In contrast, the target text B can borrow
either the reference and referent (text-i mmanent reference), or the reference and absence
of referent (text- transcendent reference) or the referent can be lost during copying (empty
reference). This last situation can again be of two types: either the referent was consid-
ered not worth mentioning (that is, a text- immanent reference became a text- transcendent
reference) or it was lost during copying (empty reference in the genuine sense). In the
former case, the loss of referent is intentional and does not permit us to infer “iliation.”92
Conversely, an originally text- transcendent reference in the source can become a text-
immanent reference in the target text if its copyist or redactor composes a new referent to
satisfy the perceived absence of a referent. We can express this situation as follows:
R → (Rʹʹ)ʹ
where (Rʹʹ)ʹ indicates that a text-t ranscendent reference has become a text-i mmanent
reference; Rʹʹ is a pseudo- referent. Finally, since a text- immanent reference itself can
become a text-t ranscendent reference, as discussed earlier, we introduce the convention
of inserting a double prime symbol after the empty parentheses to indicate intentional
loss of referent. Our complete set of equations looks as follows:
A: R → Rʹ and R→( )ʹ
B: R → Rʹ and R→( )ʹ and R→( )
R → ( )ʹʹ or R→(R ʹʹ)ʹ
Note that of the ive possible outcomes of copying— the target borrows the complete ref-
erence, it borrows the text-t ranscendent reference, a text-i mmanent reference becomes
a text- transcendent reference, a text- transcendent reference becomes a text- immanent
reference and empty reference— only the last is “genealogically” relevant from Bigger’s
perspective. He writes:
This [the fact that the source contains text- transcendent references, text- immanent references
can become text-t ranscendent references and text- transcendent references can become text-
immanent references] signiicantly limits the value of the empty reference for the identiica-
tion of parallel versions. An empty reference always refers to an extant text, but we do not
know if this text was a part of a MBh- version at the time or if it was transmitted at that time
in an entirely diferent context. In my view, we can only speak of a parallel version of the
MBh with a degree of plausibility, when this text is a case of another version or an addition
to the main thread of the narrative of the MBh.93
70
70 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
As examples, he cites Mahābhārata 3.79 and 4.44:
In the normative redaction, Subhadrā’s abduction is frequently referred to when the aim
is to praise Arjuna’s deeds. However, two of these passages must strike the reader, because
they speak of events not familiar to him from the normative redaction: in 3.79, we ind our-
selves with the Pāṇḍavas in their forest exile. Arjuna has departed to obtain divine weapons
in the Himālayas. The remaining brothers express their longing for him in that each praises
Arjuna’s deeds and virtues. On this occasion Sahadeva says Arjuna defeated the Yādavas in
battle and abducted Subhadrā with Kṛṣṇa’s approval. As we know, an important element
of the Subhadrā episode, as we are so far familiar with it, is that the Yādavas do not pursue
Arjuna and engage him in battle. Kṛpa goes even further in 4.44 when he rebukes Karṇa’s
boasting: he says about Arjuna that he abducted Subhadrā all alone and challenged Kṛṣṇa to
a chariot duel. We hear nothing about this either in the normative redaction of the MBh.94
We already saw that the thesis of a normative redaction is false. Since the constriction does
not exist, all claims of readings that survived beyond the “Brahmanic” redaction are a for-
tiori false. Indeed, since we have no evidence for such a redaction beyond what the German
critics assert, the thesis is not only false; it is also prejudicial. It attests to nothing as much as
their latent anti-B rahmanism. Since we have already addressed this prejudice’s roots else-
where, we do not pursue the question here.95 Let us instead consider Bigger’s arguments for
asserting that Mahābhārata 3.79 and 4.44 are older than the archetype. He writes:
However, the picture changes when we look at the passages removed during the constitution
of the critical edition: all manuscripts listed under the siglum S expand the Subhadrā episode
by numerous passages. A corrector of D4 follows them in that he adds these passages in the
margins and on separate pages of his manuscript. The two most important expansions can be
found in App., 1, no. 114 and no. 115, which I will summarize in the following.
Here also the story begins with the Raivataka festival in 1.211 during which Arjuna falls in
love with Subhadrā. But he does not abduct her right away; rather, he uses a trick in App., 1,
no. 114 which is inserted after 1.212.1: clad as a yati (an ascetic) he approaches the Yādavas.
They receive him as a guest. Baladeva (against Kṛṣṇa’s advice, who is in the know, but cleverly
transfers responsibility to his brother) houses him in the women’s quarters (App. 1, no. 114.1–
57). Subhadrā is already in love with Arjuna from his mere description.
She thinks she recognizes the yati and asks him to speak about Arjuna. Arjuna reveals
himself. Subhadrā grows lovesick. Devakī, who notices this and suspects that it is Arjuna
in the yati’s guise, conides in Vasudeva. Vasudeva along with a few Yādavas (but without
Baladeva and Uddhava) decides that they should marry. A festival for Mahādeva is to be
held on an island before the wedding. The Yādavas depart. Subhadrā remains to take care
of Arjuna. He sees the time for abduction has come (58– 221). He proposes marriage in
the Gandharva style to Subhadrā. Subhadrā hesitates. Thereupon the gods and the family
(except for Baladeva) come and perform the nuptials. Kṛṣṇa urges them to depart, but ofers
them Rukmiṇī’s house for the irst night. The two enjoy the night (222–3 22). The next day
Arjuna advises Subhadrā to equip the king’s chariot as though in play. When he is ready, she
takes the reins in her hands. He mounts the chariot and they drive out of the city together.
Some citizens cheer, whereas others are enraged. Arjuna shoots arrows at banners and other
standards but does not injure anyone (323– 395). A small army under Vipṛthu’s command
is gathered at Raivataka. With Subhadrā as his charioteer, Arjuna charges him. Vipṛthu is
71
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 71
defeated but makes peace with Arjuna as he is also in the know. Arjuna and Subhadrā change
to Kṛṣṇa’s chariot and lee toward Indraprastha (396– 462).
The story continues with 1.212 until 1.213.12ab: the wrathful Yādavas want to pursue
Arjuna, but Kṛṣṇa advises against it.
In App. 1, no. 115 which is inserted thereafter, the Yādavas nonetheless follow Arjuna.
He hears the din and wants to ight them. Subhadrā begs him to spare her relatives. The pair
then continue their light. The Yādavas meanwhile encounter Vipṛthu’s defeated troops and
abandon pursuit (1– 45). The episode of Draupadī’s jealousy toward Subhadrā follows; it like-
wise difers (46– 63), but this doesn’t concern us here.
S’s insertions present a version of the Subhadrā episode in harmony with 3.79.27. Since
the Subhadrā episode belongs to the main thread of the MBh narrative, I consider it likely
that we really have a parallel version to 1.211–2 13. This parallel version was inserted at a
later date in the normative redaction. A closer look, however, lets us still clearly recognize
it as a case of insertion: thus Arjuna arrives twice at the Yādavas. Although according to
App. 1, no. 114 Subhadrā was abducted directly from the palace, in 1.212.9 her guardians
hasten back to Dvārakā to give alarm. Likewise, the Yādavas who returned to the island
after the wedding (App. 1., no. 114.305) are back in Dvārakā in 1.212 with a suddenness
that astonishes the reader. This suggests that two versions of the same narrative were con-
founded. The presence of an empty reference in App. 1, no. 113.1–3 illustrates that the
narrative contained in S was not transmitted in its entirety. For Arjuna here recalls Gada’s
kathā about Subhadrā’s beauty and ponders on how to win her. However, such a narration
by Gada is found in none of the versions collected in the critical edition.
There is, furthermore, evidence that a third narrative of Subhadrā’s abduction existed.
Verse 4.44.6 cited earlier provides the impulse for it. It mentions a chariot battle between
Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. But this is not found in either of the two existing versions.96
As impressive as this display of his knowledge of the Mahābhārata is, Bigger’s arguments
for Mahābhārata 3.79 and 4.44 as empty references are fundamentally unsound. As we
observed earlier, the circumstance that a reference lacks a referent is not in itself conclu-
sive, since the passage can be either of the type R → ( )ʹ or of the type R → ( )ʹʹ— that is,
the reference could have been absent in the source itself or the copyist could have inten-
tionally omitted the referent.
Further, Bigger does not contemplate the possibility that the appendix passages
nos. 114 and 115 could be innovations, composed to satisfy the perceived absence of
referent— that is, that they could be pseudo- referents, even though the passages were
clearly created with the intent of legitimizing Arjuna’s abduction of Subhadrā and
providing a suitable genealogy for the future prince Abhimanyu.97 Indeed, even if the
source contained a fulilled text- immanent reference (A: R → Rʹ), as Bigger avers, it
does not follow that Raʹ and Rbʹ are identical: Rbʹ could still be a pseudo-r eferent.
Bigger evidently thinks nos. 114 and 115 are remnants of an older oral epic tradition
because they meet his expectations of what such a Ks ̣atriya epic could have looked like.98
According to him, when his eponymous Brahmans created the normative redaction
with the intent of suppressing the Ks ̣atriya epic, they eliminated these passages as not in
keeping with their Brahmanic ideology, but overlooked the existence of other passages
that referred to them (Mahābhārata 3.79 and 4.44). This created an anomaly in the text
that could only be resolved once the eliminated passages reentered the tradition—e ither
72
72 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
R -> R' Source text
R -> R' Copy
Normative redaction
Archetype
R E
Descended from
R D
R -> R' F Contain a mix of readings from
R -> R' G and (the recombined reference)
R' B Descended from
Figure 13 Bigger’s argument from “empty reference”
because the Brahmans could not completely erase the scribes’ memories of the older epic
or because a written version of it survived despite the Brahmans’ eforts. Thus he notes,
“[i] n the course of time […] diferent copyists inserted passages from other versions—
partly from direct recollection, partly from other (younger?) written versions—i nto the
transcript.”99 In his view, Sukthankar erred in excluding these passages from the consti-
tuted text because he overlooked the possibility that they could be older than the arche-
type, even though not attested in all its descendants—t he evidence for this being that they
are not features of the archetype and hence must have been eliminated from the text during the
formation of the normative redaction. Figure 13 makes his argument clear.
The source α contains both the reference R and the referent Rʹ. The complete ref-
erence is transmitted to a copy β and all its descendants. The Brahmans responsible for
the normative redaction eliminate Rʹ as a Kṣatriya passage, but overlook its reference R,
which is thus retained in their text as an empty reference. The tradition developing from
the normative redaction thus includes R but not Rʹ. Rʹ meanwhile survives due to a par-
allel transmission, that is, one not under the Brahmans’ control. It reenters the tradition
at B, which represents either a manuscript or some other kind of record of the oral epic.
It is thence transmitted to F and G, which are descended from the normative redaction,
but not E and D (also descended from the normative redaction). Stemmatic reconstruc-
tion will include R in the constituted text as it is found in all manuscripts examined for
the edition (DEFG), but not Rʹ, thinking it an innovation in the manuscripts that feature
73
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 73
it (FG), but this, Bigger argues, is false: Rʹ is actually older than any of the passages in the
constituted text. It is as old as R, and if we collect all such passages we can reconstruct
a partial supra-a rchetype αʹ that gives us access to an earlier stage of the tradition than
what is represented in the critical edition.
The problem with this argument is that it does not actually ofer us a means to select
passages. Despite Bigger’s pretense, Rʹ is not actually identiied on the basis of a com-
parison with other manuscripts. Rʹ denotes a pair of fragmentary passages (App. 1,
nos. 114 and 115) he identiies in other manuscripts on “higher text- critical” grounds
as remnants of the older Kṣatriya epic. The idea that we can reconstruct an earlier
stage of the tradition based on a comparison between manuscripts descended from the
normative redaction (DE), manuscripts descended from a parallel transmission (B) and
manuscripts representing a conlated tradition (FG) is a misconception, because B does
not exist and DEFG are all descended from the archetype! B is hypothesized to explain
the survival of α’s readings, but actually the evidence for B is exactly as tenuous as for
α. In other words, all Bigger has done is posit a manuscript in the lower cone to infer
the existence of a source in the upper cone, and this as a means of demonstrating
α’s reality! But if he wished to assert α’s existence, he could have done so without the
detour via the ghost manuscript B. B in his analysis is a double of α: it only serves
the purpose of making α more tangible, so to speak. Actually, however, B’s existence
is predicated on α— an older oral epic tradition existed— and α’s existence is predi-
cated on B—a part of the older epic tradition survived, thus permitting us to assert
its existence—s o his argument is circular. The same passages—A pp. 1, nos. 114 and
115— are used both times to make the existence of an oral epic tradition plausible: once
as passages allegedly found in the upper cone and once as passages found in the lower
cone. When we recall that no evidence exists for App. 1, nos. 114 and 115’s occurrence
in the upper cone, or rather, the “evidence” for their occurrence in the upper cone is
that they are found in the lower cone and considered examples of the Kṣatriya epic,
it is clear that the argument sufers from petitio principii. App. 1, nos. 114 and 115 are
introduced once as B, a remnant of the older oral epic tradition, and once as α, the
source of which B is a remnant. But since the source of which B is supposedly a rem-
nant is the oral epic tradition— that is to say, source is a synonym for oral epic tradition— all
Bigger has done is postulate the oral epic tradition’s existence. The only reason the
banality of this claim is not evident is he moves α down and back up so fast that the reader
doesn’t realize it is the same source both times: α/ B, a hypothetical manuscript brought down
to the lower cone to create the impression of support for a source in the upper cone.
Once we realize that neither α nor B exist and B, in particular, denotes not a manu-
script but readings Bigger identiies in the archetype’s descendants, the suggestion that
some readings rejected from the constituted text could derive from an older source falls
out of consideration as unveriiable.
Nevertheless, could Bigger not be right? Could our appendix passages 114 and 115
not be Rʹ, the lost referent of an original reading R → Rʹ? Here it is important to disam-
biguate between two distinct questions one might be asking. On one hand, the question
can be understood to mean: “Could our appendix passages 114 and 115 not be Rʹ, a ref-
erent corresponding to R?” to which the answer is “possible but unlikely” since we have
74
74 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
no evidence that R refers to Rʹ, or that it requires a referent satisfying it. R was posited as
a reference to make plausible 114 and 115’s status as the missing component of an orig-
inal R → Rʹ. On the other, it can be understood to mean: “Could our appendix passages
114 and 115 not be descended from an original reading R → Rʹ?” to which the answer
is “no” because ex hypothesi our reading R → Rʹ is not descended from R → Rʹ, but from
the combination of R with Rʹ. We have no evidence for an original reading R → Rʹ other
than the combination of R with Rʹ, a combination we have no evidence for other than its
component parts, both of which occur in the lower part of our stemma. With one exception R and
Rʹ do not even occur in the same manuscripts in our stemma.100
In other words, all Bigger has done is take two readings not necessarily related, com-
bined them and then postulated that his combination corresponds to an original com-
bination whose elements underwent dissociation due to a normative redaction, and this
as a means of demonstrating the normative redaction’s existence! His entire “argu-
ment” consists in irst assigning to 114 and 115 the designation Rʹ and then equivocating
between two meanings of Rʹ: once as passages found in some extant witnesses and once
as the referent of a hypothetical original reading R, and using the former as evidence for the
latter. The so- called empty reference’s sole function is to enable the equivocation between
Rʹ and Rʹ, through which the existence of Rʹ and mutatis mutandis of the oral epic tradi-
1 2 2
tion can irst be made plausible. When we recall that we only have our appendix passages
114 and 115 and that we have no evidence that they existed as the referent of an original
reading R → Rʹ apart from the fact that Bigger postulates that they represent the lost
referent of R → Rʹ, one half of which descended through the normative redaction and
one half through other means, the circularity of his argument is apparent.101 Whatever
plausibility his argument has derives from this inherent circularity. The empty reference
does not strengthen it an iota. Indeed, it cannot because to identify App. 1, nos. 114–1 5
as the missing referents of an original R → Rʹ is to beg the question, which precisely
concerns their authenticity.
The error, elementary despite its complex setting, consists once again in equivocating
between two senses of archetype, using it once to mean the “oicial text, prepared by
its author for publication” and once to mean a manuscript that “can be reconstructed
logically— with varying degrees of accuracy—o n the basis of the number of conjunc-
tive errors that are common to all its descendants.”102 From the fact that the archetype in
this latter sense does not contain the passages Bigger concludes that the archetype in the
irst sense must also not have contained them and, from this, he further concludes that
they must have been removed even though no evidence exists that they existed in the irst place. Since
he thinks the only people who could have had an interest in removing them were the
“Brahmans,” he sees himself justiied in assuming a Brahmanic redaction of an earlier
oral Ksạ triya epic and concludes— quite logically from his perspective, as it were— that this
text, which corresponds in all its particulars to that text, must be the normative redaction.
Actually, however, we have only one text—t he constituted text of the critical edition—s o
the reference both times is to the same text, except Bigger lets it count once as an extant
witness and once as a text reconstructed on its basis. Since a witness cannot be a witness
of itself (except in the trivial sense that it attests to its own contents), the evidentiary value
of his procedure is nil. In fact, for all his talk of scientiicity, all Bigger has done is select
75
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 75
passages at random and combine them into a new text—a n inane procedure justiiable
only if what results is not any arbitrary combination but the “original.”103 The only reason
this inanity is not apparent to him is that the German critics have gotten tight not only on
“Criticism” but also on their own loquaciousness.104
As self-e vident as Bigger’s suggestion may appear that Sahadeva’s reference to Arjuna’s
victory over the Yādavas at Mahābhārata 3.79.26– 27 cannot hang into nothingness but
must be based on an actual description of the event in the text, neither the manuscript
evidence nor the stemma supports the thesis. As the sole passages in the Mahābhārata
answering to this description, App. 1, nos. 114–1 5 appear to be logical candidates for
the reference, but they are unmistakably late. The only reason Bigger advances them is
that he neglects their actual contents, which are clearly Brahmanic, for a fantasy about
the Ksạ triya epic.105 Despite its rapturous reception among a section of Mahābhārata
scholars, his work recalls rather Nietzsche’s comment: “he, a poetasting criminal!”106 In
the next section, we examine Bigger’s arguments for thinking some passages “contained
in the normative redaction” could have been “lost in some manuscripts in the course of
transmission.”107
The Argument from Loss
The argument from loss entails the claim that certain passages, though contained in the Mahab̄ har̄ata’s hypothet-
ical “normative redaction,” were lost from part of the subsequent manuscript tradition. They are therefore not
found in the constituted text, although, as typical of Brahmanic concerns, they should have been included in it.
Refutation of the argument: The argument from loss replaces a critical principle— agreement between
independent families— with a subjective and prejudicial principle for reconstruction. It uses this dogmatic prin-
ciple— passages considered “Brahmanic” should be restored to the constituted text, even if they lack manuscript
support— to assimilate the constituted text to a hypothetical Brahmanic redaction. It then uses this restored text,
in turn, as evidence for the reality of the Brahmanic redaction. Given its circularity, the argument should per-
suade no one. That it does illustrates the truth of the observation that if “the circle that has been constructed
[is] large and confusing, […] the logical mistake goes unseen.”
In the previous section, we saw how Bigger identiied the constituted text with a hypothet-
ical “normative redaction” and, from the absence of certain passages from the constituted
text, concluded that they were also absent in the normative redaction. In the second stage,
he expands his attack on the critical edition, although the argument is now the exact inverse
of the former one. Whereas he earlier argued that the critical edition reconstructs a histor-
ical redaction of the Mahābhārata in all its particulars and used this to make claims about
the hypothetical redactors’ activity, he now reverses direction and argues that, although the
critical edition reconstructs the Mahābhārata’s “normative redaction,” it does not replicate
it in all its particulars. Speciically, it excises passages not attested in all major recensions as
likely insertions in the manuscripts containing them, even though, according to him, these
passages were originally a part of the normative redaction and were only subsequently lost
in one branch of the tradition. His exact argument is as follows:
Before I tackle the individual recensions, I must address several passages that are so wide-
spread that they cannot be assigned to a speciic version. We already found one passage
76
76 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
to which this applies in chapter 4.1: [Ādiparvan] no. 80. [Sabhāparvan] no. 1 and
[Droṇaparvan] no. 5 join this passage. It is striking that the transmission of these passages is
not uniform. Beside [Droṇaparvan] no. 5 no other star- and appendix- passages of this book
are attested in the same manuscripts. [Ādiparvan] no. 80 goes together with nos. 63, 75, 81,
and 85; [Sabhāparvan] no. 1 [goes together] with nos. 3, 4, 13, and 23. Such passages can be
interpreted in two ways: on one hand, we can assume these passages were very popular and
hence transmitted across diferent manuscript traditions. On the other hand, they could be
cases of passages contained in the normative redaction but lost in the course of transmission
in certain manuscripts. However, this latter possibility would throw not only Sukthankar’s
text- critical approach but also Grünendahl’s out of the window, since both apply the prin-
ciple “short equals old” or do not question it. However, this possibility cannot be completely
excluded, since the MBh contains several proofs that individual manuscripts omitted some
verses. If this occurred very early in the history of transmission, would it not be conceivable
that an entire tradition lost a passage?108
Bigger continues:
Before I address this question further, I would like to consider these passages’ content.
I already treated App. 1, no. 80 above (p. 116). The passage describes Yudhiṣṭhira as yuvarāja
and the Pāṇḍavas with their capabilities. They increasingly begin to intimidate Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
In tabular form, the passages from the irst book, which have the same attestation, have the
following contents:
no. 63 Story of Duḥśalā’s birth.
no. 75 The child Aśvatthāma drinks rice water in the belief that it is milk.
no. 81 Kaṇikanīti (Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s instruction by his minister Kaṇika).
no. 85 The Pāṇḍavas cross the Ganges after escaping from the lacquer- house with
Vidura’s aid.
In terms of their content, all these passages are of secondary signiicance for the MBh’s
further course. We cannot identify any plausible reason why a later redactor should have con-
sidered these passages worthy of addition. It appears even less plausible that these passages
attained such popularity that they could spread all across India. However, these are arguments
from higher textual criticism, whose application to lower textual criticism I already refused
myself in the introduction (p. 19). There is, however, yet another argument: All these passages
are not attested in the manuscripts Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4. Of these, Ś1 and K0–3 are related with
each other. Ñ4 appears not to belong to this group on the basis of the Schriftartenprämisse
[sic]. However, this has forfeited its unimpeachability with Grünendahl’s discussion, as
I showed in chapter 4.2.1. Ñ4 therefore could be related with Ś1 and K0– 3 and constitute a
recension together with them. Thereby there is a possibility that the textual passages men-
tioned earlier could have been lost in this recension [the hypothetical recension comprising
Ś1, K0–3 and Ñ4], that is, that they were originally contained in the normative redaction.
We would thereby overturn the previous maxim “short equals old” but would possibly come
closer to the normative redaction’s actual form [tatsächliche Gestalt].109
In the critical edition, passages 63, 75, 80, 81 and 85 are all relegated to the critical appa-
ratus (in a separate appendix) as additions to the text of the archetype. The evidence that
they are additions is unambiguous. Not only are they not found in the best Ādiparvan
77
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 77
manuscripts, Ś1 and K0– 3, but the insertion of three of them in the manuscripts that
contain them is inconsistent.110 Sukthankar comments on these passages as follows:
Important omissions which distinguish ν (really only Ś1 K0– 3) from all other manuscripts
are these:
(i) the adhyāya giving a naive account of the birth of Duḥṣāla (Bom. adhy. 116), which
uncommonly looks like being an afterthought (App. I, No. 63);
(ii) a passage of about 25 lines describing how Droṇa’s son Aśvatthāman is given lour
mixed with water, which he drinks in the belief that it is milk (App. I, No. 75);
(iii) an adhy. (Bom. adhy. 139), in which there is an incidental allusion to the installation of
Yudhiṣṭhira as Yuvarāja, and which is repetitious and incoherent (App. I, No. 80);
(iv) the so- called polity of Kaṇi(ṅ)ka, Kaṇi(ṅ)kanītī (Bom. adhy. 140), which is a replica (nat-
urally with many additions, omissions and variant readings) of the advice given by Bhāradvāja (apparently
a gotra name of this very individual) to Ś atruṁjaya, and duly communicated by Bhīṣma to
Yudhiṣṭhira in the Ś ānti (App. I, No. 81);
(v) the crossing of the Ganges by the Pāṇḍavas (Bom. adhy. 149), a superluous adhyāya, which
only serves to confound the already confused geography of the narrative (App. I, No. 85).
These ive passages are found in all manuscripts collated except Ś1 K0– 3, but it is worthy
of note that even apart from their omission in ν, the documentary evidence with regard to at
least two of them‚ is confused and unsatisfactory. No. v (crossing of the Ganges) is inserted in
diferent groups of manuscripts at diferent points of the text. In No. iv (Kaṇikanīti), on the
other hand, most of the Southern manuscripts repeat, after the interpolation, the immedi-
ately preceding portion of the original, apparently in order to restore the context broken by
the intrusion of extraneous matter.111
K2– 6 were subsequently found contaminated with either the central recension γ or with
the southern recension S.112 K5, furthermore, was incomplete, ending after 1.3.152,
whereas K6 was collated only until the end of adhyāya 2 (K5 was collated only until
1.2.40).113 The ν group thus really comprised only Ś1 and K0– 4. Only one member of
this recension (K4) contained the passages, and that member was heavily contaminated
with a southern source.114 Sukthankar therefore considered it likelier that nos. 63, 75,
80, 81 and 85 entered the tradition at a later stage than that an entire recension (ν, com-
prising the manuscripts Ś1 and K0– 3) omitted the passages. His reasons for considering
the passages additions were threefold: (1) the manuscript evidence for them was unsatis-
factory; (2) their content attested to their secondary character; and (3) most important,
his observation that Mahābhārata scribes tended to conserve as much of the transmitted
text as possible.115 There was no evidence that the passages were haplographic omissions
in the manuscripts that lacked them. Mechanical damage to their common source could
likewise be ruled out. The subsequent discovery of a Nepālī manuscript in the collection
of the Rajaguru of Nepal conirmed Sukthankar’s decision.116 As he noted:
Hitherto, it may be observed, the data of the Sāradā and the “K” versions had mainly to
vouchsafe for the puriication of the epic text attempted in the Critical Edition. Now, the
omissions of the constituted text are supported from a new source and from an entirely diferent
version, the Nepālī. Our MS. is in fact surprisingly free from most of the matter pronounced
78
78 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
to be spurious on the evidence of the then available MSS. of diferent versions. The longer
insertions given in Appendix I are conspicuous by their absence in this MS. Here is a list of
the long passages which are missing in the new MS.
No. 1: The Brahmā- Gaṇeśa complex; inserted at diferent points in K4–6 Dn Dr D2–
12.14 S, i. e., om. in its totality only in K0– 3 D1.
No. 13: A passage of six lines ins. in K (except K1) V1 (marg.) Da Dn D1– 7 G1.2.4.5.
No. 14: The Purāṇic story of Aruṇa, who is made to act as the charioteer of the Sun; ins.
in K4(marg.) Ñ V1 B D (except D5; D2 on suppl. fol.) T1 G1.2.4.5.
No. 41: Names of the hundred sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; ins. in K3.4 Ñ2.3 V1 B D (except D5).
No. 42: Story of the birth of Abhimanyu; ins. in K3.4 Ñ V1 B D (except D5).
No. 43: Story of the birth of Karṇa; ins. in K4 Ñ V1B D (except D5).
No. 61: Details of the marriage of Pāṇḍu and Mādrī, subst. for 1.105.4– 7, in K4 Ñ B D.
No. 63: Story of the birth of Duḥśalā; ins. in all MSS. except Ś1 K0– 3.
No. 71– 72: Details of the picnic (jalakrıḍ̄ā); ins. in K4 Ñ B D.
No. 75: Story of piṣṭodaka given to Droṇa’s son; ins. in all MSS. except Ś1 K0– 3.
No. 76: Arjuna’s pre-e minence among the pupils of Droṇa; ins. in K4 Ñ B D T2 G1.2.4.5.
No. 78: Description of the conquest and annexation of Drupada’s kingdom by the
Pāṇḍavas exacted by Ācārya Droṇa as gurudakṣin ̣ā; ins. in K4 Da1 Dn D2(supp. fol. sec m.).4.5 S.
No. 80: Installation of Yudhiṣṭhira as heir- apparent; ins. in all MSS. except Ś1 K0– 3.
No. 81: Kaṇikanīti; ins. in all MSS. except Ś1 K0– 3.
No. 85: Story of the boat sent by Vidura for the use of the Pāṇḍavas; ins. in all MSS. except
Ś1 K0– 3.
No. 118: Ś vetaki- episode; ins. in all N MSS. Cf. also passage No. 120 ins. in T2 G3.4, and
No. 121 ins. in Ś1 K0.1– 4.117
The evidence that these passages are additions to the manuscript tradition is therefore
unambiguous. Yet rather than acknowledge the evidence, Bigger widens the scope of his
argument to encompass the Mahābhārata’s second book also. He writes:
Can one say something similar about the other passages listed above?
[Sabhāparvan] App. 1, no. 148 reports how Kṛṣṇa returns to Dvārakā after the Khāṇḍava
episode. His reception there (among others, by Baladeva) as well as the deeds of the Pāṇḍavas
who remained behind are described. In addition to this passage, there are other passages in
Book 2 that manifest a similar state of evidence. However, the situation is by far not as uni-
form as for the passages in Book 1 just treated (more on this below). I irst present the content
of the passages briely:
no. 3 Expansion of the description of Kubera’s palace.
no. 4 How Yudhiṣṭhira and his brothers administer their kingdom.
no. 13 Expansion of Sahadeva’s deeds during the campaign of world conquest.
no. 23 Expansion of the list of kings, whom Ś iśupāla would prefer to Kṛṣṇa.
As was the case in Book 1, in terms of their content, these passages do not have any spe-
cial signiicance for the further course of the MBh and it does not appear plausible why they
should have become so popular. Thus, we are once again confronted with the question of
whether these are passages that were lost from the normative redaction in speciic recensions.
App. 1, no. 2 is not attested in S1́ , K0– 4, Ñ1 and D6. This close state of evidence (which,
however, only corresponds in one case with the state of evidence for the passages found in Book
1) could indicate that here also a passage was lost from the normative redaction. However, on
79
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 79
the other hand, T, G (without G3) and M share the passage and furthermore omit two half-
verses. App. 1, no. 1 shares this peculiarity with App. 1, no. 3. In both cases, the transmission
of the passage in the S manuscripts is so confused that I consider it unlikely that these passages
belonged to the normative redaction. This inding is conirmed by the state of evidence for
the remaining passages: alongside App. 1, no. 1, only App. 1, no, 23 is not attested in D6. The
latter is also missing in D4 but is, on the other hand, contained in K4. The relationship of
the manuscripts is therefore less uniform than in the case of the passages from Book 1. In my
opinion, at most App. 1, nos. 4 and 13 can be considered losses from the normative redaction.118
It is clear why Bigger cites nos. 4 and 13 as examples of “losses from the normative
redaction.” The two passages are found in all northern recension manuscripts with the
exception of the Ś-K group and the sole Nepālī manuscript collated for this parvan Ñ1.
They thus exhibit the same “state of evidence” as his examples from Book 1.119 Bigger
evidently thinks the two passages strengthen his reason for thinking the Ś, K and Ñ
manuscripts “constitute a recension together.” If so, then, like his examples from the
Ādiparvan, nos. 4 and 13 could be examples of passages “lost in this recension [his hypo-
thetical recension comprising Ś1, K1– 4 and Ñ1].” He would then have two examples
(one set from each book) of passages that were “originally contained in the normative
redaction” but were lost from the subsequent tradition, thus bolstering his claim that
restoring certain passages to the constituted text would “overturn the previous maxim
‘short equals old’ but would possibly come closer to the normative redaction’s actual
form.”120
Unfortunately, the claim is nonsense. First, as noted, the evidence for the passages
being additions is unambiguous. Merely for the last of the two passages Bigger cites
(no. 13), the manuscript evidence reveals that its insertion was inconsistent and the
passage kept shifting. Thus, whereas the majority of the northern manuscripts (that is,
V1, B, Dn and D1–3 .5.6) along with some southern manuscripts (T1, G1.3–5 and M)
insert the passage after 2.28.10, D4 inserts it after 2.28.9, while G2.6 inserts it after
2.28.9a. The passage is inserted in the margin in B1. D4 omits stanza 10 and the irst
line of the passage by haplography, while G2.6 omits verses 9b onward up to the irst
half of the irst line of the passage (also by haplography). The second passage’s inser-
tion is more consistent but it is inserted in the margin in B1. Second, the passages’
contents themselves attest to their secondary nature. Third, Bigger’s arguments against
the passages being additions to the tradition are erroneous. He writes that “In terms
of their content, all these passages are of secondary signiicance for the MBh’s fur-
ther course” and adds: “We cannot identify any plausible reason why a later redactor
should have considered these passages worthy of addition.” But this is to misunder-
stand the nature of manuscript transmission. Additions tend, by their very nature,
to be “of secondary signiicance.” They need not directly afect the text’s “further
course” for scribes to include them. Neither do we need to look for a special reason
why scribes might have “considered these passages worthy of addition.” The history
of Mahābhārata transmission demonstrates that scribes continuously added materials
to their inherited text— materials we would consider superluous, irrelevant and even
contradictory.121
80
80 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Likewise, it is erroneous to think passages must attain “popularity” to “spread all
across India.” The rate of difusion of innovations (which is what insertions or additions
to the text are) is simply a function of the rate at which manuscripts are copied, how
often they are compared and the scribes’ own practice in respect of innovations (that is,
how likely they are to copy the innovations they encounter). If manuscripts are copied
frequently, innovations will difuse rapidly. If manuscripts are compared frequently,
innovations will difuse through not only vertical but also horizontal transmission. If
scribes tend to copy everything they encounter, even “unpopular” innovations will be
conserved, or, rather, their popularity or lack thereof is irrelevant for their dissemina-
tion. It is erroneous to draw conclusions about an innovation’s popularity from the fact
that it is widespread. The innovation could simply have occurred higher up in the tra-
dition. Alternatively, it could have occurred in a manuscript that either produced many
descendants or produced descendants that survived, whereas those of other branches,
which did not contain the innovation, did not. We must remember that the manuscripts
we possess are but a small percentage of all manuscripts ever produced. The circum-
stance that we frequently encounter a particular innovation in our manuscripts does not
necessarily mean that it was also common in the wider tradition (that is, the part that
did not survive).122
Bigger’s arguments for nos. 4 and 13 as “losses from the normative redaction” are
not only against good sense but also against the editor’s reasoned judgment. Like the
Ādiparvan passages, which he sourced from the editor’s introduction, his examples for the
Sabhāparvan are all taken from Franklin Edgerton’s introduction to this book. Edgerton
speciically cites nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 13, 19 and 23 as evidence that Ś and K constitute an inde-
pendent group against the Nepālī, Bengālī and Devanāgarī manuscripts (his “Eastern”
recension) and the southern manuscripts.123 On the question of whether passages absent
from one recension could be omissions in that recension rather than additions in the
recensions containing them, he is even more emphatic than Sukthankar:
On one extremely important methodological point, I have gradually come, in the course
of my work, to a position which entirely agrees with Sukthankar’s procedure, but goes slightly
further than his theory as stated xciv f. This concerns the “plus or minus” passages; passages
(long or short) which are entirely missing (with no equivalent substitutes) in one or more
recensions. Sukthankar relegates such passages, almost without exception, to his Notes or
Appendix, and does not admit them to the text, even when all recensions but one contain
them. Yet he says (xcv) that they are “not necessarily spurious. There might be a hun-
dred good reasons why [they] are missing in a particular recension.” Well, I suppose there
“might” conceivably be such reasons. As far as Book 2 is concerned, I can only say that
I very gravely doubt the existence of such cases. I have come to believe that any passage, long
or short, which is missing in any recension or important group of MSS. as a whole, must be
very seriously suspected of being a secondary insertion. For the Mbh., I should now hesitate
long before including any such case in the edited text. This was not a preconceived notion.
Indeed I started with a quite diferent attitude. It is only long and careful study which has
inally forced me to this conclusion (which, I take the liberty of saying, I believe is at least
not far from Sukthankar’s own view at present). I should now go as far as to assert that prob-
ably not one of some ifty MSS. I have studied for Book 2, nor any of their genealogical
81
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 81
ancestors, ever deliberately or intentionally omitted a single line of the text; and that such acci-
dental omissions as occurred were, in every recension represented by several MSS., almost
invariably made good in at least some MSS. which we possess of the recension in question.
Mistakes will happen, of course. Doubtless few MSS. are wholly free from accidental
omissions (often, but by no means always, explainable by haplography or the like). But in
the Sabhāparvan, very rarely will these accidental lacunae be found in all the MSS. of any
recension (we must count out the Nepalese, for which in this book we have only a single
MS.). And it appears that no scribe, no redactor, ever knowingly sacriiced a single line which
he found in his original. Not even if he found something which seemed to him incompre-
hensible, inconsistent with the context, irreligious, or immoral. In that case he sometimes
changed the text, doubtless feeling that a mistake had been made and that he was only doing
the pious work of restoring what must have been the original intention. But there is certainly
not a shred of evidence for a single deliberate omission: and I do not believe it ever took place.
In general, therefore, I feel rather more conident than Sukthankar seems to have felt in
editing Book 1, that we are following the original text in omitting, generally speaking every
line that is missing in any recension as a whole (excepting only Ñ because it is represented by
a single MS., and in one MS. anything can happen). In other words, I believe that in gen-
eral these are not “omissions” in the recension that lacks them, but secondary insertions in
those that contain them, even though these latter may be what we must regard as generally
independent versions.124
This leaves Bigger one inal argument for claiming that the passages under consideration
could be “losses from the normative redaction.” Although no better than the rest, for
clarity’s sake, we also address it here. After raising objections to the editors’ decisions
on grounds of “plausibility” and “popularity,” Bigger sets these objections aside,
claiming: “these are arguments from higher textual criticism, whose application to lower
textual criticism I already refused myself in the introduction.” Then, noting, “There is,
however, yet another argument,” he introduces his inal and, in his view, conclusive argu-
ment for considering the passages “losses.”125 He writes:
All these passages are not attested in the manuscripts Ś1, K0–3 and Ñ4. Of these, Ś1 and
K0– 3 are related with each other. Ñ4 appears not to belong to this group on the basis of the
Schriftartenprämisse [sic]. However, this has forfeited its unimpeachability with Grünendahl’s
discussion, as I showed in chapter 4.2.1. Ñ4 therefore could be related with Ś1 and K0–3
and constitute a recension together with them. Thereby there is a possibility that the textual
passages mentioned earlier could have been lost in this recension [the hypothetical recension
comprising Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4], that is, that they were originally contained in the normative
redaction. We would thereby overturn the previous maxim “short equals old” but would pos-
sibly come closer to the normative redaction’s actual form [tatsächliche Gestalt].126
This argument presents four problems. First, Ñ4 is not related with the Ś and K
manuscripts, as an analysis of their readings demonstrates.127 Second, the circum-
stance that two manuscripts lack the same interpolations is not an argument for their
being related (that is, more closely than through the common ancestor they share with
all other manuscripts— by deinition, the archetype). Third, the circumstance that
passages “could have been lost in this recension” (emphasis added) is not an argument
82
82 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
for their actually being lost, especially since the existence of this recension is only hypo-
thetical and premised solely on the fact that the manuscripts in question do not feature
the same passages. Indeed, the “recension” does not exist, because Ñ4’s shared errors
of transcription reveal it is descended from ε, the common ancestor of not only the
other Nepālī manuscripts but also the Maithili and Bengālī manuscripts, and it does
not have an ancestor in common with Ś and K more recent than N!128 Fourth, the claim
that Ñ4, Ś1 and K0–3 “could […] constitute a recension together” is circular because
their assignment to this hypothetical recension presumes that they owe the passages’
absence to “loss” from a common ancestor but this is the very issue in question. Let us
call these four problems the practical, the theoretical or methodological, the grammatical
and the logical objections. We address each of them in turn.
Sukthankar’s collations of the manuscript in his 1939 article “The Oldest Extant
Ms. of the Ādiparvan” clearly demonstrate that “Ñ4” (the siglum that Bigger, following
Reinhold Grünendahl, assigns this manuscript) is related to the other Nepālī manuscripts.
Their shared errors of transcription establish their descent from a common source they
share with each other but with no other group of manuscripts.129 Ñ4’s sole resemblance to
the Ś and K manuscripts is that, like them, its text is fairly free of longer interpolations.130
But the circumstance that two manuscripts retain a largely original text in respect of the
additions is not an argument for their closer relation, since they could owe these absences
to the archetype or to the original itself. Bigger evidently thinks that Ś1, K0– 3 and
Ñ4 “constitute a recension together” because he thinks the circumstance that they lack
the same passages makes them alike, but this is to misunderstand how editors establish
iliation.131 The concept of iliation refers exclusively to the signiicant errors shared between
manuscripts, which serve to identify them as members of a subfamily. In contrast, readings
thought likely to be those of the original are irrelevant for determining iliation.132 When
Bigger now claims that “there is a possibility that the textual passages mentioned earlier
could have been lost in this recension,” and further concludes: “We would thereby over-
turn the previous maxim ‘short equals old’ but would possibly come closer to the nor-
mative redaction’s actual form,” he moves from an expression of probability to one of
certainty, even though he has not yet shown that the passages were lost or that Ś1, K0– 3 and
Ñ4 have a more recent ancestor in common than the one they share with the remaining
northern manuscripts (by deinition, N). The only reason this illicit shift from a conditional
statement to a categorical assertion is not apparent is the retention of the subjunctive mood
for both.
The fourth objection is the most damaging to Bigger’s case but it is also the most dif-
icult to demonstrate because it is where he has concealed his entire “argument.” Let us
begin with his simplest formulation of the argument:
Such passages can be interpreted in two ways: on one hand, we can assume these passages
were very popular and hence transmitted across diferent manuscript traditions. On the other
hand, they could be cases of passages contained in the normative redaction but lost in the
course of transmission in certain manuscripts. However, this latter possibility would throw not
only Sukthankar’s text- critical approach but also Grünendahl’s out of the window, since both
apply the principle “short equals old” or do not question it. However, this possibility cannot
be completely excluded, since the MBh contains several proofs that individual manuscripts
83
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 83
omitted some verses. If this occurred very early in the history of transmission, would it not be
conceivable that an entire tradition lost a passage?133
The argument is circular because it states that the passages could be omissions from some
manuscripts if lost from some manuscripts early in the history of transmission. The argu-
ment certainly “proves” the conclusion but only trivially so, since the conclusion adds no
new information beyond that already contained in the premises. Unlike the editors, who
provided noncircular arguments— the scribes’ observed practice, frequency of manu-
script comparison, absence of haplography, inconsistent insertion (including one mar-
ginal occurrence) and the circumstance that sometimes the same verses repeated after the
insertion as occurred before it—a gainst the passages being omissions in the manuscripts
that lack them, Bigger’s argument does not add to the sum of our knowledge. It merely
states that the passages could be losses if they are losses.
The reason the argument’s circularity is not immediately apparent is that Bigger
does not state so directly. Like most circular arguments, “the presumption that is at
the heart of the fallacy is buried in the verbiage of the premises, sometimes obscured
by confusing or unrecognized synonyms.”134 Thus, “lost” is a synonym for “omitted,”
while “in the course of transmission” is a synonym for “in the history of transmission.”
The antecedent of “such passages,” “several passages that are so widespread that they
cannot be assigned to a speciic version,” is a meaningless piece of verbiage. Actually,
all Bigger means by it is: appendix passages found in manuscripts of both recensions.
Since the appendix passages are by deinition passages omitted in some manuscripts, all
Bigger has said so far is that passages omitted in some manuscripts (his “such passages”
or his “passages that […] cannot be assigned to a speciic version”) could be “losses.” If
we recall that the basic question confronting the editors was “are passages found only in
some recensions omissions in the manuscripts that lack them or additions in the rest?”
all Bigger has done is answered the question with a lat: “yes, they are omissions.” The
additional qualiication that these losses could have “occurred very early in the history
of transmission” adds nothing to the question’s resolution. It only attests to Bigger’s
penchant for transferring problems concerning the extant manuscripts higher up the
stemma (see previous section). In this case, the transferal achieves nothing because no
one asserts that the losses must be recent, and its sole function is to ensure that “the
circle that has been constructed [is] large and confusing, and thus the logical mistake
goes unseen.”135
Bigger’s second formulation of the argument is exactly as circular as the irst. He writes:
All these passages are not attested in the manuscripts Ś1, K0–3 and Ñ4. Of these, Ś1 and
K0– 3 are related with each other. Ñ4 appears not to belong to this group on the basis of the
Schriftartenprämisse [sic]. However, this has forfeited its unimpeachability with Grünendahl’s
discussion, as I showed in chapter 4.2.1. Ñ4 therefore could be related with Ś1 and K0–3
and constitute a recension together with them. Thereby there is a possibility that the textual
passages mentioned earlier could have been lost in this recension [the hypothetical recension
comprising Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4], that is, that they were originally contained in the normative
redaction. We would thereby overturn the previous maxim “short equals old” but would pos-
sibly come closer to the normative redaction’s actual form [tatsächliche Gestalt].136
84
84 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Initially, the argument appears plausible. The passages under discussion could have been
lost from the manuscripts that lack them, and in that case they must have been features
of the archetype, since this is implicit in the concept of “loss.” However, as yet, Bigger
has merely articulated a hypothesis. He has not answered the question of whether the
passages were, in fact, lost. Moreover, the hypothesis is tautological: obviously for the
passages to be “lost” they must have originally been contained in the tradition, and
vice versa. Not only is the hypothesis tautological; the argument itself is circular, since
the statement “Thereby there is a possibility that the textual passages mentioned ear-
lier could have been lost in this recension, that is, that they were originally contained
in the normative redaction” functions both as the argument’s premise(s) and conclu-
sion. Disguised by the ambiguous “that is” the statement could be making one of
two claims: (1) the passages could have been lost if they were originally contained
in the archetype and (2) the passages could have been lost and, if so, they must have
been originally contained in the archetype. It is precisely this ambiguity or, rather,
the clandestine shift between the irst sense, where the statement functions as a pre-
mise, and the second, where it functions as a conclusion (in fact, establishing the con-
clusion Bigger seeks, namely, that the passages were in the archetype), that lends the
argument its persuasive force. Actually, the argument consists of a pair of premises,
since (2) can be rewritten as “The passages must have been originally contained in
the archetype if they were lost” and Bigger’s real conclusion is not “the passages could
have been lost and, if so, they must have been originally contained in the archetype”
but simply “the passages were contained in the archetype.” We can formalize the
argument as:
Premise (1): p ⊃ q (If they were originally contained in the archetype, the passages
could have been lost.)
Premise (2): q ⊃ p (If they were lost, the passages must have been originally contained
in the archetype.)
Conclusion: ∴ p, q (The passages were originally contained in the archetype and they
were lost.)
The fallacy is now evident: (1) and (2) are mutually implicating statements, and hence
logically equivalent (p ⊃ q ≡ q ⊃ p). The conclusion, moreover, is already contained in the
premises, since it asserts p and q, the antecedent and consequent of the conditional prop-
osition p ⊃ q (and also the consequent and antecedent of the conditional proposition q ⊃
p). The argument thus begs the question. Indeed, it is not just circular; it is viciously cir-
cular since the conclusion does not expand beyond the premises and Bigger at no time
demonstrates the truth of p. He merely says that if the passages were originally contained in
the archetype, they were contained in the archetype— which is true but not much of an
argument.
Given its vacuity, how could this argument convince anyone? We cite four possible
explanations:
1. The ambiguous “that is,” which obscured the logical relation between the
statement’s two parts and did not let them appear in their function as antecedent and
consequent of a conditional proposition. The relationship of the antecedent and conse-
quent can, moreover, be read in two ways depending on how we construe “that is” (that
85
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 85
is, either as p ⊃ q or as q ⊃ p). Alternatively, the obscure phrase does not express a condi-
tional relationship but a statement of fact. In that case, p and q are not the antecedent
and consequent of a conditional proposition but mere assertions (p, q), and the statement
represents the conclusion of Bigger’s argument. The same statement could thus function
as both premise(s) and conclusion.
2. The argument’s question-b egging nature, in which one of the conclusions (p) was
buried in the premise p ⊃ q and tautologically validated through the second conditional
proposition q ⊃ p. The argument was, moreover, circular, since every time p is true q will
likewise be true, as a truth table will demonstrate— and vice versa. The second proposi-
tion is thus actually superluous (since p was already assumed true) but Bigger needs it to
suggest that p was derived as the conclusion of a valid inference (q ⊃ p; q, ∴ p) (and likewise
for q: p ⊃ q; p, ∴ q).137 He can now assert the conclusion p, q, even though he has demon-
strated neither p nor q. And since “anteriorly present in” is already entailed in the concept
of “lost,” efectively, Bigger has done no more than assert p (p = q).
3. The equivocation between normative redaction and archetype, which endowed the
former concept with material reality, even though we possess only one text— the consti-
tuted text of the critical edition; by deinition, the archetype of the tradition— and hence
both times the reference can only be to the latter.
4. The statement that the passages “could have been lost in this recension,” which has
the efect of: (1) begging the question and (2) widening the deinitional circle, so that we
do not see that the argument really only makes a claim about the passages’ absence from
Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4, the only part of Bigger’s argument not in dispute.
Concerning (1): The central question at issue is whether the passages are features
of the archetype (in which case their absence in some manuscripts must be attributed
to loss) or later additions to the tradition so to assert that the passages “could have
been lost” in no way answers this question. It merely begs it. Concerning (2): When
Bigger says “lost in this recension” the reference can only be to the passages’ absence
in the manuscripts that do not contain them. But the equivocation between “loss” and
“absence” allows him to suggest that Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 form a recension, thus allowing
him to shift the locus of the passages’ “loss” (that is, absence) from the manuscripts
themselves (in which case the claim’s vacuity would be self-e vident) to a hypothetical
ancestor of the recension, from which—h ypothetically, since he never explicitly says
so— they were lost. The argument is thus exactly circular as the larger argument in
which it is embedded. It takes the form:
Premise (1): p ⊃ q (If the passages were lost, S1́ , K0– 3 and Ñ4 could constitute a
recension.)
Premise (2): q ⊃ p (If Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 constitute a recension, the passages were lost.)
Conclusion: ∴ q, p (Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 constitute a recension and the passages were
lost.)
The reason the argument’s circularity is not evident is that Bigger does not explicitly
state the premise that the passages were lost from a common ancestor of the recension
comprising Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 or a common ancestor that gave rise to the recension
comprising Ś1, K0–3 and Ñ4, even though the existence of this hypothetical ancestor is
implied in the concept of “loss.” Rewritten correctly, (1) actually says: “If the passages
86
86 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
were lost [from a common ancestor of Ś1, K0–3 and Ñ4], Ś1, K0–3 and Ñ4 could
constitute a recension,” and now the fallacy is clear. Implicit in the unstated pre-
mise that Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 have a common ancestor more recent than the one
they share with the remaining northern manuscripts (by deinition, N) is a further
claim, namely, that Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 constitute a recension, and thus, disguised by
its obscure form, what the argument actually says is that if the manuscripts constitute
a recension, they could constitute a recension. Just as we found that Bigger’s main
argument was not just question-b eginning but had buried one of its conclusions in
one of its premises, so also this subsidiary argument—t he conditional proposition
p ⊃ q— is not just question-b egging but buries its consequent in the compound
statement that serves as its antecedent. Given this (complex) antecedent, the conse-
quent must be true.
One inal comment is in order before we lay Bigger’s inal argument to rest. Even
granted its circularity, how could it appear to so many that Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 could, as
Bigger says, “constitute a recension”? Two possible explanations arise: either these people
understood the concept of iliation and how recensions are identiied as little as Bigger
(as our examination of Grünendahl’s and John Brockington’s work demonstrates) or they
were misled by the erroneous nature of Bigger’s argument for Ś1, K0–3 and Ñ4 as a
recension. As the last remaining logical trick in Bigger’s arsenal, it deserves a closer look.
The key part of the argument reads as follows:
All these passages are not attested in the manuscripts Ś1, K0–3 and Ñ4. Of these, Ś1 and
K0– 3 are related with each other. Ñ4 appears not to belong to this group on the basis of the
Schriftartenprämisse [sic]. However, this has forfeited its unimpeachability with Grünendahl’s
discussion, as I showed in c hapter 4.2.1. Ñ4 therefore could be related with Ś1 and K0– 3 and
constitute a recension together with them.138
If we remove the superluous reference to Grünendahl (which serves only to obscure
the sentence structure), the statement reads: “All these passages are not attested in the
manuscripts Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4. [...] Ñ4 therefore could be related with Ś1 and K0– 3 and
constitute a recension together with them.” Depending on how we read the ambiguous
connective, the proposition that Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 constitute a recension can be derived
in two ways:
(1) As the apodosis of a simple conditional proposition:
If the passages are absent in Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4, then Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 constitute a
recension.
(2) As the conclusion of a mixed hypothetical syllogism with a conditional irst pre-
mise and a categorical second premise:
If Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 constitute a recension, then the passages will be absent in Ś1,
K0– 3 and Ñ4.
The passages are absent in Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4.
Therefore Ś1, K0–3 and Ñ4 constitute a recension.
Unlike the earlier examples, where Bigger relied on the synonymy of “loss” to make
the hypothesis probable, here he sticks to the formulation “not attested” or, as we would
87
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 87
say, “absent.” The two versions of the argument therefore do not turn on an equivoca-
tion. Their error must be located elsewhere.
Concerning (1): The conditional proposition p ⊃ q is false, because it is possible for q to
be false, while p is true. In fact, for every value of p, q will be false, and thus the conjunc-
tion p ⋅ ~q will always be true. Since p ⊃ q is logically equivalent to ~(p ⋅ ~q), this is equiv-
alent to saying that p ⊃ q will always be false. Concerning (2): The argument commits
the fallacy of airming the consequent, that is to say, its categorical premise airms the
consequent of its conditional irst premise. The argument thus has the form p ⊃ q; q, ∴ p.
As no valid inference can be drawn about the antecedent of a conditional proposition
from the truth of its consequent, the argument is false.
Bigger’s arguments for a normative redaction are so circular, question- begging, erro-
neous and prejudicial that no one should have cited them. The surprise is that so many
did.139 While it may appear that he provided a model for how the passages could have
been lost (by attributing their “loss” to a common ancestor), the model remains only hypo-
thetical. It does not demonstrate that the passages were lost any more than it demonstrates
that the manuscripts in question had a common ancestor. In fact, both claims, as we know,
are counterfactual. The argument only appeared persuasive due to its inherent and mul-
tiple circularity. This raises the question(s): Why entangle oneself in logical knots to prove
the passages were lost from the tradition? Why argue for their loss against all evidence?
What is at stake for Bigger in this issue? To answer these questions we must briely return
to our previous discussion.
Recall that in the previous section Bigger identiied the constituted text with a hypo-
thetical “normative redaction” and, from the absence of certain passages in the former,
concluded that they must also have been absent in the latter. He then inferred from this
absence that the passages must have been removed from the normative redaction and,
ultimately, cited this “removal” as evidence of the normative redaction’s historical reality,
even though this “removal” was only apparent rather than demonstrated. At that stage,
Bigger was only interested in showing that the Brahmans eliminated certain passages
from the oral epic. In contrast, he now seeks to show that the Brahmans not only elimi-
nated passages from the oral epic but also added passages to it, and here the constituted
text can no longer serve him as evidence because he seeks examples of passages added
to the tradition. Although in one sense everything that is not explicitly a remnant of the
hypothetical Kṣatriya tradition that preceded the Brahmanic redaction is an addition
to the tradition (and therefore he did not need to seek examples of passages beyond the
archetype), Bigger interprets this demand to mean passages whose superluity over the
archetype’s text is evident. The only passages that satisfy this criterion are the appendix
passages. When restored to the constituted text, their nonorganic nature is palpable
(which is, of course, why they were removed from it in the irst place). As later additions
to the archetype, these passages are also markedly Brahmanic. They thus eminently satisfy
Bigger’s criteria.
The problem is: though excellent examples of the kind of materials the Brahmans
allegedly added to the oral epic, the passages are not actually part of the constituted
text. As passages lacking uniform attestation, they were considered additions to the
tradition after the archetype and hence moved to the critical apparatus, whereas Bigger
88
88 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
needs to show they were added to it during its formation. His solution is to propose
that the passages were contained in the archetype (which he identiies with his hypo-
thetical “normative redaction”) but were “lost in the course of transmission in certain
manuscripts.”140 This explains their absence in some recensions, while simultaneously
permitting him to restore them to the constituted text, as his theory of a redaction
requires.
Thus, whereas the editors removed all such passages to an appendix, Bigger argues
in a second step that some of them (speciically, nos. 63, 75, 80, 81 and 85 from the
Ādiparvan and nos. 4 and 13 from the Sabhāparvan) should have been retained as
at least as old as the rest of the “normative redaction.”141 As in the irst stage of his
argument, when he randomly restored passages to the constituted text, here also he
randomly restores passages to it except, whereas he earlier justiied their restoration
on the grounds that they were passages the Brahmans removed during their redaction
of an earlier oral epic, he now justiies restoring them on the grounds that they are
passages the Brahmans added during their redaction. What he fails to realize thereby is
that no evidence exists that the Brahmans either added passages to or removed passages
from an earlier oral epic, and the only person making changes to the text is he h imself!
Either way, the Brahmans cannot win. If parts that Bigger thinks belonged to the ear-
lier Kṣatriya epic are not in the text, he blames the Brahmans for removing them.
But if parts that he thinks they added to the text during their redaction are not in the
text, he attributes their absence to accidental loss and still blames the Brahmans for
adding them.
Bigger’s work is the most egregious example of German anti- Brahmanism, but it is
not the sole one. The thesis of a redaction, whether called inal, normative or Brahmanic,
ultimately reaches back to Adolf Holtzmann Jr.142 In contrast, the idea of a Brahmanic
“takeover” of an earlier Kṣatriya tradition dates back to Christian Lassen, where its
origins were clearly racist.143 German Mahābhārata critics argued sophistically and dis-
honestly for a critical edition.144 They were never interested in a secure text.145 Rather,
they feigned interest in textual criticism because only thus could they sustain the illusion
of objective inquiries and of binding procedures and results. Everyone in the ield oper-
ated under an as if: write as if the Kṣatriya epic existed; as if the Brahmans had corrupted
it; as if a redaction occurred. From Holtzmann to Bigger, Indology unfolded within this
as if.146 Degrees were granted based not on the quality of evidence or arguments, but
on the extent to which students conformed to this as if.147 Scholars were cited based on
the extent to which they assimilated themselves to this as if.148 Corresponding to this as if
of the Mahābhārata tradition was a second as if: write as if the professor was infallible;
write as if a genuine intellectual tradition of Indology existed; write as if the German
critics were beyond criticism.149 Arguing like the Protestant theologian Johann Jerusalem,
who wrote: “My experience is my proof” (meine Erfahrung ist mein Beweis), the German
Indologists needed no proof of what the Brahmans did beyond their experience of the
work.150 Arguments were superluous because they did not seek to demonstrate anything.
At best, arguments had a rhetorical value in that they conirmed the basic experience of
the work or provided a means, in communal experience, to return again and again to the
basic precept of Brahmanic corruption.
89
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 89
Notes
1 “Notre seule source, ce sont les manuscrits eux- mêmes, donc, en dernière analyse, les stemma.
Nous n’avons donc pas le droit de répudier leur témoignage sous le prétexte qu’il nous paraît
absurde.” Robert Marichal, “La critique des textes,” in L’histoire et ses méthodes, ed. Charles
Samaran (Paris: Éditions Gallimard, 1961), 1285.
2 See the introduction to this work. In support of his claim “The MBh, which presents itself
in the manuscripts, goes back to a uniform redaction that was ixed in a written form at some
time and to which further texts and streams [sic] were added by later copyists. In that case a
critical edition makes sense, since it represents an attempt to reconstruct this normative
redaction,” Bigger cites ive sources: Georg von Simson, “Altindische epische
Schlachtbeschreibung, Untersuchungen zu Kompositionstechnik und Entstehungsgeschichte
der Bücher VI bis IX des Mahābhārata” (Habilitationsschrift, University of Göttingen,
1974), 281– 86; Franklin Edgerton, “Introduction,” in The Sabhāparvan for the First Time
Critically Edited (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1944), xxxvi; Peter Schreiner,
“Die Hymnen des Viṣṇupurānạ: Materialien zur Textanalyse des Viṣṇupurānạ”
(Habilitationsschrift, University of Tübingen, 1980), 11– 13; Ian Proudfoot, Ahiṃsā and a
Mahābhārata Story: The Development of the Story of Tulādhāra in the Mahābhārata in Connection with
Non- violence, Cow Protection and Sacriice, Asian Studies Monographs, n.s., 9 (Canberra: Faculty
of Asian Studies, Australian National University, 1987), 37–3 9; and Mahesh M. Mehta,
“The Mahābhārata: A Study of the Critical Edition with Special Reference to the
Suparṇākhyāna of the Ādiparvan: Part II,” Bhāratıȳa Vidyā 32 (1972): 3– 72. Bigger
writes: “This was already postulated by Georg von Simson (1974), p. 281–2 86. However, in
contrast to him I do not believe that the version represented in the Critical Edition was the
irst comprehensive MBh. Rather, it is the youngest and therefore still attainable normative
redaction. Cp. also EDGERTON: CE 2, p. XXXVI, SCHREINER (1980), p. 11– 13,
PROUDFOOT (1987), p. 37–3 9 und MEHTA (1972), p. 64f. (this work was unfortunately
not completely accessible to me. Cp. therefore also the synopsis in MEHTA (1965), p. 64–
67.).” Andreas Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata: Seine Darstellung im Rahmen des Textes und seiner
Entwicklung (Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1998), 14 and 14, n. 76. Contrary to Bigger’s
suggestion, neither Edgerton nor Proudfoot support his thesis. Proudfoot, for example,
notes: “The intensity of variation revealed by the Poona collation is not a mark of oral transmission; nor
does it indicate that the archetype reconstructed by the Poona editors was not a written text. The very notion
that extant readings can be collated and compared in order to reveal an older reading, and
that these older readings should combine into a coherent text, both make sense only if all the
collated manuscripts have sprung from an archetypal text which had a ixed written form. In
his introduction to the Sabhāparvan, Edgerton has unequivocally accepted this view: ‘…
with due allowance for many minor uncertainties, and for errors in editing, [the reconstruc-
tion] is a text … which once existed, and from which all MSS. of the work known to us are
directly descended. … I believe irmly in the one-t ime real existence of this text.’ Since the
whole conception of the Critical Edition rests four-s quare on these assumptions it is curious
that Sukthankar and Belvalkar have not felt able to concur fully with Edgerton’s irm
statement. Sukthankar emphasizes the ‘luidity’ of the Mahābhārata tradition, going so far
as to say that the two principal recensions are ‘in the inal analysis, independent copies of an orally
transmitted text.’ Belvalkar seems to agree. If this were true, a stemmatically-b ased critical
treatment of the whole tradition would be a travesty of reality, and the presumptions under-
lying the Critical Edition project would be made invalid. However Sukthankar’s reluctance
to subscribe to Edgerton’s position is due to his misunderstanding of the nature of the oral
tradition. The deference of Sukthankar and others to oral transmission is probably attrib-
utable in part to the high value placed upon committing to memory and reciting from
memory in the Indian learned tradition. At the back of every researcher’s mind is the knowl-
edge that the Vedas have been accurately preserved orally over three millennia. But the Ś ruti
90
90 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
ofers no good analogy for the epic tradition. With the uncreated Ś ruti whose every syllable
has power and which lies at the heart of brāhmaṇic orthodoxy, the high premium placed on
absolutely accurate transmission led not only to the development of special mnemonic
techniques but also to a copious ancillary literature in written form which helped to stabilize
the tradition. The Mahābhārata has lacked the incentive, the prestige, and the apparatus for
such a controlled oral transmission. So, while Sukthankar may have thought it attractive to use orality
as an explanation for the Mahābhārata’s untamed text tradition, in fact evidence deducible from the text tra-
dition itself overwhelmingly points to an archetype which had written form. The technical evidence of
orally- transmitted epic traditions reveals that oral recitation does not and cannot aim to
reproduce an archetype exactly. Rather, in every such oral recital, the bard recomposes a
relex of an epic prototype. Each performance is a unique and unrepeatable event; each bard
has an individual style and interprets the prototype individually. The prototype is a
disembodied concept which lives vestigially in the collective memory of the audience and
with sharper deinition in the mind of the bard. The prototype is incarnated only in the
bard’s expressions of it. Thus, in recital, there is no question of striving for precision in
reproducing the exact form of the prototype, for it has none. In the absence of a ixed form
of the tradition, there is no absolute standard against which to measure the variety of relexes
which ind expression. Only the transmitter who handles written material has the means to
identify errors (viz. departures from a standard) and the liberty to cross-c heck, to reconsider,
and to make corrections in his text. The ephemeral nature of the spoken word means that
for oral transmitters imprecision and variation are not and cannot be an issue. It is under-
standable then that oral relexes of a prototype vary considerably both broadly and in detail.
It is therefore nonsense to imagine it possible to reconstruct a prototype ‘text’ by comparing records of its oral
relexes. Not only has a prototype no form in this sense, but the relexes would be so divergent that comparison
of the kind required would not be feasible. […] It is thus beyond question that in the Mahābhārata collation
we have to deal with a manuscript tradition descending from a written archetype. But this is not to say that
the development of the Mahābhārata text tradition has not been afected by the environ-
ment of a semi-l iterate culture. In this milieu, committing to memory and reciting from
memory have been an important part of scholarship. A cluster of elements is involved,
centring upon the personal relationship between the guru and his students, which goes with
oral instruction and requires that the student be a receptacle for knowledge rather than a
critical or innovative recipient. These elements are at least in part products and perpetuators
of the scarcity of written material before printing. Such a milieu will have tended to impart to a
written tradition the characteristic ‘luidity’ which has led Sukthankar and others to waver on the question of
oral transmission. The tradition becomes susceptible to interpolation: scholars who have inter-
nalized the epic idiom and metre will have been capable of giving shape to new material as
required. The tradition tends to show intensive cross-i nfection between texts: a scholar’s
memory and public recitations constitute channels of infection which do not involve direct
contact between manuscripts. Under such conditions the tradition loses some of the predict-
ability and conservatism of traditions transmitted merely by copyists; but its instability is an
attribute not of any text but of the overall development of the tradition. Each manuscript text,
including the archetype, has been just as ixed as writing can make it. There is a world of diference between
a scholar committing to memory and reproducing extensive parts of the Mahābhārata as recorded in
manuscripts, and a recital of the tradition by an illiterate bard.” Proudfoot, Ahiṃsā and a Mahābhārata
Story, 37– 39 (Sukthankar’s italics his own; all other italics added). Edgerton’s comments are
discussed later; Schreiner’s views deserve a separate treatment.
3 Besides the scholars cited in this chapter and the last, see also Tamar C. Reich, “Ends and
Closures in the Mahābhārata,” International Journal of Hindu Studies 15, no. 1, The Mahābhārata—
Perspectives on its Ends and Endings (2011): 12 and Johannes Bronkhorst, “Archetypes and
Bottlenecks: Relections on the Textual History of the Mahābhārata,” in Pūrvāparaprajñābhinand
am: East and West, Past and Present. Indological and Other Essays in Honour of Klaus Karttunen, ed. Bertil
91
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 91
Tikkanen and Albion M. Butters, Studia Orientalia 110 (Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society,
2011), 43, n. 5 and 51, n. 19. Parts of this article, albeit with additional references to Bigger,
have been repurposed in Johannes Bronkhorst, How the Brahmins Won: From Alexander to the Guptas
(Leiden: Brill, 2016). See especially 64, n. 185, 88, n. 246 and 96, n. 265.
4 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 14.
5 Ibid., 15.
6 Ibid. The claim is erroneous because, while vulgatae such as Nīlakaṇṭha’s edition were popular
and widely copied (the majority of Mahābhārata manuscripts examined for the critical edition
were of this edition), they had little appreciable efect on the manuscript tradition. Certainly,
there is no evidence that Nīlakaṇṭha’s edition ever “suppressed” other editions. Scribes appear
to have copied whatever versions existed and, above all, their locally available version(s). The
vulgate’s inluence is seen primarily in horizontal transmission of new narratives, but this
holds for almost every version. It did not lead to an appreciable decline in exemplars of other
versions, as can be seen from the fact that our reconstructed archetype is not of Nīlakaṇṭha’s
edition, as Bigger’s thesis, were it correct, requires, but of a much earlier text, which is, in fact,
much closer to the text of the Ś āradā version.
7 For the origins of this thesis, see Chapter 2, “The Argument from (Postulated) Antiquity and the
Argument from Ideology.” Like much else in contemporary Mahābhārata studies the thesis’s
origins ultimately go back to the work of racist and anti- Semite Christian Lassen (1800– 76),
where it served the function of airming a heroic Indo- Germanic identity.
8 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 18.
9 Ibid., 14.
10 Oskar von Hinüber, “Der vernachlässigte Wortlaut, Die Problematik der Herausgabe
buddhistischer Sanskrit- Texte, Zur Überlieferung, Kritik und Edition alter und neuerer
Text,” in Kleine Schriften, Teil I, ed. Harry Falk and Walter Slaje (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,
2008), 436.
11 Hermann Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata: Seine Entstehung, sein Inhalt, seine Form (Göttingen:
Vandenhoek & Ruprecht, 1922), 2. Compare Holtzmann Sr.: “The ancient epic legends of
the Indians are, indeed, contained in the Mahābhārata, a not very old composite creation
[Machwerk], but not in their complete extent, not in their pure form, but repeatedly revised,
mutilated, expanded, [and] defaced.” Adolf Holtzmann Sr., Indische Sagen. Zweite verbesserte
Aulage in zwei Bänden, vol. 1 (Stuttgart: Adolph Krabbe, 1854), vii.
12 Sukthankar’s original stemma is reproduced as Figure 79 in Appendix 15. This stemma is mod-
iied to clarify the stemmatic relationships.
13 Reeve traces the principle’s origin in Michael D. Reeve, “Shared Innovations, Dichotomies,
and Evolution,” in Manuscripts and Methods: Essays on Editing and Transmission (Rome: Edizioni di
Storia e Letteratura, 2011), 55– 103. He inds that “the irst explicit formulation remains Paul
Lejay’s in 1888.” Ibid., 68. Froger provides a succinct account of the principle: “The method
known as the ‘common error method’ reconstructs the genealogy of the manuscripts by taking as
the sign of a common origin, not just the common characteristics (internal or external), nor the
common readings (good or bad), but only the erroneous readings. Its governing principle is thus,
‘common errors entail a common origin.’ ” Jacques Froger, La critique des textes et son automatisation
(Paris: Dunod, 1968), 41. Dembowski rightly notes: “Lachmannian classiication was based on
the crucial idea of common error, so much so that the method has often (and rightly) been called
‘the common error method.’ ” Peter F. Dembowski, “The ‘French’ Tradition of Textual Philology
and Its Relevance to the Editing of Medieval Texts,” Modern Philology 90, no. 4 (1993): 514.
14 This stemma features 1,319 manuscripts generated at random descending in three families from
α, β and γ. As in Figure 4 in the introduction, enclosed circles indicate lost exemplars. In con-
trast to Figure 4, however, only the surviving manuscripts (1– 85) are numbered. Additionally,
seven manuscripts or nodes—δ , ε, ζ, η, ι, κ and λ—a re given special names because of the
potential for the contamination at these points to mislead us in our inferences. The primary
92
92 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
families (that is, those descending from α, β and γ) were colored blue, red and indigo, respec-
tively. Intermediate shades were chosen for the subfamilies descending from composite sources
(that is, sources descending from two primary families, a primary family and a subfamily or
two subfamilies). The eventual archetype θ (whose status is evident on performing eliminatio
codicum descriptorum) is not the sole manuscript in existence at the time. It is also not the source
of the largest number of copies or the largest family (which remains γ), as is often erroneously
thought. While the traditions of vulgatae, which generate large numbers of copies, are more
likely to survive, this does not justify us in automatically assuming that the archetype must have
been a vulgate version. If a single manuscript from a diferent branch of the tradition sur-
vived, the archetype would be an ancestor of the vulgate(s). Vice versa, if for some reason the
descendants of vulgate texts situated higher in the stemma ceased to be copied, the vulgates
would have no appreciable efect on the tradition.
15 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 14.
16 See ibid., 15– 16: “Setting out from the hypothesis of a normative redaction […] I have in the
CE [critical edition] of the Mahābhārata a text that was a historical fact at a speciic time.
When this time precisely was cannot be determined at present. In my opinion, our knowledge
at present does not suice for a precise dating of the normative redaction. However, this does
not hinder me from seeing in the text constituted in the CE a text that was a historical fact at a
point in time unknown to me.”
17 See Paul Maas, Textkritik, 4th edn. (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1960), 6: “ The source with which
the irst branching began is called the archetype. Its text is free from all errors that arose after the
branching and hence closer to the original than the text of any witness. If we can reconstruct
its text successfully, the constitutio is advanced signiicantly.”
18 It is crucial that the revision be extensive, but not complete, for, as Bigger acknowledges, this
renders the search for remnants of the oral epic tradition impossible. See Bigger, Balar ma
ā
im Mah bh rata, 98: “Finally one could also assume that the normative redaction subjected
ā ā
the entire Mahābhārata to a comprehensive revision. In this case, we could bring our work
here to an end, since we could then no longer say something deinite about earlier strata.” If
there is a single hermeneutic principle guiding German Mahābhārata scholarship, it is this: the
Brahmanic redactors succeeded in defacing the original heroic epic greatly, but they could not
erase it completely. That the search for the original is no less chimerical in the case of a nonex-
istent revision than in the case of a complete revision apparently does not strike them.
19 Ibid., 111.
20 Bigger sees his work as “conirming” a basic suspicion of the German critics since Lassen irst
articulated it in 1837, namely, that the Mahābhārata underwent a “diaskeusis.” See Christian
Lassen, “Beiträge zur Kunde des indischen Alterthums aus dem Mahâbhârata I: Allgemeines
über das Mahābhārata,” Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 1 (1837): 77– 78: “For us, that
which manifests most clearly in the legends concerning Vyāsa is simultaneously the most
important, namely, that the Mahābhārata underwent a diaskeusis.” Insofar as Bigger’s work
does not prove but merely assumes this hypothesis, its scientiic value is nil.
21 See Georg von Simson, “Die Einschaltung der Bhagavadgıt̄ā im Bhıṣ̄maparvan des Mahābhārata,”
Indo- Iranian Journal 11, no. 3 (1968/ 69): 159–7 4, speciically his claim that the reason “the
editor [Belvalkar] did not see or did not want to see the passage [is] it lies a good twenty- ive
adhyāyas back— among them the most important ones of the entire Mahābhārata for the
devout Hindu.” Ibid., 161. Von Simson’s idea of a common Brahmanic pattern of falsiication
extending from antiquity to the most recent period of the critical edition is addressed in Vishwa
Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee, The Nay Science: A History of German Indology (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2014), 289– 91.
22 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 17. Compare ibid., 17 (“the methods applied are those of
higher textual criticism”), 19 (“higher textual criticism”), 69 (“an investigation of the MBh
based on higher textual criticism”), 70 (“the special problems […] parts of books 1, 3, 12
and 13 present to higher textual criticism”), 83 (“results of higher textual criticism”), 119– 20
93
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 93
(“higher textual criticism has not yet pressed into these areas”), 121 (“arguments of higher tex-
tual criticism”) and 123 (“the criteria of higher criticism”).
23 Ibid., 15.
24 Soulen and Soulen note: “Lower Criticism is an unhappy term, now of infrequent par-
lance, characterizing TEXTUAL CRITICISM in contrast to so-c alled higher criticism, i.e.,
all other forms of BIBLICAL CRITICISM. The term has fallen into disuse because of its
pejorative sound coupled with the increasing acknowledgment that textual criticism is both
important and complex.” Richard N. Soulen and R. Kendall Soulen, Handbook of Biblical
Criticism, 4th edn. (Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, 2011), 121 (capitalization
and block text in original). We agree with them that it is an unfortunate term, but we use
it for heuristic reasons. Actually, we should relegate everything the so- called Mahābhārata
critics have done (excepting, of course, Sukthankar and his team) to the unhappy reaches
of “higher anti- Semitism.” For the expression, and its deinition, see Solomon Schechter,
“Higher Criticism— Higher Anti- Semitism,” in Seminary Address and Other Papers (Cincinnati,
OH: Ark Publishing, 1915), 36– 37.
25 Trovato speaks of “staunch ‘reconstructionists,’ who believe that the task of a scientiic edition is
not merely to transcribe a manuscript, or to reconstruct the archetype of surviving manuscripts,
but to use the archetype as a point of departure, using all available means— linguistic, stylistic
or metrical information, historical data, etc.— to try to come as close as possible to the lost
original, detecting and correcting, as far as possible, but always as rationally and transparently
as possible, the errors shared by surviving copies.” Paolo Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted
to Know about Lachmann’s Method: A Non-S tandard Handbook of Genealogical Textual Criticism in the
Age of Post-S tructuralism, Cladistics, and Copy-T ext (Padua: Libreriauniversitaria, 2014), 15. These
conditions are simply not given in the case of the Mahābhārata, a text whose earliest version is
dated to the second century AD. The irony is that those who insist we can reconstruct the “lost
original” simultaneously maintain that it was not one but several, that it had not one author but
a tradition of “epic bards” and that these bards did not reproduce a single text but freely com-
posed episodes as they pleased. The criterion of style in the sense that Trovato means (that is,
as an author’s distinctive stamp) simply does not apply here. When Mahābhārata critics speak
of “stylistic analysis” they mean parts identiied as characteristic of the oral, bardic tradition,
the latter itself identiied on the basis of these parts. The circularity of this conclusion evidently
evades them.
26 As Most also airms: “Lachmann’s method is mechanical, both in the sense that it must pre-
suppose the unthinking transcription of manuscripts if it is to be applied to them and in the
sense that the determination of relations of iliation is achieved on the basis of simple rules
and calculations of probability. Ideally, choices of manuscripts and of readings based on this
method will be rational in that they will depend not on the taste of the individual scholar but
on objective evidence that can be mathematized and evaluated.” Glenn W. Most, “Editor’s
Introduction,” in Sebastiano Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, ed. and trans. Glenn
W. Most (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 10. Mechanical does not mean the
method is unthinking or care is not required in evaluating the manuscripts. It merely means
that once the editor has it his manuscripts into a stemma and explained his principles, he will
attempt as far as possible not to deviate from those principles.
27 Gianfranco Contini, “La ‘Vita’ francese ‘di Sant’Alessio’ e l’arte di pubblicare i testi antichi
(1970),” in Frammenti di ilologia romanza: Scritti di ecdotica e linguistica (1932–1 989), ed. Giancarlo
Breschi, vol. 2 (Florence: Edizioni del Galluzo, 2007), 961. Eklund is good on the stemma’s
role in the latter: “A very serious criticism of the stemmatic method is that it is a single, gigantic
vicious circle. […] This objection may seem well founded but it may, nevertheless be rejected.
[…] As I have just pointed out, the stemma is built up by means of the manifest errors but then
it is not these same manifest errors which are corrected by means of the stemma. […] No, the
stemma is used to enable a choice to be made as soon as latent errors are encountered.” Sten
Eklund, “The Traditional or the Stemmatic Editorial Technique?” Eranos 104 (2006–2 007): 12
94
94 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
(italics in original). Both passages are cited (Contini also translated) in Trovato, Everything You
Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 59.
28 The special status of the archetype is highlighted by the fact that Maas notes, “another name
is not available for it. One should therefore not refer to other intermediate members between
the original and extant witnesses as the archetype, irrespective of how important they may be
under [the] circumstances.” Maas, Textkritik, 6 (emphasis in original).
29 Ibid., 9 (italics added).
30 Ibid., 10 (italics added).
31 See ibid., 10: “If the transmission proves corrupt, one must attempt to correct it through
divinatio. This attempt either leads to an evident emendation or to multiple equally satisfactory
conjectures or to the insight that a correction [Heilung] through divinatio cannot be hoped for
(crux).”
32 Ibid., 15 (italics in original).
33 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 19.
34 An archetype, understood in the strict sense, only indicates that a reading is later than it— that is, it
is a corruption of the original or a more original reading. Bigger, however, means something else
with “not belonging to it.” In his view, since lower criticism can only tell us whether the arche-
type contained a passage but cannot exclude its existence before the archetype, “belonging to it”
must be interpreted literally as to it and it alone. This is Flores’s precise anxiety: the archetype is
“non […] la somma delle serie complete” (not the sum of the complete series). Bigger, however,
uses it to draw a most perverse conclusion: if the archetype is not the sum of the complete series
preceding it, that series could have contained anything, including a Ksạ triya epic.
35 The idea of “text- historical” (textgeschichtliche) as opposed to “text- critical” (textkritische)
investigations derives from Paul Hacker’s article “Zur Methode der geschichtlichen Erforschung
der anonymen Sanskritliteratur des Hinduismus. Vortrag gehalten auf dem XV. Deutschen
Orientalistentag Göttingen 1961,” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 111, no. 2
(1961): 483– 92. Despite the similarity of names, the two are unrelated. Despite, also, the name
textgeschichtlich, the method is unrelated with objective historical investigations based on empir-
ical evidence. Indeed, it explicitly rejects the latter. Here is how Hacker deines this specious
method: “From such changes (I mean: inversions of the text, expansions, interpolations
and even individual word variants) we can at times practically read of intellectual-h istor-
ical processes. And since for the most part we lack direct historical evidence, textual history
[Textgeschichte] or, speaking more generally, the method of comparing multiple transmissions is often
the sole scientiic means of knowledge for the historical processes. The history of religion of
Hinduism in its diferent branches— history of myths, of cult, of religious ethics and laws, of
piety— but also the history of philosophy in some of its branches can no longer be carried out
scientiically without the use of this method.” Ibid., 489 (italics in original). It is important to
note that when Hacker speaks of “textual history,” he means something other than what is
meant, for instance, in the Italian school of textual criticism: “a focus on the history of the
tradition; a habit of taking into consideration the existence of authorial variations and of
multiple versions; a mistrust of evaluating manuscripts merely for their antiquity and apparent
quality; use of geographical criteria, and so forth.” Alberto Varvaro, “The ‘New Philology’
from an Italian Perspective,” trans. Marcello Cherchi, Text 12 (1999): 51. Rather, he means
the precise opposite: a history constructed whole cloth out of the texts alone. For Hacker’s rejec-
tion of any contact with historical methods, see Hacker, “Zur Methode der geschichtlichen
Erforschung der anonymen Sanskritliteratur des Hinduismus,” 492: “In all these eforts at a
history of Hinduism, the method should, when one sets out from the texts, initially be restricted
to philology, that is to say, ethnological, anthropological, archaeological and similar relections
should, at irst, be kept strictly apart. Only once we have obtained results can the dialogue
with the other historical sciences—h owever, important and necessary—b ecome truly fruitful.”
Oddly enough, although he claims a “philological” pedigree for his method, Hacker also rejects
a “merely external, more or less mechanical textual criticism […]. Inner criteria of an intellectual-h istorical
95
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 95
nature must accompany it hand in hand.” Ibid., 488 (all italics Hacker’s). Likewise, when Bigger
says that “higher criticism […] can help interpret this passage and locate it text- historically,”
he means neither objective historical investigations into the language of the authors and the
milieu in which it was read and disseminated nor the abstract reconstruction of the tradi-
tion presented in a Lachmannian stemma. Rather, he means the text’s decomposition into its
alleged component parts using the “inner criteria” of the Brahmans’ perceived ideology, the
Kṣatriyas’ likely interests and similar tendentious arguments. To call these criteria “criteria of
an intellectual-h istorical nature” is, of course, an abuse of that term, possibly only in a milieu
where the sole intellectual-h istorical project of the past centuries has been to prove the evils of
“priestly domination.”
36 Vishnu S. Sukthankar, On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata (Bombay: Asiatic Society, 1957), 10.
37 Ibid., 10–1 1. See also ibid., 30– 31 for Sukthankar’s rejection of the search for the lost oral
epic: “Higher Criticism would have us search for the lost ‘epic nucleus,’ which is apparently some-
thing immensely worth possessing. With that end in view it proceeds by the method of athetizing
certain lines, passages, chapters, or even whole books. These are spurious, and all the rest is the
work of one great poet. This method has been applied to comparatively more recent and also
much simpler works, about whose historical context we happen to be better informed and where
it would be much more legitimate. Yet even in these cases it has, as is well known, completely
broken down. Very little relection is needed to convince one that a mere process of stripping of
what we regard as spurious will not automatically leave us with the pure and unalloyed ‘original.’
As we analyse the poem back towards its source, it proves to have not one source but many. What
shall we do then? We know nothing about the hypothetical ‘nucleus.’ Moreover the nucleus we
may discover in our analytical adventures is likely to prove to be not the ‘original’ we are looking
for, but merely a projection of our own feelings. On the other hand we have got the poem, about
which there is no doubt, and we may be able to puzzle out a good deal about its meaning, its inner
meaning, if we tried. Let us then focus our thoughts upon that and try to understand it as best as
we can. I believe we shall ind in the poem itself something far greater and nobler than the lost
paradise of the primitive Ksạ triya tale of love and war, for which the Western savants have been
vainly searching and which the Indian people had long outgrown and discarded.”
38 In fact, paraphrasing von Simson, we could say, “The picture we encounter here is by no
means a balanced one, but rather, relects the view of the epic’s German critics, and this view
is to a great extent driven by their interests and ideologically prejudiced. The interests of
the German Indologists, that is, the class interests of the priests and intellectuals, are clearly
expressed, above all, in writings from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.” The quotation
is from Georg von Simson, Mahābhārata: Die Große Erzählung von den Bhāratas (Berlin: Verlag der
Weltreligionen, 2011), 591.
39 See Adluri and Bagchee, The Nay Science, chapters 1– 2.
40 Bigger advocates “normative” over “inal,” noting: “in contrast to him [von Simson] I do not
believe that the version represented in the Critical Edition was the irst comprehensive MBh.
Rather, it is the youngest and therefore still attainable normative redaction.” Bigger, Balarāma
im Mahābhārata, 14, n. 76. Insofar as von Simson himself does not think the revision of the epic
ceased with this redaction this is a distinction without a diference.
41 The coincidence between the constituted text and the hypothetical redaction explains the
apparent self- evidence of von Simson’s and Bigger’s claims. It is also the reason few scholars
detected the problems with their work. Von Simson and Bigger do not demonstrate the con-
stituted text is a redaction; they merely declare it so. Once the critical edition is redeined
thus, all their conclusions follow with strict necessity. Who will show that a deinitional circle
exists here?
42 Maas, Textkritik, 6.
43 Michael D. Reeve, “Reconstructing Archetypes: A New Proposal and an Old Fallacy,” in
Hesperos: Studies in Ancient Greek Poetry Presented to M. L. West on His Seventieth Birthday, ed. P. J.
Finglass, C. Collard and N. J. Richardson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), 326– 40.
96
96 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
44 Enrico Flores, Elementi critici di critica del testo ed epistemologia (Naples: Lofredo, 1998).
45 Reeve, “Reconstructing Archetypes,” 331– 32.
46 Ibid., 333– 34 (italics in original).
47 Von Simson and Bigger mean something else than editors when they recognize the archetype
as the source of the irst branching of the extant tradition. Whereas editors typically mean a
manuscript detected during recensio from which all extant witnesses can be shown to derive, von
Simson and Bigger interpret extant tradition to mean the tradition after the Brahmanic redac-
tion, the whole of which is assumed to have survived even if some manuscripts did not survive,
since in contrast to the preceding tradition it did not undergo conscious decimation. In other
words, what the critical edition reconstructs is the irst Brahmanic version of the text. The
branching began from this source not just in the sense that all extant witnesses can be traced
back to it but that all manuscripts ever were copied from it or from its descendants.
48 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 18.
49 Reeve, “Reconstructing Archetypes,” 335– 36 (italics added).
50 “But θ is not the sum of the complete series α, β, γ, etc! Θ stems ultimately from α, because it
carries the error b, but it is mistakenly considered to be the sole survivor of an endless series
of acts of copying (the librarians’ workshops of antiquity and the reproduction of the text in
countless copies). Moving up from the bottom, we keep inding errors common to the entire
tradition of the manuscript, but in progressively smaller numbers: in theory reaching zero
errors in the original or only those errors that arose in the original. The archetype, therefore,
because it is always constructed from the bottom or from the manuscripts that have been
preserved, as the bearer of the common (or conjunctive) errors will always be an apparently
unique copy.” Flores, Elementi critici di critica del testo ed epistemologia, 54.
51 Reeve, “Reconstructing Archetypes,” 336.
52 Ibid., 336– 37.
53 “Θ, whether of the ninth century or of the third to the fourth century, is a bottleneck, the
bottom of one funnel and the vertex of a second inverted one [below it] where, [moving] from
the bottom up, all the common errors a, b and c (which are all earlier than the ninth century) are
collected and, from the top, precipitate all those which we ind in the surviving witnesses XYZ.
The aporia consists in this: the bottleneck does not exist, since the errors falling from the top
do not coalesce at the bottom of the funnel but fall dispersing radially.” Flores, Elementi critici di
critica del testo ed epistemologia, 54.
54 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 17. See also ibid., 19, 68, 70, 83, 119, 121 and 123.
55 Ibid., 18.
56 The notion of a “descendant” whose existence must irst be identiied in the surviving
manuscripts requires clariication, since a descendant is not normally found in another man-
uscript, which would be contrary to its very meaning. What Bigger means is that some of the
passages found in the witnesses XYZ are not descended from the ancestors they are hypoth-
esized to have descended from, that is, ancestors of XYZ extending in a line as far back as θ.
Rather, they are older than θ, having descended directly from α and other copies that preceded
θ, without passing through the alleged constriction at θ.
57 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 111.
58 The stemma is best understood as a hypothetical architecture that connects the surviving points
in the tradition bearing in mind their intrinsic relationships. Although only partial in this sense,
the stemma nevertheless stands for the whole the way every part of a hologram contains the
image of the complete object. The stemma presents a good guide to the tradition, even parts we cannot access.
Without evidence to the contrary, we should assume that the remainder of the tradition, the part
we cannot reconstruct, unfolded more or less similarly, since manuscript copying presents only a
limited number of options. Editors consider stemmata representative in this sense.
59 “[T]he ‘stemma’ […] is not, strictly speaking, the whole genealogical tree for the entire tradition
of the text. It is a schema which we hope not to be unfaithful to the real genealogical tree, but
in which all the ramiications may not be retraced. […] In addition, the schematic character of
the stemma springs from the absence of a rather large number of intermediary copies, lost over
97
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 97
the centuries, and because of these missing copies we shall never be able to know with absolute
certitude whether a manuscript is a son of another, or its nephew, or grandson.” Pierre Marie
de Contenson, “Principles, Methods and Problems of the Critical Edition of the Works of Saint
Thomas as Presented in the ‘Leonine Edition’,” Tijdschrift voor Filosoie 36, no. 2 (1974): 356.
60 Compare von Simson, who argues: “All these features [errors in recollection, introduction of
synonymous expressions, displacement of verses, etc.], which, together with the efects of the
contamination of manuscripts, have made the creation of the critical edition so diicult appear
to me, however, to exclude neither the hypothesis of an archetype of the extant manuscripts
nor that of an Ur-t ext, to which these must be traced back. One must only be clear about the
fact that this Ur- text was the late work of relatively untalented compilers. […] If there ever
existed an Indian Homer, then his work is not our Mahābhārata but an earlier version of the
epic, now forever lost to us.” Von Simson, “Altindische epische Schlachtbeschreibung,” 285.
Bigger does not use the term archetype. Note that although von Simson grants an archetype, he
does not mean it in the sense editors do. Rather, he interprets archetype precisely to mean a second
work. For him, the archetype is not a more or less faithful copy descended through many acts
of individual copying from the original, but “the late work of relatively untalented compilers.”
As a reconstruction of this work, the critical edition is an archetype. It is not an archetype in the
sense we mean and in the sense that editors use the term.
61 Bigger acknowledges that “such an investigation has much about it that is hypothetical,” but he
insists that “as long as we do not ind a manuscript of the Mahābhārata from the irst century
BCE, we are dependent on such a procedure if we wish to advance beyond the boundary the
text constituted in the critical edition places on us.” Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 70.
62 Benedictus Johannes Paulus Salemans, “Building Stemmas with the Computer in a Claddistic,
Non- Lachmannian Way: The Case of Fourteen Versions of ‘Lanseloet van Denemerken’ ”
(PhD Diss., Katholieke Universiteit Nijmegen, 2000), 14.
63 This stemma is only hypothetical as the contamination at δ, ε, ζ, η, ι, κ and λ could potentially
mislead us in our inferences, but it makes an important point. The shape of our stemma is not
an accurate guide to the shape of the tradition but it is an accurate guide— indeed, the sole
one— to its contents. The Indologists erred in drawing the opposite conclusion. They thought
that the narrowing of the stemma toward its apex evidenced a reduction in the number of
exemplars as we approach the archetype but, for this very reason, the reconstructed arche-
type was not indicative of the tradition’s contents given the “manifest” decimation of all other
copies. Who will explain to them that this argument is not only false but also circular? Even if we
granted that a decimation occurred, this would not establish that the lost exemplars contained
a text signiicantly diferent from the archetype. The only condition under which this conclu-
sion is justiied is if we assumed the existence of an alternative tradition, one diferent from the
one eventually conserved and, moreover, that someone had an interest in erasing one tradition
and conserving the other (since chance would not explain it). In other words, we must assume
Brahmanic corruption to “prove” its existence, which was, of course, the German scholars’ aim
from start to inish.
64 Much would depend on how we read the evidence of the manuscripts. For instance, without
looking at the manuscripts we could not know whether P was a descendant of β with occasional
borrowing from another tradition or a descendant of the tradition descending from ε with only
occasional allegiance to β. In the latter case, we would have connected P with F through ε and
ε itself with O through δ. Alternatively, if the borrowing into ε from the tradition descending
from δ was insigniicant, we might think P and F formed a separate subfamily (the family of
α) and seek to connect them with β through their common ancestor ω, the irst source of the
entire tradition (though, again, it is doubtful we would realize this). The value of a theoretical
exercise such as the one presented in these igures is not that it provides deinite answers but
that it stimulates relection on contamination.
65 Could the Indologists cite Figure 10 to argue that, whereas the constituted text reconstructs θ, a
manuscript in the family of β, there are two other families about which we know nothing, and
hence they are justiied in thinking that θ reconstructs the Brahmanic version of the text, whereas
98
98 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
either α or γ (or α and γ) could represent the Ksạ triya version, which has not descended to us?
Given their perverse attachment to the thesis of Brahmanic corruption of an earlier Ksạ triya
epic, we are certain that they will. But four problems arise. First, it is false that we know nothing
about the other two families because we have access to β and nothing in the stemma tells us that
the irst two families were radically diferent from the third. Second, the stemma reveals that
no attempt was made to replace the families of α and γ with θ, as their thesis of a motivated
Brahmanic redaction requires. It is only accidental that θ’s descendants rather than α’s or γ’s
survived. Third, θ’s readings are actually a good guide to the tradition because θ is an unexcep-
tional copy, indistinguishable (except in the matter of its idiosyncratic scribal errors and minor
additions) from thousands of similar copies created or in existence at the same time. It is only
chance that it, rather than one of its peers, became the archetype. Fourth, the stemma features
an example of extra-s temmatic contamination to illustrate that we could not simply claim con-
tamination from a hypothetical survivor of the Ksạ triya epic. In the enclosed region on the right,
extra-s temmatic contamination from ι is postulated to explain the unexplained good readings
of 74, 78, 79, 80 and 81. The manuscripts’ shared good readings, which they share neither with
any of the members of the other groups nor with 70, 71 and 72 with whom they otherwise share
some errors, suggesting a common ancestor at S, leads us to posit extra-s temmatic contami-
nation into a common ancestor V. The Indologists have failed to demonstrate a similar situa-
tion in a single instance. All their examples of “contamination” consist of identifying an alleged
“Ksạ triya” passage in an isolated exemplar. Most important, this stemma illustrates that the fam-
ilies of α and γ survived until quite late, which, by the Indologists’ theory of how Brahmanism
became the dominant cultural and intellectual force in India following the Brahmans’ takeover
of the Ksạ triya epic, should mean that Indian culture retained its heroic Ksạ triya outlook until
quite recently. We should expect to see these manuscripts’ inluence on Indian culture, but the
Indologists themselves hold that the Ksạ triya element in Indian culture died out quite early,
indeed, as early as the Brahmanic redaction of the Ksạ triya epic. Any stemma in which the
destruction of all other exemplars is not concurrent with the creation of the archetype is thus
incommensurable with their view that India’s downfall commences with the rise of Brahmanism.
66 The number of copies typically increases over time, thus suggesting a generic triangle as the most
common shape for stemmata. But we also know of traditions that were decimated over time, leaving
a single manuscript. Their stemmata would trace an inverted triangle. We could not draw these
stemmata. But this precisely illustrates the danger of making inferences about a tradition from the
shape of its stemma. On the increase in copies over time, see Most, “Editor’s Introduction,” 7– 8: “It
is only a guess, but probably a good one, that for most of the history of human culture, the normal
situation was one that began with a single exemplar to be copied (the source text) and ended up, as
result and usually as purpose, with more than one copy of the text (the source text plus the target
text, or multiple target texts): transmission usually entailed multiplication. And given that the proce-
dure was performed neither by machines nor by gods but by humans, and that humans err, trans-
mission always entailed error, and multiplication of copies usually entailed proliferation of errors.”
67 Real trees not only trace complex shapes but, because they are an abstract representation, they
can also be manipulated along any vector. Figures 6 and 10 are intended to show that real trees
do not have a distinct shape, but even they do not depict the “real” tree, which does not exist. They
are themselves abstract representations, albeit more complex ones. We could expand or com-
press them. We could move diferent groups around. We could extend individual lines to create
highly abstract shapes or we could apply fractal logic to create complex, repeating patterns.
Convention dictates that the archetype be located at the top, but, in fact, we could move it to
any apex. In the inal analysis, a stemma is only a formal notation for depicting manuscript
relationships: it is not the image of their transmission, as is often erroneously thought.
68 Pasquali thought that without a corroborating history of the text, stemmata remained entirely
abstract. His sense of the importance of history, knowledge of the language and immersion
in the author’s or period’s style is beautifully summarized in this quote: “Every language is
what it is and produces the efect it produces, solely due to its history. Philological inquiries
99
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 99
are necessary for me in the irst place in order to understand the words and phrases [of the
language], and not merely their color or style. Language is like a stream of water carrying
the taste of both the rock from where it sprang and the land over which it lowed.” Giorgio
Pasquali, “Arte Allusiva,” in Stravaganze quarte e supreme (Venice: Pozza, 1951), 11.
69 Von Simson and Bigger’s work recalls Nietzsche’s metaphor of hiding and locating a camel: “If
someone hides something behind a bush, looks for it in the same place and then inds it there,
his seeking and inding is nothing much to boast about; but this is exactly how things are as
far as the seeking and inding of ‘truth’ within the territory of reason is concerned. If I create
the deinition of a mammal and then, having inspected a camel, declare, ‘Behold, a mammal,’
then a truth has certainly been brought to light, but it is of limited value, by which I mean that
it is anthropomorphic through and through and contains not a single point which could be
said to be ‘true in itself,’ really and in a generally valid sense, regardless of mankind.” Friedrich
Nietzsche, “On Truth and Lying in a Non-m oral Sense,” trans. Ronald Speirs, in The Birth
of Tragedy and Other Writings, ed. Raymond Geuss and Ronald Speirs (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1999), 147. In this case, the deinition is the bush, and only those who cannot
see through it will be impressed with their ideas.
70 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 14.
71 Johannes Bronkhorst, Greater Magadha: Studies in the Culture of Early India (Leiden and Boston,
MA: Brill, 2007), 95.
72 See ibid., 96: “The assumption of an archetype that is diferent from the irst written version
is attractive in the case of the Mahābhārata. This text contains many portions—e .g. the
Bhagavadgītā, the Anugītā, the Anuśāsanaparvan, etc.—w hich are most easily understood as
later additions to an older text.”
73 “However, one manuscript, or a small number of them, may attain a position of prestige which
causes it (or them) to overshadow all others. Something like this can happen when the irst or
most important commentary is written. The commentator may use just one version of the text,
perhaps the only one he is acquainted with, or the one he likes best.” Ibid., 95– 96.
74 Ibid., 71.
75 Bronkhorst is thus wrong when he writes: “If the commentary becomes well- known, subse-
quent readers and copyists may prefer that version of the text to all others. This is one way
in which one version of a text may replace all others, and become the archetype of all the
manuscripts available many centuries later. This may not however be the only way how this
can happen. Manuscripts preserved in major libraries or centres of learning may be copied
more often than others, and for this reason become authoritative. Whatever the exact reason in
each case, it is important to note that it can and does happen that the manuscript tradition of a
text passes through a bottleneck, not necessarily in the sense that there is only one manuscript
left at that time, but rather that just one manuscript becomes the ancestor of all those that sur-
vive at a given later point in time. The result is that a manuscript that is far removed in time
from the original may become the archetype of all those that survive later on.” Ibid., 96. In
Figure 10, θ, which eventually becomes the archetype, is not the most copied; α and γ generate
far more copies— γ’s descendants constitute a whopping 27.5 percent of our stemma— yet
their traditions ultimately die out. Although only hypothetical—w e do not have access to real
trees— this stemma illustrates a truism that cannot be repeated often enough: the archetype is
a manuscript identiied “by chance” during the recensio. No one can say at the beginning of a
tradition which source has the greatest likelihood of becoming the archetype.
76 “The present version of the text, which may be a Brahmanical reworking of earlier material,
appears to have had as one of its main purposes to teach kings how to behave in accordance
with Brahmanical expectations. The need for such an ideological statement, scholars point out,
was strongly felt during the aftermath of the Mauryan empire, whose rulers, as we have seen,
did not observe the rules of Brahmanical society. The irst Brahmanical reworking of earlier
material, and the irst writing down of the Mahābhārata, may therefore have taken place
during the period in which the memory of the Mauryan empire was still strong.” Ibid., 95.
100
100 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
77 Sukthankar notes: “the constituted text cannot be accurately dated, nor labelled as pertaining to
any particular place or personality.” In his view, the constituted text cannot claim great antiquity,
a judgment we think he might now revise. See V. S. Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” in The Ad̄ iparvan
for the First Time Critically Edited, vol. 1 (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1933), ciii.
78 Could the German Mahābhārata critics use this stemma to claim that as our stemma traces
only a very small part of the historical reality, the archetype must occur quite low down, thus
increasing the likelihood of a Brahmanic redaction? We can make four objections: (1) even
with a few survivors we can return quite far back in the tradition; (2) the hypothetical Brahman
redactors would have to know they had to redact just this source, which is impossible because
at the time there was no way to know that this exemplar rather than any other would produce
descendants that survived; (3) a “Brahmanic” text is attested at least as far back as the eighth
century and possibly earlier; (4) without corroborating evidence, no reason exists to assume
a sudden deviation in the text. Although additions and changes can occur to a tradition over
time, they are typically due to scribal error, insertions and commentarial glosses. Nowhere in
the world has a complete “inversion” in a text’s sympathies and content been observed as is
posited for the Mahābhārata. The Indologists’ scientism, provincialism, bigotry and incapacity
to think outside their hackneyed categories and interpretive schema would have provoked
Gaugin’s scorn: “Brains unitted for intellectual quests, having no consciousness of life save as
eating and drinking, with no real aim except to obey a rule, covered with a mantle of hypocrisy
that is worn with contempt by other male virgins.” Paul Gaugin, Gaugin’s Intimate Journals, trans.
Van Wyck Brooks (Mineola, NY: Dover Publishing Company, 1997), 94.
79 Flores, Elementi critici di critica del testo ed epistemologia, 50.
80 Bronkhorst provides the best evidence of this. He writes: “The Mahābhārata, as it has reached
us, is clearly a Brahmanical text, which misses few occasions to preach a Brahmanical vision
of the world. The role and the duties of kings, in particular, receive ample attention. This is
hardly surprising in a text whose main narrative tells the story of a war between kings who
disputed each others’ claims to kingship. The present version of the text, which may be a
Brahmanical reworking of earlier material, appears to have had as one of its main purposes
to teach kings how to behave in accordance with Brahmanical expectations. The need for
such an ideological statement, scholars point out, was strongly felt during the aftermath of
the Mauryan empire, whose rulers, as we have seen, did not observe the rules of Brahmanical
society. The irst Brahmanical reworking of earlier material, and the irst writing down of the
Mahābhārata, may therefore have taken place during the period in which the memory of
the Mauryan empire was still strong. Some scholars go one step further and point out that the
Mahābhārata emphasizes that kings should be Kṣatriyas.” Bronkhorst, Greater Magadha, 94– 95.
81 Oliver Hellwig, “Stratifying the Mahab̄ har̄ ata: The Textual Position of the Bhagavadgīta,̄” Indo-
Iranian Journal 60, no. 2 (2017): 132–6 9 applies quantitative methods (a Latent Dirichlet Allocation)
to the Bhīsṃ aparvan to evaluate von Simson’s theories of the Bhagavadgīta’̄s exceptional position.
He concludes that “the proposed method […] substantiate[s] the textual structure that von Simson
has proposed for the BhG and its embedding in the BhīP,” but is careful neither to attribute the text
to Brahmans nor to make claims about hypothetical redactors (or their activity) and, on the whole,
is extremely close about whether the Bhagavadgīta ̄is an insertion in the Mahab̄ har̄ ata. Ibid., 165.
In response to a question Hellwig clariied that, beyond noting statistically signiicant linguistic
diferences between the Bhagavadgīta ̄and its surroundings, the method makes no statement about
the Bhagavadgīta’̄s “secondary” nature. Compare ibid., 134: “I would like to emphasize that these
indings do not imply any statement about the sequence of events that led to the composition of
the BhīP or of the Mbh. They can be reconciled [both] with theories that postulate a relatively
short duration of composition (Hiltebeitel, 2001; Witzel, 2005; Mahadevan, 2008) [and] with tem-
porally more extended models such as proposed by Fitzgerald (2006), because the algorithm does
not contain a temporal component.”
82 Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 65.
83 Ibid., 64.
101
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 101
84 Ibid.
85 See Leighton Durham Reynolds, Texts and Transmission: A Survey of the Latin Classics
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983), xiii. Reeve cites the passage in the quotation above. L. D.
Reynolds and N. G. Wilson, Scribes and Scholars: A Guide to the Transmission of Greek and Latin
Literature (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991), 60 note that “after the destruction of the previous
centuries many texts survived in one copy only.” They speak of “the period from roughly 550
to 750” as “one of almost unrelieved gloom for the Latin classics on the continent.” Ibid., 85.
But the causes of destruction were complex. Although Christianity certainly played a role—
through disinterest, oicial neglect and, in some cases, censorship— no evidence exists for a
concerted program of decimation as is sometimes asserted.
86 This thesis’s origins ultimately go back to Lassen, “Beiträge zur Kunde des indischen Alterthums
aus dem Mahâbhârata I,” 61– 86 and Holtzmann Sr., Indische Sagen. See especially Lassen’s
comments: “The collection was primarily intended for the warrior caste. […] The Râmâyana
and Mahâbhârata really form the literature of the Kṣatriya and the doctrine of the gods and
religious view presented therein is not the purely priestly […], but rather, the form the religious
doctrine attained in the mind of the warrior caste. […] [T]h e Indian priestly caste had a clear
understanding of the appropriate means […] for securing it lasting dominance over the minds
of the remaining people. It therefore cannot surprise us that we ind epic poetry used as an
instrument of an addiction to spiritual domination. […] There was no means as appropriate
for raising the warrior caste in the priestly spirit than linking instruction about religious and
social laws to the narratives that already enjoyed universal favor. That such an intention was
realized in the diaskeusis of the Mahâbhârata appears clear to me from the large number and
the extent of the didactic portions.” Lassen, “Beiträge zur Kunde des indischen Alterthums aus
dem Mahâbhârata I,” 85– 86. Although called a “diaskeusis” rather than a “redaction,” the thesis
is the same. For references to “diaskeuasts,” see ibid., 63, 64, 68, 75 and 81, n. 18.
87 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 14.
88 The error is simple enough, but it has had grave consequences. It has wasted the time and minds
of a generation of scholars. Naama Shalom, Re- ending the Mahābhārata: The Rejection of Dharma in
the Sanskrit Epic (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2017) cites Bigger thus: “Moreover,
as is suggested by the scholar Andreas Bigger, whenever MBh scholars rely on the C.Ed., they
necessarily adopt the fact that the epic had a textual archetype at some point in history, which this
edition represents. Since the manuscripts of the MBh appear to stem from a single source- text,
Bigger further argues that the written Sanskrit MBh (i.e., the MBh-s aṃhitā of 100,000 verses)
was ixed at some point in history and thus came to dominate the entire manuscript tradition of
the epic. For this reason, Bigger names this text the ‘normative redaction’ of the MBh, as follows:
German philology has coined the word Endredaction (inal redaction) for the archetype of
the MBh. I prefer ‘normative redaction’ for the following reason: it does not suggest that
this redaction was the last one that ever occurred in the history of the MBh. Rather, it is
most probably one among others. What makes it so important is the fact that this redac-
tion came to dominate the whole written tradition of the Sanskrit MBh; it became norma-
tive for this part of the transmission. […] We may now assume, as a working hypothesis,
that the text of the Critical Edition of the MBh is a reconstruction of this normative
redaction. […] We then have before us a text which was, at a certain time, a historical
reality. […] The normative redaction is thus the earliest text we can possibly establish.
If we assume that there was a normative redaction, an archetype that can be reconstructed,
we must at least assume that this text, even if orally transmitted, was already ixed. It is
therefore no longer a loating oral tradition […] but a ixed oral text, similar to the Vedic
corpus, though not so rigidly ixed. It is possible that our normative redaction had the form
of a ixed oral text and there is no way of disproving it, but I still think it is more plausible to
assume that the normative redaction was the irst written MBh. This may also explain why it
was possible for one redaction to have come to dominate the whole manuscript- tradition.”
102
102 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Ibid., 119– 20 and see also 212, n. 38. All references are to Andreas Bigger, “The Normative
Redaction of the Mahab̄ har̄ata: Possibilities and Limitations of a Working Hypothesis,” in
Stages and Transitions: Temporal and Historical Frameworks in Epic and Puran ̄ i ̣c Literature. Proceedings of
the Second Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Puran ̄ a ̣ s, ed. Mary Brockington
(Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts, 2002), 21– 33 (Shalom cites from pages 19– 24).
89 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 111.
90 Ibid., 111– 12.
91 Bigger’s suggestion that “purely theoretically, an empty reference could also be completely
empty, that is, refer to no adequate text. This, however, will be the case only very rarely if
at all” complicates the picture. Ibid., 112, n. 3. We are unclear about what a “completely
empty” reference would look like. Does Bigger imagine every statement in the text must have
a matching description? If we grant empty references in the source, their identiication in the
target text only becomes more diicult.
92 That is, in the peculiar sense that Bigger understands this term. Actually, we could not infer il-
iation even in the latter case, since no way exists to determine which manuscript the damaged
copy stems from, except that Bigger thinks he can identify the “source” based on the fact that
it must contain an intact reference (or rather, since the source also does not exist, he thinks he
can hypothetically reconstruct it by recombining the dissociated elements of the reference).
93 Ibid., 112.
94 Ibid.
95 See Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee, “Jews and Hindus in Indology,” paper uploaded
to Academia.edu, www.academia.edu/ 30937643/ Jews_ and_ Hindus_ in_ Indology (accessed
April 14, 2017).
96 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 113– 14.
97 Compare Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xliv (Sukthankar’s italics): “In passage No. 114 of
App. I, Subhadrā and Arjuna were likewise secretly and hastily married in the presence of
gods, ṛṣis‚ and elders, while Balarāma was away from the scene, to legitimize Abhimanyu (the father
of the famous Parikṣit and grandfather of Janamejaya, to whom the epic was narrated.”
98 See Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 107: “The Bhārgava layer represents one of the earliest
Brahmanic layers in the developmental history of the MBh. However, for these Brahmans
the Bhārgavas were not necessarily their own family, but rather the Brahmans par excellence,
the preeminent family. If the Bhārgava layer is really the earliest Brahmanic layer, the oldest
Balarāma layer must be attributed to the period before it. Here it is most certainly not the
Brahmans but the Kṣatriyas— at least as the audience and patrons—w ho were the bearers
of the transmission. This accords with the view that Balarāma in the central passages is
presented as a representative of Kṣatriya dharma. That the Brahmans had little use for such
a Kṣatriya is conirmed by the fact that the Nārāyaṇīya layers, which became inluential at a
time when the transmission of the MBh already lay in the Brahmans’ hands, had little to add
to the igure of Balarāma beside Saṃkarṣaṇa. In my opinion, 1.211– 213 also belongs among
the Balarāma passages that preceded the Brahamanic layers. The problems that are discussed
there belong unambiguously in Kṣatriya circles.”
99 Ibid., 111.
100 The appendix passages 114 and 115 occur in the southern recension and one Devanāgarī
manuscript (D4); 115 is additionally inserted in K4. The southern manuscripts insert 114
after 1.212.1cd (T3 and G2.4 insert it after 7ab); D4 inserts it on a supplementary folio in
a second hand after 2ab. They insert 115 after 1.213.12ab; K4 inserts it in the margin in a
second hand; D4 inserts it on a supplementary folio in a second hand. Bigger evidently claims
that “the picture changes when we look at the passages removed during the constitution of
the critical edition: all manuscripts listed under the siglum S expand the Subhadrā episode by
numerous passages. […] The two most important expansions can be found in App., 1, nos.
114 and no. 115,” because he thinks that, taken together, the passages evince the existence
of a “continuous” text—a t least in the manuscripts that preserved the “parallel version.” See
103
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 103
ibid., 113. But this is false because the siglum S does not encompass the same manuscripts
both times. The manuscripts comprising S for each of the three parvans are listed next:
Ādiparvan Āraṇyakaparvan Virāṭaparvan
T1 = Melkote, Yadugiri Yatiraj T1 = Lahore, D. A. T1 = Melkote, Yadugiri
Math Library MS (without V. College Library, Yatiraj Mahal Library,
number). no. 3908. no. 155.
T2 = Tanjore, Saraswathi T2 = Tanjore, Saraswathi T2 = Tanjore, Saraswathi
Mahal Library, no. 11865. Mahal Library, Mahal Library,
T3 = Tanjore, Saraswathi no. 11809. no. 11809 (8245).
Mahal Library, no. 11809.
G1 = Melkote, Yadugiri Yatiraj G1 = Melkote, Yadugiri G1 = MS lent by Rao
Math Library, MS (without Yatiraj Math Library Bahadur Professor
number). MS (without number). Dr. S. Krishnaswami
Aiyangar, MA, PhD,
F.A.S.B., Madras.
G2 = Melkote, Yadugiri Yatiraj G2 = Poona, BORI, Mbh. G2 = Melkote, Yadugiri
Math Library, MS (without Collection, no. 53 Yatiraj Math Library MS
number). (= Institute’s Collection, (without number).
G3 = Tanjore, Saraswathi no. 266). G3 = Poona, BORI, Mbh.
Mahal Library, no. 11823. G3 = Tanjore, Saraswathi Collection, no. 54.
G4 = Tanjore, Saraswathi Mahal Library,
Mahal Library, no. 11838. no. 11839.
G5 = Tanjore, Saraswathi G4 = Pudukottah State
Mahal Library, no. 11851. Library, no. 322.
G6 = Tanjore, Saraswathi
Mahal Library, no. 11860.
G7 = Melkote, Yadugiri Yatiraj
Math Library MS (without
number).
M1 = MS belonging to Chief M1 = MS (without number) M1 = Trivandrum, Palace
of Idappali, Cochin. belonging to Ponnokkoṭṭu Library, no. 377 (in
M2 = Cochin, State Mana Nambudiripad, Devanāgarī transcript).
Library, no. 5. Alwaye, Travancore.
M3 = Cochin, State Library, M2 = Malabar, Poomulli M2 = Trivandrum, Palace
no. 1. Dated Kollam 1013 Mana Library, no. 299. Library, no. 378 (in
(ca. 1838 CE). Devanāgarī transcript).
M4 = MS belonging to M3 = Poona, BORI, Mbh.
Kallenkara Pisharam of Collection, no. 33.
Cochin. M4 = Cochin, State Library,
M5 = Cochin no. 14. Dated Collam
(Jayantamangalam); in 1006 (ca. 1831 CE).
property of the Paliyam M5 = MS belonging to
Family. Mankavu Padinnare
M6 = Malabar (Nareri Mana); Kovilakam of Calicut.
in private possession. Dated Kollam 1013 (ca.
M7 = Cochin (Avanạ pparambu 1838 CE).
Mana); in private possession.
M8 = Malabar Poomulli Mana
Library, no. 297. Dated
Kollam 1017 (ca. 1842 CE).
104
104 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
As the table indicates, only one Telugu manuscript (no. 11809 in the collection of the Saraswathi
Mahal Library, Tanjore) is continuous across all three parvans, and thus can contain Mahābhārata
3.79 and 4.44 and the appendix passages 114 and 115. One other Telugu manuscript (no. 155
in the collection of the Yadugiri Yatiraj Mahal Library, Melkote) was apparently continuous
(according to the Virāṭaparvan’s editor, Raghu Vira, “The complete MS. contains the irst ive
parvans of the Mahābhārata”), but it was not used for the Ādi and Āranỵ akaparvans, so that
we cannot know if it contained App. 1, nos. 114 and 115. See Raghu Vira, “Introduction,”
in The Virat ̄ạparvan for the First Time Critically Edited (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, 1936), viii. The manuscript bearing the siglum G2 for the Ādiparvan is also con-
tinuous (Sukthankar notes, “The MS. contains the irst 4 parvans: Ādi, Sabhā, Aranỵ a and
Virāṭa, written probably by the same hand”; Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xxi). It was used
for the Ādi and Virāṭa parvans (Raghu Vira: “The MS. contains the irst four parvans of the
Mahābhārata”; Vira, “Introduction,” ix), but not the Āranỵ akaparvan. Sukthankar notes
of G1 of the Āranỵ akaparvan that “The manuscript contains the irst four parvans and a
part of the ifth,” but it was used for neither the Ādi nor the Virāṭa parvans. V. S. Sukthankar,
“Introduction,” in The Ar̄any
̣
akaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited, vol. 1 (Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1942), ix. Thus even if we grant Bigger’s claim that App. 1, nos.
114– 15 are Rʹ corresponding to an original R in Mahābhārata 3.79, we would get a relation-
ship R → Rʹ only in manuscript no. 11809; for the rest App. 1, nos. 114– 15 would not satisfy
Sahadeva’s reference unless we granted that he went looking for other manuscripts.
101 For all its complexity— an original reference R → Rʹ that underwent dissociation into R and
Rʹ, the referent of which was eliminated but nevertheless survived so that ultimately both
parts R and Rʹ descended—t he empty reference serves one and one purpose only. It ensures
that no part of the original epic is lost, thus enabling Bigger to reconstruct it. If the older
epic were well and truly lost, it could not be reconstructed. But if it survived, he would have
nothing to do. Hence the pretense of a “lost” element. Not only does this let him validate
German prejudices about a Kṣatriya epic lost due to the Brahmans; he can now also “show”
that it was not lost after all since fragments survive in the Brahmanic Mahābhārata. From his
perspective, we only need recognize these fragments and we shall miraculously recover the
“lost” epic.
102 Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 64.
103 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 147: “We thus see that the evidence from the MBh does
not conirm the majority of current theories about the emergence and development of the
igure of Balarāma, or they refute it. Interestingly, Balarāma gains features in the course of
his development that science [Wissenschaft] accepts as originally belonging to his igure. This
gives rise to the suspicion that science [Wissenschaft] has projected features found in younger
texts uncritically into the past. My investigation of the textual history of the MBh clearly
demonstrates the questionableness of such an approach.”
104 On Criticism see Lassen, “Beiträge zur Kunde des indischen Alterthums aus dem Mahâbhârata
I,” 72 (“For the Criticism of the ancient Indian epic poetry, which is preserved for us in
the Râmâyana and the Mahâbhârata alone, I wish to extract the following axioms from what
was previously said. The epic narration was originally orally transmitted and this transmis-
sion was in the hands of the priestly caste.”); Holtzmann Sr., Indische Sagen, x (“Thus I will-
ingly concede that not all features in my replica of the Indian epic will concur with the
model, when Criticism at some point has succeeded in reconstructing the latter in its genuine
beauty.”) and xiv–x v (“But nonetheless even this poem is far removed from presenting itself to
us in its original purity: it has been subject to manifold changes and expansions, and there is
need, in respects great and small, of protracted critical work before the Sanskrit text attains a
form in which it deserves to be translated.”) and Adolf Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik
des Mahābhārata (Kiel: C. F. Haeseler, 1892), 9 (“in the inner Criticism of the Mahābhārata lies
a problem that is destined to proitably employ many future generations of scholars”). And
see also Oldenberg, Das Mahābhārata, 2 (“it still lies in the distant future that this most variably
105
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 105
transmitted text of this monstrous work will be puriied and secured by the philological art
on which it has a claim”).
105 Sukthankar considers App. 1, no. 114 an example of an addition in the southern recen-
sion “[m] ade apparently with the object of correcting the laxity of sexual relations implied
in the old narrative.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xliii. Otherwise also the passage is an
example of the southern recension’s rather baroque character. Sukthankar notes: “These
additions (respectively omissions) and verbal variants sometimes go to such a length that,
at times, there emerges in the end an entirely diferent story. Compare, for instance, the
two versions of the highly popular episode ‘Rape of Subhadrā’ (Subhadrāharaṇa) in adhy.
211– 212 of our edition and passage No. 114 of App. I (comprising over 460 lines!). We ind
that the Southern version of this story is enriched with many entirely novel and startling
features, such as Arjuna’s masquerading as a peripatetic monk (yati), or his ierce battle with
the Yādava forces led by Vipṛthu, which he, of course, routs, alone and unaided, or rather
merely with the help of his newly acquired, valiant and resourceful wife, who acts as his
charioteer!” Ibid., xxxiv.
106 See Friedrich Nietzsche, Anti- Education: On the Future of Our Educational Institutions, ed. Paul
Reitter and Chad Wellmon, trans. Damion Searls (New York: New York Review of Books,
2016), 44: “One of them writes poetry, and is clever enough to look up words in Hesychius’s
dictionary: He is convinced at once that his calling is to modernize Aeschylus, and then he
inds people gullible enough to claim that he and Aeschylus are congenial— he, a poetasting
criminal!”
107 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 120.
108 Ibid., 120– 21.
109 Ibid., 121.
110 All manuscripts except Ś1 and K0– 3 (V1 missing for no. 63) insert no. 63 after adhyāya 107 and
no. 75 after 1.122.31ab. Matters are more complex regarding the remaining three passages.
Whereas Ñ, V1, B, Da, Dn and D1.2 insert no. 80 after adhyāya 128; K4, D4.5 and S insert
an additional passage (no. 79) and insert no. 80 thereafter. Likewise, whereas K4, Ñ, V1, B,
D and M5–8 (the latter four manuscripts omit lines 49–1 03) insert no. 81 after no. 80 and T
and G2.4.5 do so after no. 83; G1.3.6 insert it after adhyāya 130. M3 omits lines 49– 103 and
inserts the passage after 1.129.1. Finally, K4, Ñ, V1, B, D and M insert no. 85 after adhyāya
136; T and G1 do so after 1.137.17.
111 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” li– lii (italics added).
112 Ibid., l–l i: “The K version, though comprising manuscripts akin to each other and clearly
distinguishable from those of the Devanāgarī version, is by no means— as is natural—q uite
homogeneous. Only K0.1 represent the version K in a comparatively pure form, while the
remaining manuscripts of the group (i.e. K2–6 ) are really nothing more than misch- codices,
being conlated either with γ or with S. On the other hand, just owing to this conlation, some
of the other composite Devanāgarī manuscripts (particularly D2.5) have so many features in
common with K, that they may as well be separated from D and classed under K. The con-
tamination of K3– 6 with γ is illustrated by the following passages: No. 14 of App. I (found
in K4 marg., and Ñ V1 B D); No. 41(in K3.4 and Ñ2.3 V1 B D except D5); No. 42– 43 (in
K3.4 and Ñ V1 B D except D5). K4 includes passage No. 61 (of App. I) and 1131*, like Ñ B
D. The contamination of K2– 4 with γ is illustrated by 116*, 119*, 122*, 124*, 125*, 128*,
132*, 137*, 139*, 142* 143*, 144* 145*, 151*, 157*, 160*, 162*, 166*, 167*, 168*, 172*,
173*, 189*, 190*, 191*, 221*‚ 228*, 245*, 281*, 305*, 354*, 372*, 405*, 416*, 417*, 438*,
487*, 490*, 523*, 536*, 564*, 692*, 694*, 824*, 1000*, 1035*, etc., etc. The contamination
of K4– 6 with S is exempliied by the following among other facts. K5.6 contain 22*, K4.6
25*, K4 49*, K4 (suppl. fol.) passage No. 55 (125 lines) and No. 100 (118 lines), of App. I: all
of these are Southern passages. K4–6 ‚ moreover, contain the Brahmā episode in adhy. 1 (a
slippery passage, which migrates from place to place), while K4.6 have found place even for
the venerable elephant- headed Gaṇeśa‚ who is unquestionably a late Northern intruder. In
106
106 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
K4 these interpolations are written out on separate folios (called here odhapatra), and inserted
ś
at appropriate places, which shows the interpolations on the high road to recognition as gen-
uine parts of the Mahābhārata.”
113 “This MS. [K5] is incomplete, ending with 1.3.152. It was collated at the Visvabharati, up to
1.2.40, and was then reported to be missing.” “Collated up to the end of adhy. 2 only [said
of K6].” Ibid., xiii (Sukthankar’s italics).
114 For Sukthankar’s comments on K4, see ibid., xii: “A carelessly written complete MS., with ळ for
ल throughout, which is a Southern trait; written by one hand, but preserved in the Collection
in two bundles numbered 565 and 566. Supplementary folios at 2, 114, 150, 151, 205 include
certain long passages (some from Southern sources), copied by the same hand; notable among
them being the Brahmā- Ganẹ sá interpolation, whose point of insertion is indicated by a small
mark made in the body of the text, and the marginal remark atra odhapatrameka (cf. v.l.
ś ṃ
1.1.53). There are some excerpts in margins, intended as glosses. Marginal additions of lines
and stanzas are frequent only in the irst 35 folios, afterwards few and far between. Corrections
are made with yellow pigment. Colophons frequently contain adhyāya names, subp arvan
names, but no adhyāya number. The copyist was Ganẹ sá ‚ son of Trimbaka.”
115 His speciic reasons, outlined in the “Prolegomena,” lii– liii, are as follows: “It was remarked
above that ν is the shortest of the extant versions of the Ādi. Let us examine, without bias,
this feature of ν. Those passages that are lacking in ν, in comparison with the other versions,
cannot all be omissions in ν, whether accidental or intentional. They cannot be intentional
omissions, notwithstanding that these missing passages are mostly of inferior character,
intrinsically worthless, repetitious, superluous, or inally such as scholars have already (even
before the discovery of this version) marked as likely interpolations. For, this Ś āradā (Kaśmīrī)
version of the Ādi is not an abstract or an adaptation. It claims to be the unabridged text
itself, in all its fullness, and I see no suicient reason to doubt the a priori presumption that it
is not an abridged version. The explanation that primarily with the very object of excising
what seems to us to be superluous or repetitious matter, an abridgement might have been
intentionally made in the past by some Kaśmīrī redactor or a syndicate of redactors, would
be a grotesque distortion of Indian literary and religious tradition. No one in the past found
the epic text too long. Far from it. It was perhaps not long enough. Taking away some-
thing from the received text of the Mahābhārata and passing it of as the original work is
a thing categorically diferent from adding something to it. To add small details here and
there, embellishing and amplifying the original, would be merely a gentle and lowly ser-
vice ad majorem gloriam dei. Even long pieces may sometimes be added, if they are actually
found in other Mahābhārata manuscripts; and occasionally, even if they are not found in
the current manuscripts, provided there is at least oral tradition to support their claims. No
doubt the received text contained diiculties and obscurities and repetitions. But they would
be merely due to corruptions of the text; the diiculties could be solved and the purpose of
the repetitions explained by a really learned Pandit, who knows and understands everything.
That the omissions cannot be the result of a preconceived plan to shorten or to improve the
text, follows further from two other facts: irstly, enough digressions and superluities still
remain in ν, which would have all been swept away in pursuance of the alleged plan; and,
secondly, ν has its own interpolations, albeit they are few in number and short in extent, such
as 349* (in K V1 Da D2.4), 451* (K D2), 516* (K except K3 Dn D1), 565* (K except K2),
1499* (Ś1 K D5), 1735* (Ś1 K1 only), 1855* (Ś1 K Ñ1), 2077* (Ś1 K except K2 and Ñ1.3 V1
D2.5), etc. While these so-c alled ‘omissions’ cannot be all intentional, they can also not be
all accidental. The text is continuous and complete in itself. It has no apparent lacunae, as it
surely would have had, if the omissions had been due to fortuitous loss or destruction of some
intermediate folios of a parent manuscript. It may further be pointed out that many of the
apparent ‘omissions’ of ν, in relation to γ or the Vulgate (i.e. Nīlakaṇṭha’s text) are conirmed
by the rival recension, the Southern recension; e.g. the Gaṇeśa episode (App. I, No. 1), or the
107
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 107
anticipation of the list of the hundred sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra (No. 41), or again the story of the
birth of Abhimanyu (No. 42), or inally the anticipation of the story of the birth of Karṇa
(No. 43) in the Saṁbhavaparvan. These passages are omitted in S no less than in K. In these
instances, moreover, the intrinsic probability is wholly on the side of those manuscripts that
lack these accretions. It is unnecessary to dilate on the Gaṇeśa episode, which, on the face
of it, is a later addition, and which has been dealt with so often by diferent critics. As for the
two passages, Nos. 42– 43 of App. I, it is suicient to observe that the adhyāya in which they
occur is meant to be a mere list of the dramatis personae, in which each actor in the great drama
is identiied as the incarnation of some god, goddess, or titan, taking this or that part in one
momentous phase of an all- embracing cosmic movement. The adhyāya being originally a
mere (metrical) list (as it is in the constituted text and the Southern recension), such stories as
the account of the birth of Abhimanyu and Karṇa are wholly out of place here, and could
not possibly have belonged to the original scheme of the adhyāya. The contrary supposition
only stultiies the original writer, making him out to be an irresponsible lunatic, scarcely a
desirable conclusion from the orthodox viewp oint. Likewise many of the apparent omissions
in ν in relation to the Southern recension are conirmed by other Northern versions; e.g. the
anticipation of the birth of Kṛṣṇā and Dhṛṣṭadyumna (App. I, No. 79), or the Nāḷāyaṇī epi-
sode (No. 100), or the account of a battle between the Kauravas and the Pāṇḍavas (No. 103),
which are peculiar to S. In other words, these ‘omissions’ are documented by the whole of N”
(all italics Sukthankar’s).
116 This is the manuscript Sukthankar described as “the oldest extant ms. of the Ādiparvan”
and provided full collations of in his 1939 article (see next note for citation). It is now pre-
served as NAK 5/3 56 in the National Archives, Kathmandu. It is also known as A28-5 for
its reel number and available in scanned form from the Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin. For details
see: http:// 134.100.29.17/ wiki/ A_ 28- 5_ Mahābhārata. Bigger, following Grünendahl,
refers to it as “Ñ4.”
117 V. S. Sukthankar, “Epic Studies VII: The Oldest Extant Ms. of the Ādiparvan,” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Institute 19 (1938– 39): 203– 4.
118 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 122.
119 Edgerton’s note on the two passages reads: “After 2.12.8, V1 B (B1 marg.) D S ins. (cf. 2.30.1–
6)” (for no. 4) and “V1 B (B1 marg.) Dn D1–3 .5.6 T1 G1.3–5 M ins. after 2.28.10: D4 (which
om. hapl. stanza 10 and line 1 of the foll. passage), ins. after 9: G2.6 (which both om. hapl.
from 9b up to the prior half of line 1 of the foll. passage) ins. after 9a” (for no. 13). Franklin
Edgerton, The Sabhāparvan for the First Time Critically Edited (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1944), 368 and 376. The Sabhāparvan critical apparatus comprises 30
manuscripts: Ś1, K1– 4, Ñ1, V1, B1– 6, Dn1–2 , D1–6 , T1, G1–6 and M1– 2. Passages 4 and
13 occur in all manuscripts except Ś1, K1– 4 and Ñ1.
120 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 121.
121 Sukthankar is persuasive on this issue. He writes: “There has been an extraordinary reluc-
tance among scholars to face the fact that the Mahābhārata manuscripts may contain and do
contain quantities of spurious matter. But there is now no excuse for such recalcitrance. The
critical apparatus of this edition contains a unique record of hundreds of lines which are evi-
dently and unquestionably spurious. Here is a list of passages from our Appendix, each found
in one manuscript only: App. I, No. 2 (in K6 marg.: containing 4 lines); No. 4 (K3: 14 lines);
No. 5 (B4: 23 lines); No. 7 (G1: 4 lines); No. 16 (K4: 9 lines); No. 25 (D5: 4 lines); No. 26 (B4: 6
lines); No. 31 (K4: 27 lines); No. 34 (K4: 6 lines); No. 44 (D2: 24 lines); No. 49–5 0 (Da1: 21
lines); No. 66 (D4: 47 lines); No. 70 (G1: 8 lines); No. 74 (B1: 9 lines); No. 94 (D4: 31 lines);
No. 98 (D4: 50 lines); etc., etc. These are passages from the Appendix alone, to which many of
them have been relegated on account of either their length or their irrelevancy; but the foot-
notes contain hundreds, nay thousands, of lines of precisely the same character. Then there
are also lines which are found in only two or three manuscripts, of which I have counted some
108
108 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
300 instances. A number of new additions have been now given by Professor Sastri, who has
examined other Telugu and Grantha manuscripts for his edition of the Ādi in the Southern
recension. And I am fully persuaded that if we examine yet other manuscripts, we shall still
ind fresh passages which had never been seen or heard of before. No sane person would
maintain that these are all original passages lost in all manuscripts except the few late and
inferior manuscripts in which they happen to occur. It is not always easy, as has already been
remarked, to prove that these ‘additional’ passages are interpolations. The epic metre is easy
to imitate; the epic grammar is lexible; the epic style is nondescript. The additional lines are
generally fashioned with skill, and itted in with cunning. The following interpolated stanzas,
by a poet aspiring after higher things, in fancy metre and classical style are rather exceptional:
1859*:
bhīma uvāca |
re bhūbhujo yadi bhuvollasita
ṁ
na ki
ṁ
cit
tat ki
ṁ
sp ṛhājani sutāṁ prati pārṣatasya |
jajñe spṛhātha katham āgatam āgata
ṁ
vā
prān ̣ādhike dhanuṣi tat katham āgraho ’bhūt ||
kasya dron ̣o dhanuṣi na guruḥ svasti devavratāya
mandābhyāsaḥ kurupatir aya
ṁ
śrīsamutthair vilāsaiḥ |
re karn ̣ādyāḥ śṛn ̣uta madhurāṁ brāhman ̣asyāśu vān ̣īṁ
rādhā yantra
ṁ
racayatu punar viddham apy astv aviddham ||
An interesting instance of a passage which is betrayed by its contents is an extravaganza in
some Grantha manuscripts. This bizarre interpolation describes among other things, with
circumstantial detail, the marriage of Parāśara and Satyavatī (alias Matsyagandhā). At this
ceremony, the shades of the ancestors of both the bride and the bridegroom are invoked, all
the details of a regular Hindu marital rite are minutely observed, and the marriage is sol-
emnized in the presence of Vasiṣṭha, Yājñavalkya and other great Ṛṣis living in the Naimiṣa
forest, with the distribution of baksheesh to Brahmins. It is an interesting speculation whether
credulity can go so far as to regard even such passages as an authentic part of the original
Mahābhārata or Bhārata of Vyāsa‚ just because the passage is found in some Mahābhārata
manuscripts. The foot notes contain a rare selection of passages that are either palpably
absurd, sometimes contradicting the immediate context, or else have little connection with
the context in which they lie embedded: quotations, glosses, fanciful additions of details, the
jetsam and lotsam of Mahābhārata poesie. These bewildering luctuations in the text are
quite unique, being peculiar to the Mahābhārata. They are not found in the manuscripts of
the Vedic literature or in those of grammatical, philosophical, or rhetorical texts or of the
works of the classical poets and dramatists. This only proves the Mahābhārata was peculiarly
liable to inlation and elaboration.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” c– ci.
122 Bigger evidently confuses two senses of popular, namely, frequently encountered and commonly liked
or approved and, from the circumstance that the passages occur frequently, draws the erroneous
conclusion that they must, therefore, also have been popular in the latter sense. The conclu-
sion is doubly erroneous because scribes tended to copy everything in their sources without
discriminating as to their popularity (indeed, they could not have known at the time whether
the lines or episode they were copying were “popular” because they would most likely not
have had access to more than two sources and it is unlikely the passage, if it had already
spread by horizontal transmission, would be found in three or four sources but not one, unless
the former were from one region and the latter from another).
123 “The following are found in E1 and S generally, not in W (= Ś K), but also not in Ñ1: No. 1
of App. I (but S omits some parts and transposes others); 41*; 42*; 52* (found in K4); No. 2
of App. I (found in K4); 60*; 62*; 103* (= 105* in S; in G1.6 only the irst line); 108*; No. 3 of
App. I (in S mostly in diferent places from VBD); 117*; 118*; 121* and 122* (in S in slightly
diferent place from VBD); 125*; 127* (not in B6); 132*; 133*; 134*; 145* (not in B1); No. 4
109
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 109
of App. I (in B1 only margin!); 196*; 197* (in S in diferent place from VBD); 297* (not in
B6); No. 13 of App. I; 302* (= lines 1– 4 of No. 14 of App. I); No. 19 of App. I (in K4; not
in D4.6; same insertion in expanded form as No. 20 of App. I in S); 329*, lines 1–2 (in K4,
not in D4; K1.3 have a diferent secondary insertion); No. 23 of App. I (in K4; not in D4.6).”
Edgerton, “Introduction,” xlvi.
124 Ibid., xxxiv– xxxv (all italics Edgerton’s). The reference is to Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,”
xcv– xcvi. The complete passage reads: “This leads us to the question of ‘additional’ passages
in general. Our attitude with regard to them is quite clear, in my opinion. The irst and fore-
most source of our knowledge as to what the Mahābhārata comprises, is and must remain
the manuscript evidence itself. For example, the question—w hich seems to trouble a great
many people, judging by the inquiries on the point received at the Institute— whether the
Uttaragītā, Gajendramokṣa and Anusmṛti are parts of the Mahābhārata, must be answered
by the manuscripts themselves. If none of our manuscripts contain these passages, it is prima
facie evidence that they are not parts of the Mahābhārata. There is nothing to suggest that
our Mahābhārata manuscripts have sufered any serious loss at any time. There never was
any lack of manuscripts, many of which were preserved carefully in temples, and which
must have been copied repeatedly, for the enhancement of merits. There is no evidence
of any break in the tradition at any time or any place, within the conines of India at
least. The probable inference is that our manuscripts contain all that was there originally to hand
down, and more. What late writers and commentators have said about passages not found
in our manuscripts is always a matter of secondary importance; it cannot ipso facto nullify
or override the primary evidence of manuscripts. Such extrinsic testimony has only local or
personal value; it can always be rebutted by the evidence of the Mahābhārata manuscripts.
Likewise, whether an episode, adhyāya, passage, stanza or line may be regarded as belonging
to the Mahābhārata or not must primarily depend upon whether the manuscripts contain
it. Extrinsic evidence, in so far as it is valid, will principally hold good only for the period or
locality to which it belongs. Intrinsic evidence may be considered; but, being of a subjec-
tive character, it must be used with caution. Our primary evidence being the manuscripts
themselves, we are bound to view with suspicion, as a matter of principle, any part of the
text which is found only in one recension, or only in a portion of our critical apparatus.
Therefore, the evidence for such passages as are contained only in one manuscript, or a
small group of manuscripts or versions, or even in a whole recension must be pronounced
to be defective. Consequently, all lines belonging to one recension only, and a fortiori such as
pertain to a combination of manuscripts amounting to less than a recension, for which there
is nothing corresponding in the other recension and which are not absolutely necessary for
the context—a ll lines, in short, with a defective title—h ave been placed in the footnotes or
the Appendix, pending further inquiry regarding their credentials. Such passages are not all
necessarily spurious. There might be a hundred good reasons why the questionable passages
are missing in a particular recension or version. It might conceivably be, for instance, that
the shorter recension represents (as a certain scholar has said) ‘a mutilated and hastily put
together composition of the Middle Indian Redactors, who could not lay their hands on
all manuscripts of the Mahābhārata.’ The shorter version might again be, theoretically, a
consciously abridged or expurgated version. Or, more simply, the omission might be due to
mere oversight of some scribe who had quite unintentionally omitted the defaulting passage
and this mistake of the irst scribe had been perpetuated by the other copyists. And so on
and so forth. But all these are mere possibilities. All these reasons in general and particular
must be adduced and proved, or at least made probable, in any given case. Moreover, the
manuscripts clearly show that there has been in progress, through centuries, constant com-
parison of manuscripts. In view of this circumstance, the explanation that the omission of a
passage in a whole version might be due to a scribe’s omission loses much of its force. Omission
is as much a fact in Mahābhārata textual tradition as addition. And it is fair to demand of a person
who alleges the authenticity of such one-r ecension passages why the rival recension does not
110
110 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
contain it. The general condemnation of a recension or version that it is mutilated, merely
on the ground that it lacks certain passages that are found in a rival recension or version, is
entirely meaningless; for the argument might easily be reversed, so that the controversy will
resolve merely into mutual vituperation. What I mean is this. From the fact that one of the
recensions, say N, does not contain a certain passage or a certain set of passages found in
another, say S, it is illogical to argue that N is a mutilated version; because such an argument
can with equal cogency be applied to S, in regard to certain other passages that are missing
in S but found in N. The point is so important and at the same time so diicult to grasp
that I shall endeavour to make my meaning clearer with the help of a concrete illustration.
My contention is this. From the fact that the Southern recension contains, say, the Nāḷāyaṇī
(App. I, No. 100), which is missing in the Northern recension, it would be illogical to argue
that the Northern recension is defective or mutilated; because one can, with equal cogency,
seek to establish the mutilation or defection of the Southern recension by pointing, say, to
the Gaṇeśa passage, which is found only in certain Northern manuscripts and is entirely
missing in the Southern manuscripts. The argument could have been employed with greater
semblance of reason and plausibility, had there been only a mere plus or minus on either
side, but is entirely without cogency in the present instance where there are both additions
and omissions on both sides” (all italics Sukthankar’s).
125 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 121.
126 Ibid.
127 There is no manuscript called Ñ4 in Sukthankar’s critical apparatus. The reference is to the
manuscript NAK 5/3 56 mentioned earlier. Grünendahl and Bigger refer to this manuscript
as Ñ4 to imply proximity with the manuscripts Ñ1– 3, which were actually used in the critical
edition of the Ādiparvan. In the following, as a shorthand and to avoid confusion, we retain
their usage.
128 Bigger evidently thinks Ś1, K0–3 and Ñ4 “could […] constitute a recension together” because
he thinks the fact that these six manuscripts do not feature the same passages is evidence for
their closer relation, but he overlooks the fact that if N, their latest common ancestor, did not
contain them, they also would not contain them. Even if we assume, as Bigger evidently does,
that the passages were contained in the so- called normative redaction, this still does not prove
Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 are closely related because the passages’ absence in these manuscripts could
be due to their absence in N, whereas those descendants of N that do feature them could have
copied them from another source.
129 “Our MS. shows in point of readings the greatest agreement with mss. of the Nepālī
group: quite naturally, as it is written in the same script and belongs to the same provincial
version. In particular, its agreements with Ñ3, the best and the oldest MS. of the Nepālī
version belonging to our apparatus, are unique and striking. The total number of variant
readings in our MS. amounts approximately to a little more than 2500. Out of these, its
unique agreements with Ñ3 (or in a few places along with one or two other MSS.) against all
other MSS. count over 500. This shows that our MS. deinitely belongs to the Nepālī version,
and is not a copy of a MS. of the Śāradā or ‘K’ version— a very important point— though it
has marked ainities in many a place with the latter group.” Sukthankar, “The Oldest Extant
MS. of the Ādiparvan,” 207 (Sukthankar’s italics). Thereafter Sukthankar appends a list of
60 readings, chosen at random, of the manuscript’s unique agreements with Ñ3.
130 “Here it is necessary to emphasize the curious circumstance that while the new MS. is on a
par with Ñ3 in respect of individual readings, it is far superior to Ñ3 in so far that it lacks about
ninety per cent of the insertions which Ñ3 has in common with the Vulgate, that is to say, the
Bengali– Devanāgarī group. It thus gives its welcome support to the Śāradā– K group and our
Critical Edition as regards that large mass of passages in which these texts are lacking.” Ibid.,
208– 9 (Sukthankar’s italics).
131 Bigger could perhaps argue that mechanical damage to their common ancestor N
explains the passages’ absence in Ś1, K0–3 and Ñ4, whereas those of N’s descendants that
111
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 111
feature them copied them back in from another source (these manuscripts in this respect pre-
serving the “original” reading, albeit reconstructed or restored after damage to their source).
But this explanation is not consistent with the manuscript evidence. K4, Ñ1–3 , V1, B, D
and M5– 8 insert App. 1, no. 81 after App. 1, no. 80; the T manuscripts and G2.4.5 do so
after App. 1, no. 83, whereas G1.3.6 does so after adhyāya 130 and M3 does so after 1.129.1.
M3, moreover, like M5– 8 omits lines 49–1 03. Likewise, K4, Ñ1– 3, V1, B, D and M insert
App. 1, no. 85 after adhyāya 136; whereas T and G insert it after 1.137.17. If the passages
were original, as Bigger contends, we would expect them to occur in the same place in all
the manuscripts that feature them. Even if Bigger were to argue that the fact that K4, Ñ1–3 ,
V1, B and D insert the passages roughly in agreement with the M manuscripts suggests that
M was the source of their reconstructed text, he could not explain the variance between the
G manuscripts and thus between the G manuscripts and T (in respect of App. 1, no. 81) and
between the T and G manuscripts and M (in respect of App. 1, no. 85). Surely, if they all
owe their reading to their common source S and, via S, to the archetype θ, they must all fea-
ture the passages in the same place? Moreover, if K4, Ñ1– 3, V1, B and D owe the restored
reading App. 1, no. 81 (after damage to their source N) to M, they should follow the latter’s
southern spelling of Kaṇika as Kaṇiṅka but they consistently feature the northern spelling.
They should also feature M’s additional insertions (for example, the six lines inserted in all
southern manuscripts except T1 and G3 after line 7 and the one- line insertion found in
all southern manuscripts after line 177 of App. 1, no. 81) and omit the lines it omits (for
example, lines 10– 11, omitted in all S manuscripts except T1; line 16, omitted in G3 and
M6– 8; lines 21– 27, omitted in M3.5; lines 21– 28, omitted in M6– 8; lines 36–4 2, omitted
in M; lines 49– 103, omitted in M5– 8; line 171, omitted in all S manuscripts except T1; line
184, omitted in T, G2.4.5 and M; lines 188– 89, omitted in S except T1 [and Ñ3 and D5];
and line 190, omitted in all S manuscripts except T1). Bigger has not read the appendix
materials suiciently carefully.
132 Reeve states the point brilliantly: “The principle about shared errors is merely an adapta-
tion of the broader principle to the easily overlooked and seldom controversial fact that one
family has already been assembled: the family selected for study. Why is it a fallacy to apply
the broader principle within that family? Textual critics usually reply that original readings
may survive anywhere in a tradition, which is true but not obviously to the point. It is a fallacy
precisely because the principle has already been used for deining that family. Alternatively, it
is not a fallacy as long as one remembers that the families now to be deined are sections of
that family.” Reeve, “Shared Innovations, Dichotomies, and Evolution,” 59 (Reeve’s italics).
133 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 120– 21.
134 Irving M. Copi, Carl Cohen and Kenneth MacMahon, Introduction to Logic, 14th edn. (London
and New York: Routledge, 2016), 137.
135 Ibid.
136 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 121.
137 Unlike the fallacy of airming the consequent, which is a formal fallacy, that is, an argument
whose invalidity is unrelated to the propositions’ material contents, but simply a consequence
of the fact that the conclusion is unrelated to the premises, a circular argument is a valid
argument. In a circular argument, the conclusion follows from the premises but trivially so.
Bigger’s argument is therefore valid, but it does not expand our knowledge of the tradition.
Crucially, it cannot settle the issue of whether the passages are additions in the manuscripts
that contain them or omissions in those that lack them.
138 Ibid.
139 The most egregious is Christopher R. Austin, “Vedic Myth and Ritual in the Mahābhārata: A
Critical Study of the Mahāprasthānika- and Svargārohan ̣a Parvans” (PhD diss., McMaster
University, 2007). We cite a selection of the most problematic claims: “I embrace a concep-
tion of the Mahābhārata as a text heterogeneous in content and authorship, but consolidated
in a comprehensive act of editing which produced a written form of the text by around the
112
112 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
4th or 5th century CE. The present- day Critical Edition of the Bhandarkar Institute
represents an approximation of this early written text. This form of the Mahābhārata was
authoritative for later tradition, and as such may be referred to as the ‘normative redac-
tion.’ The ixing of the text at this point was not an act of creation ex nihilo, but one of
redaction: forms of the text had hitherto existed as loating oral compositions/ and almost
certainly in earlier written forms as well. The heterogeneity of this normative redaction
(which, again, is now available to us more or less in the form of the Critical Edition) is
borne out in much of the work of analytic scholarship on the basic text of the Critical
Edition, and allows us to infer that the process of growth by interpolation and accretion,
which we know occurred subsequent to the creation of the normative redaction, likely
occurred in some degree prior to the creation of this written archetype as well.” Ibid., 13– 14.
“James Fitzgerald refers to this form of the text as the ‘written archetype,’ and writes: ‘The
efort to establish a critical edition of the Sanskrit text of the Mahābhārata … revealed that
a single Sanskrit version of the “Mahābhārata,” ixed in writing, was at the base of the entire
manuscript tradition of the Sanskrit Mahābhārata. […] [The Critical Edition’s manuscripts]
point conclusively to a single written “text” of a Mahābhārata at some point in the ancestry
of these manuscripts […] The critical edition of Poona is the closest approximation to the
archetype behind the manuscript tradition we will ever get.’ In the accompanying notes,
Fitzgerald adds: ‘The amount of unity, both petty and general, that exists among the MBh
manuscripts […] can be explained only on the assumption of a ixed text antecedent to
those manuscripts, an archetype. For the variations which exist can be explained as later,
particular innovations resulting from various dynamic factors in the tradition, while the
unity cannot be explained, generally, as parallel independent invention.’ Fitzgerald, ‘India’s
Fifth Veda,’ 152–5 3. On the whole I embrace Fitzgerald’s conception of this earliest infer-
able form of the text, but prefer Bigger’s term ‘normative redaction’ (see below) since the
term ‘archetype’ may tend to suggest a simple and homogenous text in contradistinction to
a later complex and developed one, and this is not the case with the text of the Critical
Edition.” Ibid., 14, n. 32. “I borrow the phrase ‘normative redaction’ from Andreas Bigger
[...], who articulates a position similar to that expressed by Fitzgerald, but with important
qualiications. Bigger characterizes the early written form of the text as the ‘normative
redaction,’ likening it to ‘a kind of screen- shot,’ (20) emphasizing thereby the luidity of the
text both prior and subsequent to the creation of what Fitzgerald refers to as the ‘written
archetype.’ ” Ibid., 14, n. 33. “Hence I do not conceive of this early form of the written
Mahābhārata—t he written archetype or normative redaction— as the product of unitary
authorship per se. That is to say, I do not believe that the material constituting the written
archetype came about as an actual literary creation by design of a single writer. But it does
seem likely, given the integrated and cohesive nature of the Critical Edition text, that the
normative redaction was prepared in writing and organized in quite a comprehensive act
of editing and compilation. Hence, whatever the provenance, authorship and age of the
materials brought together in the course of this editing, the normative redaction presents
them in a continuous and integrated framework that would appear to make of the
Mahābhārata a self- contained piece of literature. Consequently, the position I take which is
deinitive for the work of this dissertation is to acknowledge and accommodate a degree of
heterogeneity of the poem’s materials, while recognizing the important integrating efect of
redaction which the written archetype ixed, preserved, and made authoritative for later
manuscript traditions of the Mahābhārata. Once again, it is on the basis of the present day
Critical Edition of the poem that I and other scholars infer the existence and character of
such a written archetype or normative redaction, and in this dissertation I will build hypoth-
eses about the normative redaction based principally upon a close reading of the Bhandarkar
Critical Edition text.” Ibid., 15. “Above I have made passing reference to some of the
elements which bespeak the poem’s unity and integrity as a piece of literature: the coherent
113
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 113
narrative, consistency in the rendering of the story’s characters, structural symmetry and
repetition of motifs across the poem. I would argue that such elements provide us with some
examples of the normative redaction’s cohesiveness— a cohesiveness that, as I have just
proposed, is likely attributable to a process of systematic redaction or editing. But in
addition, I would argue that the two narrative frames within which the entire Mahābhārata
story is presented also provide us with an indication of the integrating and consolidating
efect of redaction. These frames are established at the very beginning of the poem, are
carried through consistently across the entire text, and closed at the epic’s termination.
Moreover, they point to an aspect of the normative redaction which is central to this disser-
tation: the structuring efect of Vedic ritual upon the Mahābhārata’s narrative.” Ibid.
Fitzgerald’s claims are equally problematic: “The written Sanskrit Mahābhārata was ixed
and promulgated in Northern India between about 300 and 450 CE, that is, about the time
of the Gupta empire, and that text became, de fact, an almost normative redaction for
written copies of the Sanskrit text (Bigger 1998: 13–1 9; Fitzgerald 1985: 126–2 8). […]
There is broad agreement that the particular precursors of this text, that is, some kind of
‘Bhārata’ epic, came into existence and began developing sometime after 400 BCE. There
is also broad agreement, though not unanimity (see Hiltebeitel 1999c), that the Mahābhārata
has antecedents of some kind in older Indo-A ̄ryan, oral bardic literature and perhaps even
in some more ancient Indo- European bardic songs about warriors and wars.” James
L. Fitzgerald, “The Mahābhārata,” in The Hindu World, ed. Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby
(New York: Routledge, 2004), 52–5 3. And see also James L. Fitzgerald, “Making Yudhiṣṭhira
the King: The Dialectics and Politics of Violence in the Mahābhārata,” Rocznik Orientalistyczny
LIV, no. 1 (2001): 68– 69: “By that term [Mahābhārata] I mean a written, Sanskrit text that
‘precipitated out’ of wider, mainly oral, traditions of epic and didactic poetry. I believe this
written Sanskrit text was provoked by the rise of the Nandas and the Mauryas, and partic-
ularly by the ‘dharma- campaign’ of Aśoka Maurya. I believe it was completed through a
deliberate authorial and redactorial efort sometime during or shortly after the times of the
Brahmin dynasties of the Śuṅgas and the Kāṇvas; that is, after the middle of the second
century B. C. and before the end of the irst century B. C., though perhaps even as late as
sometime in the irst century A. D. This written text then became a major new element
operating alongside of and interacting with the oral traditions that preceded it and which
certainly persisted after its creation. I believe this written Mahābhārata may have been sys-
tematically expanded one or more times between this tendentious, post- Mauryan redaction
and 400 CE, thus complicating the traditions of Bhārata, and, or, Mahābhārata further. In
addition, during this period there were, no doubt, also additions and excisions in all
branches of the manuscript tradition, additions that were neither artistic nor systematic
(that is, particular keepers of given manuscripts inserted explanations and clariications,
passages which they thought appropriate to transmit as part of the MBh for one reason or
another, and sometimes even whole episodes; or they cut away passages or episodes they
thought inappropriate). Many of these non- artistic ‘improvements’ were then preserved
when the afected manuscripts were copied. At some point around the time of the Gupta
Empire […] another written Sanskrit text of the Mahābhārata was created and promulgated
out of this complex tradition and this ‘Gupta text’ became, de facto, the normative written
version of the text, a version that served as the ultimate archetype of all later Sanskrit
manuscripts of the Mahābhārata throughout India for the next 1500 years. This text appears
to have absorbed or otherwise eliminated all or most other written versions, though some
later variations in the manuscript tradition may represent survivals from pre- normative
traditions, written or oral. While demonstrating the existence of this [our italics] archetype,
Sukthankar’s efort to establish a critical edition of the MBh on the basis of the extant
manuscripts proved untenable, in the end, to retrieve this [our italics] archetype, though he
and his colleagues went ahead and gave us a conjectural—t hough very valuable in my
114
114 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
judgment— approximation of it.” The passage includes a reference to two of Bigger’s
works: “See my article India’s Fifth Veda, op. cit., and A. Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata,
[...] pp. 13–1 9 and A. Bigger, The Normative Redaction of the Mahābhārata: Possibilities and
Limitations of a Working Hypothesis.” Ibid., 69, n. 17.
140 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 120.
141 This appendix is part of the critical apparatus. It forms an enlarged critical apparatus,
consisting of insertions too long to include in the regular critical apparatus and a secondary
critical apparatus consisting of variants to these passages.
142 “On the whole both editions, C and B [Calcutta and Bombay], do not difer signii-
cantly: they belong to one family and are based on a common foundation of a rigorously
conducted, completed redaction.” Adolf Holtzmann Jr., Das Mahābhārata nach der nordindischen
Recension (Kiel: C. F. Haeseler, 1894), 9 (Holtzmann’s italics). Hopkins thereafter introduces
the term “inal redaction” (according to him, “the place and time of the inal redaction”
was east of the “Holy Land” “as early as 400, perhaps 300, CE”) and Kirste then translates
Hopkins’s “inal redaction” into the German “Schlußredaktion.” See Edward W. Hopkins,
“The Bhārata and the Great Bhārata,” The American Journal of Philology 19, no. 1 (1898): 20–
22 and J. Kirste, “Zur Mahābhāratafrage,” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 14
(1900): 222– 23.
143 Lassen, “Beiträge zur Kunde des indischen Alterthums aus dem Mahâbhârata I,” 61– 86.
See earlier for Lassen’s references to a “diaskeusis.” For Lassen’s comments about the
Mahābhārata “as an instrument of an addiction to spiritual domination,” see ibid., 86. And
for his comments about the Mahābhārata as containing “references to the two races that
fought each other in Indian prehistory: the originally native black [race] and the Sanskrit-
speaking, light- skinned [race] that had immigrated from the north, whose western racial
relatives are, even now, successfully ighting a similar battle with similar superiority over the
red races of America,” see ibid., 75 (Lassen’s italics). But a connection between the Brahmanic
takeover and the inversion of racial hierarchies will not be made until Holtzmann Jr. See
Adluri and Bagchee, The Nay Science, chapter 2. For Lassen, the priestly, “semitic” element is
dominant.
144 Winternitz’s comments reveal the tactical aims that the call for a critical edition served. In
Moriz Winternitz, “Genesis des Mahābhārata,” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes
14 (1900): 61 he notes: “I, however, believe that as long as a halfway critical edition of the
Mahābhārata does not exist, as long as we cannot say at least with some certainty whether
a verse or a passage occurs in all recensions or not, we have a duty to examine every indi-
vidual śloka for its authenticity before we use it for historical- critical purposes” (all italics in
original). Winternitz raised these objections against Joseph Dahlmann, who argued for the
Mahābhārata’s unity. But Winternitz misunderstood the unity that Dahlmann was positing
for the Mahābhārata: not a historical unity but the unity of the received text or the unity of
the literary context, within which the text is read. The suspension of all intellective activity
vis- à- vis Hinduism insofar as it is based on the epic is carried further in Moriz Winternitz,
“Promemoria über die Nothwendigkeit einer kritischen Ausgabe des Mahābhārata,
insbesondere der südindischen Recension,” Almanach der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften
51 (1901): 206– 7. There he argues: “It is clear from the excerpts of the manuscripts that
I published that, for all historical and critical investigations concerning the ancient Indian epic, the so-
called vulgates and the diferent editions printed in India are completely and utterly unsatisfactory. For the
diferences between the printed texts and the text of the south Indian manuscripts is so
great that we cannot say with certitude that any passage belongs to the epic as long as we
do not know if it also occurs in the south Indian text. Therefore all hypotheses about the
ancient Indian epic’s age and emergence, about the genuineness or lack thereof of individual
portions, about the greater or lesser age of individual sections thereof will be suspended
in the air so long as we do not know what kind of text the diferent manuscripts ofer. All
115
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 115
investigations about the epic’s language and style lack a proper foundation so long as a reli-
able text is unavailable. All research into mythology, religion, philosophy and law on the basis
of the epic is without foundation so long as we cannot with certitude say that a passage cited
for some myth, for some religious or philosophical doctrine or for some legal principle is
also really found in the diferent recensions” (all italics Winternitz’s). Could Winternitz have
anticipated that someday a passage would be “really found” in all recensions, and German
Indologists would still argue for removing it, declaring it a Brahmanic “interpolation”?
145 Winternitz argues disingenuously against Dahlmann: “What else have critics until now
done except proceed from the Mahābhārata as it currently exists and sought, where possible,
to eliminate whatever did not organically cohere with the epic— the reference here is not to
an imaginary Ur- epic but to the epic poem contained in our Mahābhārata.” Winternitz,
“Genesis des Mahābhārata,” 53 (Winternitz’s italics). But insofar as Mahābhārata critics
eliminated “whatever did not organically cohere with the epic” according to their expectations,
they precisely were not setting out from the text “as it currently exists.” The prepossession for
an “Ur- epic” is very much in operation. In fact, neither the receptus (Dahlmann’s text) nor the
constitutio textus (the text of most post- critical edition scholars) should be considered deinitive
or have value for us. In the German Mahābhārata scholars’ eyes, granting the texts coher-
ence is the irst sin (and interpretation a close second).
146 For examples of this as if in operation, see Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik des
Mahābhārata, 51 (“I cannot decide whether we must here assume a recollection of a
commonly lived primordial age or further developments that occurred in parallel under
similar living conditions. But it is certain that the Mahābhārata has preserved traces for
us that reach back to a hoary period of Indian antiquity; that recollections from an Indo-
Germanic primordial age are preserved therein can until now at best be made plausible.”)
and Hermann Weller, “Who Were the Bhriguids,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute 18, no. 3 (1937): 296–9 8 (“I have always had the impression that the original heroic
poem could not have become an Encyclopaedia Brahmanica, a book of Brahmanic conception
of the world (Weltanschauung), unless and until that particular psychological trend of India
which we epitomize under the name Hinduism had become so vigorous as to overwhelm
and vanquish the theosophic outlook of Vedic India. This victory might perhaps have been
achieved about the fourth century B. C. The Greek Megasthenes already had before him a
hinduized India. Also in the textual history the Great Epic, the decisive step had been taken
by that time: the heroic poem had been expanded by additions coloured by the Brahmanic
conception of the world (Weltanschauung). But to be sure the epic had not yet attained its pre-
sent dimensions. This metamorphosis took place, as has now been shown by Sukthankar,
chiely under the inluence of the Bhriguids. Now everybody will admit that the Vedic Age
stood more under the inluence of the Aryan than of the Pre-A ryan- Indid tribes, but that
the latter in course of time became more and more dominant, and that along with them
came to the forefront gods characteristic of the Indian Middle Ages. By the above-m en-
tioned Pre- Aryan Indid tribes, I understand representatives of the most eastern branch
of the racial stock stretching from the Mediterranean zone via Arabia to Western India,
comprising Mediterranean, Oriental and Indid elements. Now I ask: Did this widely ram-
iied Brahmin group, calling itself the Bhriguids, belong perhaps to this primeval race, the
race which in some epoch of hoary antiquity had caused the earlier inhabitants of India
to retreat into mountain fastnesses, the race of the real Gracil-I ndid people who (according
to Eickstedt) are represented even today in the purest state in Hindustan (Doab) and in the
Deccan, that highly gifted race which constituted the ruling power in Mohenjo Daro, and
which later produced eminent philosophers? To be sure even in Rigvedic times all Brahmins
were not pure Aryans (Nordic); even at that time there must have been pure Indid and
Aryan- Indid representatives of this caste. And the further the Aryans spread over India, the
greater must have been the number of non-N ordic Brahmins. What has been traditionally
116
116 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
handed down to us about the Bhriguids in our Mahābhārata contains undoubtedly his-
torical reminiscences. Even when they had partly formed alliances with the older military
aristocracy by matrimonial ties, at bottom they were inimically disposed towards the ruling
class; and oft-r epeated legend of Parasu-R āma, who exterminated all warriors (Ksatriyas),
is evidence of a real tragic conlict in a hoary past. The contradictory traditions to the efect
that the later warrior-c aste either was the result of marriages between Ksatriya widows and
Brahmins or else was propagated by concealed survivors of the Ksatriya caste who had
escaped destruction— these conlicting traditions can perhaps be reconciled on the supposi-
tion that both eventualities had taken place.”) Bigger himself provides the emblem of this as
if logic when he writes: “Just as we can only postulate the occurrence of a normative redac-
tion so also we remain dependent on hypotheses concerning the written MBh’s subsequent
development. The normative redaction spread gradually across all India. Did it thereby
suppress other written traditions? Or did it irst cause other traditions to be written down?
At any rate, as the critical edition shows, it is certain later additions encroached on the nor-
mative redaction. Insofar as they did not belong to the parallel versions just discussed, these
additions were either composed by the scribes themselves, written down from memory (that
is, an oral text was written down) or copied from another source. Only the last option can
be demonstrated provided the source from which this textual passage was taken is still pre-
served.” Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 118.
147 A letter to one of the authors provides a good example: “But you do not at all address the
question of what the text of the hypothetical redactors is. That of the critical edition? You
cannot possibly assume that. As every serious colleague will conirm for you, the critical
edition is no more than a convenient working tool [Arbeitsinstrument] with whose assistance one
can easily survey a (hopefully) representative selection of manuscripts of (hopefully) impor-
tant manuscripts.” Michael Hahn, letter to Vishwa Adluri, February 10, 2010, 4. Apparently,
Hahn was unaware that the assumption that the critical edition’s text is identical to the hypo-
thetical redactors’ text had already been made and considered lawless scholarship by his
colleagues by this time.
148 Again, an email to one of the authors provides a good example: “Dear Dr. Adluri, it does not
come as a surprise to hear that. I know the German scene all too good [sic] to be surprised.
And to tell you the truth: I was much astonished to come to know that my colleague Hahn
acts as your supervisor. I appreciate [very] much that you invited me despite all your troubles
with ‘German Indology’ (which in fact should not be reduced to Hahn and Hanneder though
I esteem them), for which I feel awfully sorry. There is an (obviously young) colleague of us
[sic], Dr. Chris Austin, who has published (at least) one very good paper on the ‘ritual redac-
tion’ of the Mahabharata. Do you know it? Yours, Thomas.” Thomas Oberlies, email to
Vishwa Adluri, January 4, 2010. The scholar recommended is Christopher R. Austin, whose
deference to German ideas of the critical edition as a “normative redaction” we have already
seen. The reference is to Christopher R. Austin, “The Sārasvata Yātsattra in Mahābhārata 17
and 18,” International Journal of Hindu Studies 12, no. 3 (2008): 283– 308. Among the German
literature Austin cites is Thomas Oberlies, “Arjunas Himmelreise und die Tīrthayātra
der Pāṇḍavas: Zur Struktur des Tīrthayātrāparvan des Mahābhārata,” Acta Orientalia 56
(1995): 106–2 4; Thomas Oberlies, “Die Ratschläge des Sehers Nārada: Ritual an und unter
der Oberläche des Mahābhārata,” in New Methods in the Research of Epic/ Neue Methoden der
Epenforschung, ed. Hildegard L. C. Tristram (Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag, 1998), 125–4 1;
Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata; Andreas Bigger, “Wege und Umwege zum Himmel. Die
Pilgerfahrten im Mahābhārata,” Journal Asiatique 289, no. 1 (2001): 147–6 6; Heino Gehrts,
Mahābhārata: Das Geschehen und seine Bedeutung (Bonn: Bouvier Verlag, 1975) and one reference
to a source in a German journal: Herman Tieken, “The Mahābhārata after the Great Battle,”
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 48 (2004): 5– 46. Clearly, suicient to render it a work of
scholarship.
117
ARGUMENTS FOR A HYPERARCHETYPAL INFERENCE 117
149 Hahn expresses the temerity of questioning the gray eminences of German Indology
thus: “How could he [Vishwa Adluri], a newcomer in the ield, believe that he has a better
insight into the MBh (that he never read in the original language) than a true giant like
Oldenberg?” Michael Hahn, email to Greg Bailey, Monday, January 19, 2009.
150 Johann Friedrich Wilhelm Jerusalem, Zweyte Sammlung einiger Predigten (Braunschweig: Rudolph
Schroders Erben, 1752), 306. The phrase repeats as a leitmotif throughout his writing career.
For more sources, see Karl Aner, Die Theologie der Lessingzeit (Halle a.d. Saale: G. Olms, 1929).
118
What the scribe said: stock phrases Mahābhārata copyists adopted to indicate their concern
with idelity to the source
Source: Reproduced from Vaidya, “Introduction [to the Harivaṃśa],” xxiv– xxv. The phrases translate,
in order, as:
1. I have put in the words as I saw [them].
2. The good [- hearted] ones should forgive the mistake committed by a slip of pen.
3. I have written as I saw the book [that is, as I saw in the book]. Be it connected or disconnected,
relevant or irrelevant, it is not my fault.
4. If there is any letter missing or more or less [etc.] the intelligent ones should forgive it. Who does
not commit a mistake?
5. A dot, bad handwriting, a misplaced visarga, broken marks, wrong split of the word [lit., a fault in
breaking a word] are all due to hurry or haste in writing and without intention. The good-m inded
ones should forgive such things.
6. If there is in this treatise, a letter missing, loss of morals or wrong reading, it has all occurred due
to folly. The forgiving, intelligent ones should get it corrected.
7. Whatever I have written here incorrectly due to the fault of the mirror and due to confusion of the
intellect or mind, all that should be corrected by the noble ones. Generally, the eyes of the writer
fail or get confused.
8. If there is anything less or in excess due to the sluggishness of eyes, speed of hand or lack of clarity
of the alphabets, it should be corrected by the intelligent ones.
119
Chapter Two
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE
OF CONTAMINATION
He [the editor] should ensure, by all the means provided by his science and his ingenuity, that he discovers therein
the constants of the “vertical” tradition. It is at this price, and at this price only, that he will be able to deter-
mine the reality, and eventually the amplitude, of a “horizontal” transmission.1
— Jean Irigoin, “Quelques rélexions sur le concept d’archétype”
Understanding “Contamination”
Mahābhārata critics understand “contamination” not as textual critics do (for whom it refers to the addition of
readings from a second source beside the one the scribe copied), but as the interpolation of Brahmanic elements
into an original Kṣatriya epic. They thus interpret contamination to mean a kind of pollution (namely, with
the Brahmans’ religious ideology).
From the preceding discussion it may seem that we ignore contamination, but we are
extremely sensitive to it. In fact, as we demonstrate in this chapter, the problems in the
critics’ work arise because they are not concerned with legitimate instances of contami-
nation— instances where it frustrates attempts to draw up stemmata or makes us hesitant
about our judgments— but use the term in a peculiar way. As the Mahābhārata critics
interpret the term, contamination refers not to the phenomenon that scribes occasionally
combined readings from diferent sources, but to a Brahmanic takeover or “redaction”
of an original oral epic. The critics think the epic was thus “contaminated” with the
Brahmans’ religious ideology. But the critics also posit a second type of contamination,
namely, the survival of earlier oral epic elements in folk memory, which then reentered
the written, Brahmanic tradition.2 In their opinion, collecting these elements, which
appear stemmatically later but are actually historically earlier, lets us restore a partial
supra- archetype of the oral epic.3 Alongside this work of recovery, they argue for a dia-
chronic layering or stratiication (diachronische Schichtung) of the constituted text using cri-
teria such as content, meter4 and “style”5 to identify and eventually eliminate elements
perceived as “Brahmanic” from the latter.6
Contrary to what the critics think, however, the circumstance that we can create a
version of the Mahābhārata corresponding to our prejudices about it does not mean
that such a version actually existed. It merely reveals these prejudices as tasteless and
uneducated.7 Where it contravenes basic philological principles, the Indologists’ so- called
analytic scholarship contributes neither to our understanding of the text nor to our under-
standing of the tradition.8 In continuation of our analysis, in this chapter we examine
their arguments for identifying an earlier stage of the tradition than what is present in
120
120 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
the critical edition, while simultaneously developing objective criteria for reconstructing
the source of contamination.
Contamination: Hyperarchetypal and Extra- stemmatic
This section distinguishes between extra-s temmatic contamination, intra-s temmatic contamination and
hyperarchetypal contamination. We examine Bigger’s view that the hypothetical Kṣatriya epic underwent
contamination from Brahmanic sources prior to the formation of the archetype (hyperarchetypal contamina-
tion) and that the resulting Brahmanic text then itself underwent contamination beneath the archetype with
remnants of the Kṣatriya epic that survived either in folk traditions or in the poets’ memory (extra- stemmatic
contamination).
Sebastiano Timpanaro distinguishes two types of contamination:
1. Extra- stemmatic contamination, deined as “contamination deriving from
manuscripts that do not form part of the tradition that has survived more or less
completely,” and
2. Intra- stemmatic contamination, that is, “relations of collation between surviving
manuscripts which form part of the stemma we can reconstruct.”9
The second type concerns relations between extant sources and hence does not feature
in criticisms of the critical edition from a hyperarchetypal perspective. In contrast, extra-
stemmatic contamination often features, especially in the form that an older oral epic
tradition existed alongside the Mahābhārata. Extra- stemmatic contamination, in turn,
can be of two types:
1a. Contamination into an ancestor of the archetype, and
1b. Contamination into an extant source from a no longer extant source.
We refer to the former as “hyperarchetypal contamination” in the following in contradis-
tinction to the latter (“extra- stemmatic contamination” in the strict sense).10
As we have seen, the critics argue that elements of the older oral epic could have survived
past its alleged Brahmanic redaction in two ways:
1. Although signiicant, the redaction was not complete. Episodes or narratives from
the earlier Kṣatriya stage were thus unintentionally preserved.
2. Alternately, if the Brahmans’ inluence was limited to the major manuscript
traditions, the older epic tradition could have survived at the margins of Brahmanic
society, and occasionally reintroduced Kṣatriya elements into the epic.
The irst view is a form of hyperarchetypal contamination (contamination of the orig-
inal epic with a Brahmanic source prior to the formation of the archetype). In contrast,
the second view invokes extra-s temmatic contamination to explain the occurrence of
121
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 121
allegedly oral materials in the Mahābhārata. Andreas Bigger’s work may serve as an
example. Concluding his analysis of Balarāma in the Mahābhārata, Bigger writes,
If one wants to summarize the insights […] gained in this work, the following rough scheme
ofers itself for the diachronic stratiication [Schichtung] of the results:
1. The oldest stage (of which we cannot deinitively say if it belonged to the Mahābhārata
all along or from what point onward it was inserted).
2. Additions before the Pāñcarātra layer.
3. Additions in or after the Pāñcarātra layer. With this stage the normative redaction was
reached.
4. Developments after the normative redaction: a. southern recension. b. northern
recension.11
In contrast to the irst stage, when “not the Brahmans but the Kṣatriyas were the
bearers of the transmission—a t least as the audience and as patrons,”12 the next three
stages relect the rise of the Brahmans as the Mahābhārata’s custodians.13 Bigger
characterizes the corresponding changes to the text as follows: “In the second stage,
[…] Baladeva is revealed as a strict follower of Kṣatriya dharma. In a second step, what
is really a religious dharma becomes predominant since Baladeva embarks on a pil-
grimage (tır̄thayātrā) as an alternative to the Kurukṣetra battle. Baladeva thereby airms
dharma, but Kṣatriya dharma is supplemented by one the Brahmins wish to see of the
Kṣatriyas.”14 “In the third stage, the igure of Saṅkarṣaṇa, one of the four vyūhas, who
is also called Śeṣa, is associated with Baladeva. […] As a result of this assimilation,
the idea emerges that Śeṣa [was] incarnated as Baladeva. With this stage, the nor-
mative redaction is attained, as reconstructed in the critical edition. In the following
period, Baladeva undergoes a more or less independent development in the northern
and southern recension.”15 Figure 14 clariies Bigger’s hypothetical four-s tage evolu-
tion of the text.
The original ω generates copies at α, β, γ and δ. These texts undergo continuous
interpolation from Brahmanic sources, divided into pre-P āñcarātra, Pāñcarātra and
post- Pāñcarātra sources (P1, P2 and P3 in the stemma). As a result, the archetype θ is no
longer a Kṣatriya epic but a Brahmanic work. Elements of the original either could have
survived past the text’s redaction (resilient transmission) or been reintroduced into the
tradition beneath the archetype (recombinant transmission). Θ generates copies at ε, ζ, η
and ι, but they are copies of the new Brahmanic work (the change in the angle of the line
relects the change in custodianship). The copies undergo further contamination with
either Brahmanic sources (B) or remnants of the Kṣatriya tradition (K). Whereas the con-
tamination of the Kṣatriya epic with pre- Pāñcarātra, Pāñcarātra and post- Pāñcarātra
sources occurs above the archetype and hence represents hyperarchetypal contamina-
tion, the contamination of the Brahmanic text is a case of extra- stemmatic contamina-
tion (contamination from no longer extant sources). Using the stemmatic method, we
would reconstruct the archetype θ, but this is deicient. The stemmatic method wrongly
eliminates older Kṣatriya passages that reentered the tradition beneath the archetype.
Furthermore, it overlooks that the archetype θ is itself a composite work, the result
122
122 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
ω
K atriya
α
P1 Brahmanic
contamination of
β
the K atriya epic
P2
(hyperarchetypal
γ contamination)
P3 K atriya and
Brahmanic
δ
Extra-stemmatic Change in θ Normative redaction
contamination transmission
ε
B
Contamination ζ
into the
K
Brahmanic text
η
Brahmanic
B
ι
Witnesses
Figure 14 Bigger’s “prehistory of the normative redaction”
of multiple redactions, containing a mixture of pre- Pāñcarātra, Pāñcarātra and post-
Pāñcarātra interpolations into an original Kṣatriya source.
Identifying the Source of Contamination
This section contrasts the Mahābhārata critics’ arbitrary and tendentious arguments for Brahmanic “contami-
nation” with objective criteria for identifying the source of contamination. We show that the minimum condition
to identify interpolations is a stemma of the form 3+1, where three manuscripts descend from the contaminated
source and a fourth descends from an independent source. If any two manuscripts descended from the contami-
nated source agree against the manuscript descended from an independent source, then their reading is the reading
of the source of contamination.
The Mahābhārata critics’ arguments for rejecting or including speciic passages in the
constituted text are not stemmatic.16 Typically, their sole criterion for considering cer-
tain passages “interpolations” is their a priori assumptions about the text’s history.17
By way of contrast, let us examine the conditions that must be met to reconstruct the
source of contamination objectively. We take as our example Lachmann’s 1817 review of
123
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 123
Friedrich Heinrich von der Hagen’s edition of the Nibelungenlied. Timpanaro summarizes
Lachmann’s review as follows:18
In July 1817 Lachmann published a long review of Friedrich Heinrich von der Hagen’s edition
of Der Nibelungen Lied (Hagen 1816) and Georg Friedrich Benecke’s edition of Bonerius’ Der
Edel Stein (Benecke 1816). Lachmann distinguished two redactions in the manuscript tradition
of the Nibelungen Lied: a shorter and more genuine one contained in the manuscript he called
B; and another, longer and heavily interpolated one, represented by the manuscripts GEM.
According to Lachmann, both redactions have reached us disigured by corruptions and sec-
ondary interpolations; but while the irst one cannot be reconstructed in its original form until
another manuscript, a brother of B, is discovered, the second one can be reconstructed by
comparing GEM.
According to Lachmann, such a comparison reveals that the ancestor of GEM was
still fairly free of interpolations in the text written by the irst hand but that a second hand
inlicted many changes and arbitrary additions upon the original text. Each copyist of GEM
reproduced now the readings of the irst hand, now that of the second hand, and also inter-
polated on his own.19
Lachmann does not draw up a stemma, but Timpanaro ofers the one shown in Figure 15.
Ω indicates the oldest redaction, φ the irst hand of the ancestor of GEM, and φ2 the
interpolations by the second hand in the same manuscript.20 Lachmann adds that the
editor’s task is to identify the interpolations in the ancestor of GEM, in other words, to
reconstruct the readings of φ2.21 He provides the following rules, in which the signs >
and < signify “better than” and “worse than” just as in mathematics they signify “greater
than” and “less than”:22
1. Three manuscripts out of four outvote one every time.
2. When any two agree, BG < EM (that is, where B agrees with G, the unanimous
reading of E and M is preferable), GE > BM, GM > BE.
3. Where three readings exist, BG < E—M (against the reading shared by B and G,
the two others in E and M are preferable), G— E > BM, G— M > BE; on the other
hand, EM = B—G (the agreement of E and M leads to no secure decision against
the two readings of B and G), BM = G— E, BE = G— M.23
4. When all four disagree, the original reading is just as uncertain.24
ω
B φ (φ2 )
G E M
Figure 15 Reconstructing the source of contamination
Source: Reproduced from Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, 140.
124
124 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Of the four rules, the irst is obviously false: the agreement of BGE against M or of BGM
against E or BEM against G gives us the reading of φ and not φ2. On the other hand, if
the three manuscripts that agree are GEM (against B), it is not necessary that they repro-
duce the reading of φ2. B could have innovated with respect to ω so that the original
reading of ω (and φ) is reproduced in GEM or φ could have innovated with respect to ω
so that GEM difer from B but do not contain the reading of φ2.
The irst rule, then, is useless for reconstructing the reading of φ2. The second rule,
in contrast, is correct. When two readings exist, each one attested by two manuscripts,
the reading of B and one apograph of φ was already present in φ and ω, while the
other two apographs of φ reproduce the variant of the second hand (φ2).25 The emended
version of the third rule is also correct, but does not help us identify the reading of
φ2. If three readings exist, the agreement of one of the three apographs of φ with B
clearly yields the reading φ (and hence of ω). On the other hand, the readings of the
two remaining apographs are equally likely to reproduce the reading of φ2 or they could
both be innovations with respect to φ2. In either case, we cannot reconstruct. Further, if
two apographs of φ agree, while the third and B reproduce isolated readings, we have
no grounds for preferring the shared reading of the two apographs: either the shared
reading of the two apographs or the isolated reading of the third apograph can repro-
duce the reading of φ2. Finally, the fourth rule is correct and self- evident.
Since the irst rule is false and the fourth rule, though correct, is tautological, they can
be eliminated. The second and third are more interesting for determining the conditions
necessary to identify the source of contamination. As Timpanaro, citing Fritz Bornmann,
notes, the two rules are formally parallel. “Both rules mean in substance that a reading
attested by one or two apographs of φ can represent φ2 as long as such a reading is not
found in B too.”26 This minimum condition does not get us very far. It merely clariies that
if a reading is attested in a manuscript not descended from the contaminated manuscript,
its reading cannot be the reading of the source of contamination (φ2), but must be the
reading of the irst source of the entire tradition (ω) and have descended thence via φ to
our witnesses. The third rule builds on this condition. It clariies that if two apographs con-
tain one reading and the third another and neither reading is attested in a manuscript not
descended from the contaminated manuscript, then either reading could be the reading of
the source of contamination φ2. If, on the other hand, the manuscript not descended from
the contaminated manuscript and one of the apographs share a reading, while the other
two contain isolated readings, we can exclude the shared reading, but we have no grounds
for preferring one of the isolated readings. Only the second rule allows us to unambigu-
ously identify the reading of the source of contamination: if two readings exist, one of
which is attested in a manuscript not descended from the contaminated manuscript and in
a descendant of the contaminated manuscript, then the other is the reading of φ2.
From the foregoing discussion, we see that B, the manuscript not descended from
the source of contamination, has a crucial role in identifying the source of contamina-
tion, as it represents an independent control. If we did not have at least one manuscript
not descended from the source of contamination, it would not matter whether all three
apographs GEM agreed or only two or none. In none of these three cases could we
exclude certain readings. Hence, the most basic rule refers to B. The presence of at least
125
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 125
one manuscript not descended from the source of contamination is a necessary but insuf-
icient condition for identifying the source of contamination.
Two further conditions must be met for us to identify the source of contamination.
First, the number of possible readings cannot exceed two. As the third rule shows, if
three readings exist, the reading of the source of contamination cannot be unambigu-
ously identiied. Second, the minimum number of apographs of the contaminated man-
uscript is three, for if only two apographs exist and one of them shares a reading with the
manuscript not descended from the source of contamination (B), we could not be certain
the reading of the other was not an innovation in copying from φ. On the other hand, if
only two apographs exist and both share the same reading but difer from the reading of
B, we could not be sure that the shared reading was not an innovation in copying from ω
or, alternatively, that B did not innovate in copying from ω. That is to say, only if we can
be sure that the reading of ω was transmitted correctly to φ (which practically will mean
inding it in one of its descendants) and we have a second reading attested in at least two
apographs (if it occurs only in one, it could be an independent innovation), can we be
certain of identifying the reading of the source of contamination. Hence, we arrived at
the second rule: only when two apographs of the contaminated manuscript agree against
a third and when this third agrees with an independent witness is it certain that the
reading of the two apographs is the reading of the source of contamination.
The problem can be expressed more simply using the concept of a bipartite stemma.
Since a bipartite stemma does not let us mechanically exclude one of the variants (for
either of the readings might be correct), we require a tripartite stemma.27 But since a tri-
partite stemma alone will not let us identify the reading of the source of contamination
(if all three apographs agree, this could be the reading of the original, or, if two agree
against one, this could be the reading of the original and the isolated reading an inde-
pendent innovation in that apograph), we require an independent control: a manuscript
not descended from the contaminated manuscript. The circumstance that these two
manuscripts constitute a bipartite stemma is irrelevant, as we are not interested in iden-
tifying the reading of their archetype. On the other hand, if φ were the archetype and
variants were entered into it, we could not identify the source of contamination. Even
if the descendants of φ reproduced an eclectic mix of readings, now following the irst
hand, now the second, we could not identify the source of contamination. Although the
reading of two against one would always give us the reading of the archetype, we could
not know whether this was the reading of φ or of φ2. In fact, it is doubtful we could draw
up a stemma at all.28 On the other hand, if one scribe in copying from it reproduced all
its variants, but the other two scribes ignored them all, we could not identify the source
of contamination. We would consider the two copies that share errors descendants of a
common ancestor and accordingly redraw our lines to yield a bipartite stemma.
Finally, it may seem as though to identify contamination all we need is four manuscripts
descended from a common ancestor, of which each pair reproduces a reading, but this
is incorrect. While it is certain one of the two readings is φ’s and the other φ2’s, we
could not know which was which. Hence, a quadripartite stemma would not enable us
to determine the reading of the source of contamination. The condition is rather of
the form 3+1, where the number 3 indicates a tripartite stemma and the number 1 an
126
126 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
independent manuscript linked to the tripartite stemma via a common ancestor (this
may or may not be the irst source of the entire tradition). Timpanaro’s stemma in fact
represents the minimum conditions to identify the source of contamination. As we shall
see, these conditions are seldom if ever met in Mahābhārata studies.
The Argument from Uncertainty
Mahābhārata critics often try to undermine the stemma by positing contamination from a nonextant oral source
(extra- stemmatic contamination). They claim that as our stemma does not accurately represent historical reality,
we cannot deinitively exclude earlier, nonextant sources.
Refutation of the argument: The argument from uncertainty fails because introducing uncertainty into
a system afects all outcomes equally. Introducing uncertainty into the stemma does not make it likelier that
a Kṣatriya epic existed. It appears to favor the Kṣatriya epic only because the critics assume its existence in
advance and that they can know its contents without a stemmatic reconstruction.
In logic, the argument from uncertainty refers to the fallacy of rejecting well- grounded
inductive truths because they are merely inductive. For instance, someone could argue
that as only inductive proof for event a exists, he is justiied in maintaining ~a, even
though the probability for a, written as p(a), approaches near certainty: p(a) ≈ 1. The
critic thus invokes uncertainty to make space for a speciic outcome, even though the
empirical evidence is against its occurrence.
Likewise, the analytic critics often invoke uncertainty to defend their view that the
Mahābhārata developed from an oral epic. Typically, they do so by positing extra-
stemmatic contamination with an oral source, arguing that as we cannot deinitively
exclude an oral precursor of the Mahābhārata, they are justiied in considering certain
elements in the text oral in origin. They thus dispute the scientiically and inductively
more probable conclusion for the less probable one. The problem is: introducing extra-
stemmatic contamination into the stemma, whether at the level of one of the witnesses
or at the level of a subarchetype, does not make the existence of a Kṣatriya epic like-
lier. On the contrary, it will almost always lead to misleading results. Consider Bigger’s
argument that the interpolations found in γ and S are original, whereas the passages
were lost in ν. Although we rejected this argument in the previous chapter, Bigger
could claim that γ and S contain the correct reading if he invoked extra-s temmatic
contamination. He could argue that the scribe of D, besides copying from γ, kept an
eye on θʹ and borrowed some readings from it. If θʹ was then lost,29 the true stemma
would appear as in Figure 16.
Θʹ represents the scribes’ “memory” (Gedächtnis), whereas D is a mixture of readings
“transcribed” (niedergeschrieben) from memory and others inherited from γ.30 Bigger could
thus resurrect his claim that the critical edition only reconstructs a certain stage of the
transmission, but it does not contain the oldest readings. Θʹ could represent an older copy
than θ or a purer copy of the original ω (θ could be a contaminated apograph of the orig-
inal combining elements of the Kṣatriya epic with elements from a Brahmanic source—
ωʹ in the stemma; the dashed line indicates contamination of θ from ωʹ). D’s readings
are therefore preferable given its access to θʹ. It follows the purer line ω— θʹ as compared
127
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 127
ω′ (Brahmanic source) ω (Ks·atriya epic)
θ θ′
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
S´a¯rada K Nepa¯l¯ı Maithil¯ı Bengali Devana¯ gar ¯ı Telugu Grantha Malaya¯lam
S´1 K0–6 Ñ1–3 V1 B1–6 Da1.2, Dn1–3, T1.2 G1–6 M1–5
D1–7
Figure 16 Extra- stemmatic contamination into an extant witness
with Ś, which follows ν— N. Passages rejected from the constituted text because they were
found only in some manuscripts could thus be older than the archetype. Bigger could
argue that focusing on these passages lets him reconstruct the original (at least in part,
since not all θʹ’s passages are transmitted to D). The “methods of higher criticism” prove
superior, as they correct for the stemmatic method’s overly rigid procedure.
We would observe that D occasionally avoids errors common to the rest (errors that
occurred in θ and were transmitted to the rest via NS), and that γ sometimes agrees with
N and S, sometimes with D.31 We would construct the stemma shown in Figure 17.
We would discard γ as a contaminated manuscript ofering nothing not found in the
other sources, and we would consider D’s peculiar readings as likely as those of θ to be
the archetype’s.32 Insofar as they are drawn from θʹ, this would be correct, but insofar
as they were errors made by γ or in copying from γ, it would be false.33 Discarding γ, we
would reconstruct the text of N and S and also θ (our former archetype). Sukthankar’s
stemma only takes us this far, since he considered D’s peculiar readings additions or
corruptions in it, and hence consigned them to the apparatus. In contrast, following
Bigger’s hypothesis, we would consider D a text on par with the reconstructed text of
θ. As this stemma is bipartite, either set of readings could be the original. But since D
is an extant witness, whereas θ is a conjectured source, we would consider D’s readings
more authoritative.34 We would reconstruct a Kṣatriya epic following D’s readings.35
128
128 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
ω′ (Brahmanic source) ω (Ks·atriya epic)
θ D
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
S´a¯rada K Nepa¯l¯ı Maithil¯ı Bengali Telugu Grantha Malaya¯lam
S´1 K0–6 Ñ1–3 V1 B1–6 T1.2 G1–6 M1–5
Figure 17 The consequences of assuming extra-s temmatic contamination
ω′ ω
θ θ′
N S
Figure 18 Extra- stemmatic contamination into a direct descendant of the archetype: S as
an example
The outcome is the same if we assume contamination into one of the archetype’s direct
descendants (Figure 18).
Once again, we would observe that S occasionally avoids errors common to the rest
(errors found in θ and its descendants), and that θ and S sometimes agree and sometimes
do not. We would construct the stemma seen in Figure 19.
Since we have no reason to posit the existence of an intermediate source between N
and S, we would eliminate θ and adjust our dashed lines to obtain the stemma seen in
Figure 20.36
We would conclude that either S had undergone contamination with θʹ or θ or N had
undergone contamination with ωʹ, but we could not decide between the two. In both
129
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 129
ω′ S
θ
N
Figure 19 The consequences of assuming extra-s temmatic contamination into S
ω′ S
N
Figure 20 S as the original oral epic
cases, however, the argument leads to a reductio ad absurdum. In the irst case (Figure 18),
we would think that elements in S not shared with N were inherited from a descen-
dant of the Kṣatriya epic, even though S’s distinctive elements are characteristically
Brahmanic. In the second case (Figures 19 and 20), we would consider S itself the
Kṣatriya source. Even if we assumed that the former stemma represented the true state
of afairs, we could reconstruct neither θʹ (S includes only some of its readings) nor ω.
In the second example, we would reconstruct S from its witnesses T, G and M, and think
that the passages unique to θ (or N) derived from another source (ωʹ), but we could not
reconstruct this text either (N includes only some of ωʹ’s readings). Either way, we could
not reconstruct an older text than the archetype θ, whether the Kṣatriya epic ω or the
Brahmanic source ωʹ.
The southern recension is a later, more inlated tradition than the northern.37 It is also
considered more Brahmanic.38 The example thus illustrates the absurd consequences
of claiming contamination from a nonextant oral source into S. But what if we con-
sidered the pair θʹ and N instead of θʹ and S? Since the northern recension is alleg-
edly closer to the historical core devoid of Brahmanic elements,39 Bigger could argue
that N represents a contaminated source containing a mixture of older oral elements
and elements inherited from the normative redaction (our archetype θ). Although itself
“contaminated,” N represents a purer source than S, which can be disregarded for
reconstructing the archetype θ. We can restrict ourselves to examining the elements in N
inherited from θʹ, the copy of the Kṣatriya epic ω. To understand the problems with this
second hypothesis, let us again construct a pair of stemmata. Suppose that the scribe of
N, besides copying θ, kept an eye on θʹ and borrowed some readings from it. If θʹ was
then lost, the true stemma would appear as seen in Figure 21.
N contains a mixture of readings from θ and θʹ, where θ is a contaminated copy of the
Ksạ triya epic ω (contamination with a Brahmanic text ωʹ) and θʹ is either an oral source
or elements of the Ksạ triya epic preserved via the poets’ memories. Stemmatic recon-
struction would retain the readings attested in S and N. In cases of crux, that is, when S
130
130 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
ω ω′
θ′ θ
NN S
Figure 21 Extra- stemmatic contamination into a direct descendant of the archetype: N as
an example
N ω′
θ
S
Figure 22 The consequences of assuming extra-s temmatic contamination into N
N ω′
S
Figure 23 N as the original oral epic
and N difer and a third reading explaining the other two is not available, the editor would
resort to other criteria. In contrast, Bigger would argue that N consistently contains better
readings (those inherited from θʹ). We would observe that N sometimes avoids errors
common to the rest (errors found in θ and its descendants), and that θ and N sometimes
agree and sometimes do not. We would construct the stemma seen in Figure 22.
Once again, we would eliminate θ and adjust our dashed lines to yield the stemma
seen in Figure 23.
We would discard S as a contaminated manuscript ofering a mix of readings from
N and ωʹ, and we would consider N’s peculiar readings the archetype’s (or, rather, the
hypothetical Kṣatriya epic’s). Insofar as they are drawn from θʹ, this would be correct,
but insofar as they were errors made by N, or in copying from θ, it would be false.40
Presuming we could exclude the alternative, does this stemma let us reconstruct an older
text than the archetype θ? Four arguments speak against it:
1. This stemma discards S’s evidence, even though Sukthankar found it to be an inde-
pendent tradition rather than a copy of N.
131
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 131
2. S’s evidence is essential to reconstruct N. Sukthankar considered S’s independent
agreement with ν against γ the strongest argument for the reading of the archetype
when ν and γ difered.41
3. The tradition is reduced to two branches, ν and γ. Since we no longer have a
mechanical way of choosing between variants, and Sukthankar thought “the Śāradā
(Kaśmīrī) version is certainly the best Northern version, and probably, taken as a
whole, the best extant version of the Ādi,”42 we would often prefer the readings of
Ś or Ś and K over γ. N will thus often be identical with Ś. Not only will it not difer
signiicantly from Ś, it also cannot claim great antiquity.
4. Considered as the original epic, N is later than the so-c alled normative redac-
tion θ (allegedly the result of contamination of the Kṣatriya epic with Brahmanic
elements).43 Even so, this stemma does not let us reconstruct the original epic.
This stemma is based on the observation that N sometimes agrees with S and sometimes
difers from it. We do not know if this is because N was contaminated with the “oral”
source θʹ, a copy of the Kṣatriya epic ω, or because either θ or S was contaminated
with a Brahmanic source—ω ʹ. For Bigger, however, the distinction is irrelevant. From
his perspective, the reading of the northern recension is preferable every time N and S
disagree, since it represents the purer transmission. But Sukthankar followed this very
principle in reconstructing the archetype! He notes, “When the two recensions have
alternate readings neither of which can have come from the other and which have equal
intrinsic merit (N: S), I have, for the sake of consistency and with a view to avoiding
unnecessary and indiscriminate fusion of versions, adopted, as a stop gap, the reading
of N.”44 Adopting N’s readings consistently thus will not lead to an older stage than the
constituted text, which prints N’s unique readings whenever N and S disagree. It merely
robs us of the ability to check N’s readings (or its witnesses’ readings) against S. Even if
we assume that this stemma is more accurate than Sukthankar’s, it does not let us recon-
struct an earlier stage of transmission than what is contained in the critical edition, since
this requires that we identify not N’s unique readings, but its super- unique readings—
readings not just unique to N but unique even among its readings. Contamination of
either kind, whether extra-s temmatic or intra-s temmatic, is a threat to any stemma.
As Martin L. West notes, “If contamination is present in more than a slight degree,
it will be found that no stemmatic hypothesis is satisfactory.”45 Bigger, however, inten-
tionally introduces uncertainty into the stemma to make space for a Ks ̣atriya epic. The
attempt fails because introducing uncertainty into a system makes all outcomes equally
unlikely.46 Once we introduce uncertainty, it is not restricted to one exemplar, but
travels through the stemma to all the exemplars linked with the contaminated source.
Introducing uncertainty into the stemma may undermine the critical edition, but it will
not yield a Ks ̣atriya epic.
The Argument from Oral Source
If the oral tradition survived past the Brahmans’ seizure and destruction of the original epic, elements from it
could have trickled back into the manuscript tradition. This could have occurred if a scribe either recollected an
132
132 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
oral version or possessed a transcript of it. In that case, we are justiied in thinking that some of the readings
in our manuscripts (and mutatis mutandis the constituted text) are older than others, and some are at least
as old as the oral epic.
Refutation of the argument: the argument does not address the question of how we can identify the alleged
remnants of the oral epic. Every manuscript contains readings of varying antiquity but, without the stemmatic
method, we cannot sift between them. The argument also does not address the problem that the alleged remnants
could be later innovations or inaccurate recollections. Indeed, in a long chain of transmitters such as an oral
tradition presumes, it is especially likely that the readings underwent deterioration. The analytic critics fail to
perceive the problem because they focus on passages rather than readings, and do not ask how, even if we grant
that the passages were original, their readings could have been transmitted unchanged.
In the previous section, we have seen that positing contamination from a nonextant
oral source did not permit us to reconstruct an earlier stage of the tradition because of
contamination’s potential to mislead us in our inferences. But what if the oral tradition
survived until a very recent date? Would that make a diference? Would it permit us to
identify elements of the hypothetical Kṣatriya epic consistently? It appears as though all
we need do to overcome the objections of the previous section is to localize contamination
to a late stage of the tradition. If contamination can be localized to an extant witness, for
instance, and we can show that only speciic readings derive from the hypothetical oral
source (the source of contamination), we need no longer fear our stemma shifting due to
contamination. This is also Bigger’s solution. He writes:
Most likely, there existed a ixed oral transmission before the normative redaction was com-
piled, even though it may be that it did not cover a single text, but only parts of it. This oral
tradition did not disappear at the same moment as the irst mss. of the normative redaction
came into being. I would expect it to continue for many centuries parallel to the normative
redaction. One may also assume that some of the passages I was able to identify in my thesis
derive from another strand of the oral tradition and were introduced into the written tra-
dition at a later time. The minor variants noted by Sukthankar, on the other hand, can be
explained as having been produced by a scribe, who, though copying a ms., also knew the
MBh by heart and therefore tended to mix what he read with what he remembered.47
Consider the stemma in Figure 24. The oral epic generates “copies” at α, β and δ. It is
transcribed for the irst time at N, which generates further copies at ν and γ (unlike α, β
and δ, ν and γ are physical copies of a written source). Finally, the revised Brahmanic
text also reaches southern India, where it gives rise to S and its descendants. Alongside
the two written traditions of the Mahābhārata, the northern and the southern, we thus
also have an oral tradition that survived “for many centuries parallel to the normative
redaction.” Unlike the former, however, it does not appear on our stemma because of
its intangible quality. But we would be wrong to discount it for this reason. Its efects
are felt in the visible portion of our stemma because some manuscripts occasionally
contain “readings” that they can owe only to the Kṣatriya epic. Contamination occurs
not only into the archetype of the written tradition (hyperarchetypal contamination)
and between the manuscripts on our stemma (intra- stemmatic contamination) but
also from sources not entered into our stemma (extra- stemmatic contamination).
133
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 133
ω (K atriya epic)
α
β δ N ω′ (Brahmanic source)
S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
Figure 24 The original oral epic as the source of N
But unlike our previous examples, these sources are not not listed on our stemma
because they disappeared long ago. Rather, they are contemporary with the surviving
witnesses. They are not listed because, other than their efects, which are real and can
be detected in the surviving witnesses, they left no record. Their efects, however, evince
the existence of a “parallel transmission” or “parallel tradition” alongside our written
tradition.48
Initially, the argument appears identical to the previous one. However, Bigger could
specify that he does not mean contamination in the sense that a scribe combined readings
from two sources into a lost ancestor of the extant witnesses. Rather, what he envisions
is that the scribe of D4 followed the text of γ (or a source between γ and D4) con-
sistently, but, in one place, following c hapter 1.211, he remembered an older version
of the narrative and wrote this down instead. If, as Bigger says, “diferent copyists
inserted passages from other versions—p artly from direct recollection, partly from other
(younger?) written versions— into the transcript,”49 albeit in recent memory, the stemma
need not shift. The insertion of 114 and 115 into D4 is a unique example of an oral
version transcribed from memory. It does not afect the rest of the tradition but, in this
one case, we are justiied in preferring D4’s lectiones singulares (singular readings). The
stemma in Figure 25 clariies the situation.
The oral epic generates “copies” at θ and θʹ. Θ, however, already represents a “redac-
tion” of the text. This oicial Brahmanic redaction includes only a small measure of
ω’s readings (namely, those the Brahmans either overlooked or found indispensable), but
because it gave rise to copies at N and S and they, in turn, gave rise to descendants that
survived, it became the archetype. Actually, however, it is not the archetype but a “nor-
mative redaction” and the true archetype (in fact, the original) is not θ but ω. We cannot
134
134 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
ω′ (Brahmanic source) ω (Ks·atriya epic)
θ θ′
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
S´a¯rada K Nepa¯l¯ı Maithil¯ı Bengali Devana¯gar¯ı Telugu Grantha Malaya¯lam
S´1 K0–6 Ñ1–3 V1 B1–6 Da1.2, Dn1–3, T1.2 G1–6 M1–5
D1–7
Figure 25 Contamination via an oral source
reconstruct ω because most of its readings were lost in creating θ, but we do have a
valuable witness for its (genuine) readings in D because of its access to θʹ.
The problem with this thesis is twofold. First, we have no way of identifying the
readings D owes to θʹ rather than θ. Doubtless, the critics will propose subjective cri-
teria such as style or perceived conformity with the ideal of a heroic epic. But even if
we grant this, a second problem remains. Recall that the readings D inherits from θʹ are
preferable to those it inherits from γ because they allegedly follow the more direct trans-
mission. In contrast to D’s other readings, which descended through multiple individual
acts of copying (not to mention the deliberate defacement they sufered at the Brahmans’
hands), the appendix passages 114 and 115 derive from a more or less direct ancestor of
ω. But what is the scribe’s source? On the stemma θʹ appears as an ancient source available
until very recently to the scribe of D. But actually, if the scribe’s “source” is his recollec-
tion, θʹ is recent rather than old.
A recent source is, of course, not necessarily bad. In his Storia della tradizione e critica
del testo, Giorgio Pasquali showed that, contrary to the prejudice against the recentiores
(the more recent manuscripts), later exemplars sometimes preserved better readings
than the oldest surviving manuscripts because of their editors’ access to good old
manuscripts (which did not survive).50 He coined the phrase recentiores non deteriores
(recent, not necessarily worse) to express the circumstance that good readings are not
135
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 135
restricted to the meliores (the manuscripts judged the best) but can occur in any part of the
tradition. In West’s words, “A propensity to emendation, so far from discrediting a manu-
script may be symptomatic of an interest in the text that also prompted the consultation
of out- of- the- way copies, like the use of λ by the late manuscript A in the stemma on
page 44. Conversely very old copies such as papyri sometimes disappoint expectations by
giving a worse text than the medieval tradition instead of a better one.”51 West presents
the stemma shown in Figure 26.
Λ, though a late copy, contains old readings because of its scribe’s access to γ. A is
contaminated with λ, but, far from being a disadvantage, this actually means that it
contains better readings than it otherwise would (readings it inherits from B or M). We
would therefore be wrong to reject A’s individual good readings, even though they lack
support from the other manuscripts.
Initially, Bigger’s argument appears similar. Like A’s individual good readings, the
appendix passages 114 and 115 are preferable because of the scribe’s access to θʹ. They
should not have been rejected from the constituted text, even though the attestation
for them was inconsistent. Contrary to Bigger’s claim, however, θʹ’s status is far from
clear. Although placed in the closest proximity to ω in our stemma, its position is actu-
ally uncertain. If the scribe inserted 114 and 115 from memory, θʹ is not ancient but
contemporary with D. It should occur signiicantly lower in our stemma. A long chain
α
β γ
δ
ζ ε
η
θ
M
D g b
O
B
N G H K C F
λ
E
I L A
Figure 26 Recentiores non deteriores
Source: Reproduced from West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique, 44.
136
136 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
of intermediate sources separates it from ω. Even if it ultimately derives from ω, what
is the proof that it was transmitted accurately? Moreover, lacking a physical copy, the
scribe is at the mercy of his memory. He cannot know if what he wrote corresponded to
what he heard. Even if he thought he transcribed it faithfully, he cannot know this. Any
additions he made should therefore be treated as his own idiosyncratic changes.
Alternatively, θʹ could represent an ancient source, a “copy” made from ω soon after
its text was established. This is indeed Bigger’s solution. He writes: “These additions […]
were either composed by the scribe himself or transcribed from memory (that is, an oral
text became a written text) or copied from another source.”52 If θʹ is an oral source, how-
ever, how could a scribe from the eighteenth century (the approximate date of D4, the
manuscript containing the appendix passages 114 and 115) have access to it? The only
way he could know it is if he heard it from a narrator, who heard it from another, who
in turn heard it from another and so on. That means, however, that his source, although
recent (in fact, as recent as his hearing of it) is not ancient. It should be treated no difer-
ently from anything else he might have been told because neither he nor his source can
know that what he heard corresponds to the original reading.53
In West’s example, the principle recentiores non deteriores applies because λ is a man-
uscript. As such, it can be both recent and archaic. As a material object, it is recent,
whereas, as a text, it is archaic. λ could have been copied from γ shortly after the latter
itself was made and survived for a long time so that A’s scribe had access to it or γ itself
survived for a long time and λ was made from it closer in time to A. In either case, the rel-
evant manuscript’s nature as a physical object lets it bridge the expanse of time between
its source and the copy made from it. Θʹ, however, is not a manuscript but a “copy” of
the original oral epic. As such, it has descended through ininitely many acts of narration
to D’s scribe (or his informant). Which of these versions should we designate as θʹ? Even
if we decide that only the irst act of oral transmission in this extended series deserves the
name θʹ, we cannot circumvent the problem. The scribe’s source will now no longer be
θʹ but a remote descendant of it called θʹʹ, and we will still face the problem of how to
explain the unclariied (manifold) transmission between θʹ and θʹʹ (Figure 27).
This stemma illustrates the vast gray space that exists between the scribe’s recollec-
tion or copying of the passages at θʹʹ and their origin θʹ in the tradition. This space is
only imperfectly illed in by ambiguating on the meaning of “source.” It does not suice
to note that the scribe’s source is his recollection or a “parallel” oral tradition existing
behind our stemma because the real question is: can we reconstruct the chain of trans-
mission all the way to the irst source of the surviving tradition? If not, then the assertion
that these hypothetical sources contain good old readings (readings they owe to ω) is per-
fectly arbitrary.54 The readings could have undergone a thousand changes during trans-
mission. We could also just assert that they are ancient because we say they are ancient.55
One way out of this impasse is for Bigger to posit an intermediate written source. He
could argue that if the oral tradition underwent transcription at a suiciently early date—
say, around the time the canon was sealed and a “ixed oral text” emerged56— a written
text of the original epic could have survived alongside the Brahmanic Mahābhārata.
Rather than recall a passage from an oral source, D’s scribe could have kept an eye on this
transcript and entered variants from it into his copy of γ. Alternatively, Bigger could argue
137
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 137
ω′ (Brahmanic source) ω (Ks·atriya epic)
θ θ′
Unclarified (manifold)
transmission
N S
ν γ
σ
θ′′
ε
S´a¯rada K Nepa¯l¯ı Maithil¯ı Bengali Devana¯gar¯ı Telugu Grantha Malaya¯lam
S´1 K0–6 Ñ1–3 V1 B1–6 Da1.2,Dn1–3, T1.2 G1–6 M1–5
D1–7
Figure 27 Recentiores deteriores
that if a scribe wrote down the oral epic as he heard it and this text was then transmitted
and was lost only recently, the scribe’s recollection would be recent. We would have a
recent source θʹ with access to archaic readings via the intermediate manuscript δ, which
explains D’s good readings. We can represent the two alternatives as seen in Figure 28.
Both arguments insert a written intermediary between the oral and manuscript
traditions to overcome the problem that an oral source can either be ancient (in which
case it is likely corrupt since it has a long transmission) or it can be recent (in which case
it need not be archaic and should therefore be treated like any other insertion). The line
on the right represents the transcription of the oral epic and the subsequent contami-
nation of D with δ, the immediate source of the appendix passages. The line on the left
represents transcription of the oral epic and the subsequent contamination of D with an
oral source θʹʹ. Δ is only the indirect source of the passages. Whereas the dashed line on
the right represents the break between θʹ and its irst transcription at δ, the dashed line
on the left represents the break between the loss of δ and the recording of its variants in
D at θʹʹ.
Inserting a written intermediary, however, only apparently solves the problem.
Consider Bigger’s irst suggestion. If D’s scribe had access to δ, the transcript of the oral
epic, why would he consistently follow the later and worse source γ and insert only two
passages from δ in his text? Would he not, rather, have copied the latter? Moreover, if δ
survived until recently, why is its inluence not felt in other manuscripts? Indeed, if the
normative redaction allegedly suppressed all other versions of the epic, how could this
138
138 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
ω′ (Brahmanic source) ω (Ks·atriya epic)
Unclarified
θ θ′ (manifold)
transmission
δ
N S
Unclarified
(manifold)
transmission
ν γ
δ
σ
ε θ′′
S´a¯rada K Nepa¯l¯ı Maithil¯ı Bengali Devana¯gar¯ı Telugu Grantha Malaya¯lam
S´1 K0–6 Ñ1–3 V1 B1–6 Da1.2, Dn1–3, T1.2 G1–6 M1–5
D1–7
Figure 28 Transmission via an oral source and the inevitability of a written intermediary
one exemplar or one of its descendants survive in the eighteenth century? And if a copy
survived in the eighteenth century, why did it disappear just then?
The alternative that 114 and 115 are remnants of an oral tradition that underwent tran-
scription and, after this source was lost, returned to being oral elements thus appears prefer-
able. In this case, the passages could be both recent and archaic and the objection recentiores
deteriores would no longer hold. This is Bigger’s precise claim. He replaces δ with a “ixed oral
text,” but in all other respects the argument is identical. First, a “loating oral tradition” was
codiied and established as a text. Then it was transmitted via a “ixed oral transmission.”
The “oral tradition did not disappear at the same moment as the irst mss. of the norma-
tive redaction came into being.” Rather, it likely “continue[d] for many centuries parallel to
the written tradition.” But once this oral transmission ceased, the “ixed oral text” (δ in our
stemma) returned to an abstract tradition in that “a scribe, though copying a ms., also knew
the MBh by heart and therefore tended to mix what he read with what he remembered.”57
(The dashed line between δ and θʹʹ in the diagram indicates this break.) Finally, its elements
were incorporated into D at θʹʹ, explaining the former’s singular readings, which evince the
existence of an alternative, Ksạ triya version of the epic. Bigger does not clarify how many
centuries later the oral transmission died out, but from the fact that the version the scribe of
D heard cannot be far removed from δ (otherwise, all the problems we encountered in the
previous stage of the argument will resurface), we can assume that it existed until at least
the sixteenth century. In that case, it is plausible that the scribe of D had access to a version
of the Mahābhārata removed, at most, one or two generations from ω (albeit with a break,
since his source was not δ itself but his or his informant’s recollection of it). If some of D’s
variants such as 114 and 115 derive from this copy, they would be both recent and archaic.
139
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 139
But far from solving the problem, this worsens it. For starters, if the scribe “knew
the Mahābhārata by heart,” why did he not simply produce a copy of this version?
Why would a scribe who knew an older version of the epic copy a later and more
corrupt source? Is it credible that, rather than correct this source’s corruptions, he
merely chose to add two passages from memory? Further, how can we know that the
manuscript the scribe copied, γ, was not better than the lost exemplar δ given that he
clearly preferred to copy γ? Indeed, if he knew it by heart, δ was not lost at all! In other
words, Bigger is postulating a text in reality nonextant to explain why a text allegedly
lost appears extant; and this is meant as a way of reducing the gap between θʹʹ and θʹ!
Either way, we cannot be certain that δ represents the original epic. Not only do
we have no evidence that δ’s scribe (or, rather, codiier, since in Bigger’s scheme it
represents an “oral text”) did not innovate with respect to his oral source; we also have
no evidence that the readings D allegedly owes to θʹ actually derive from δ. Bigger
asserts that they do, but that is because he does not ask himself how D’s scribe could
have access to δ, how θʹ’s readings could have been transmitted unchanged to θʹʹ and
what reason we have for thinking they were transmitted unchanged. In fact, he does
not consider “readings” at all in the sense that editors do. His preferred “readings”
are not variants but passages he considers characteristic of a Kṣatriya epic. Even if
they had undergone a myriad of changes during transmission, he would consistently
prefer them over the archetype’s readings for no other reason than that they appear to him
“not Brahmanic.” The sole criterion he applies is lectio heroicior praeferenda est (the more
heroic reading is preferable),58 and he does not care whether the “heroic” reading has
degenerated over time, if it is a recent, that is to say, ersatz creation or, indeed, if it
represents an authentic tradition.59 He neither examines the text of the alleged heroic
epic (for instance, to ascertain whether its Sanskrit is from the sixteenth, the twelfth or
the third century) nor does he evaluate its variants (there are none: the lectio heroica is a
lectio singularis). As long as it satisies the criterion of “a cruel crudeness of passion” he
accepts it into his reconstruction.60
Scholars interested in a scientiic textual criticism will apply more stringent criteria.
They will consider it insuicient to identify tales of derring-d o—a bduction of women,
ight scenes and ribald merry-m aking— Bigger’s sole criterion for considering a passage
“ancient.” They will not mistake their expectations of a rough- hewn warrior age for
genuine authenticity.61 Even if they suspected that some passages were “Kṣatriya” in
origin, they will distinguish between their readings and their contents. They will not allow
their ideas about the “classical” ideal of epic to mislead them.62 Most important, they will
ask if readings suspected of deriving from the hypothetical Kṣatriya epic are necessarily
good and how they can be both ancient and attested. As we saw, an oral source like that
Bigger posits cannot simultaneously meet the traditional criteria for preferring readings,
antiquity and attestation.63 A reading can either be ancient (in which case its accuracy
is doubtful, given the long transmission between original and descendant) or it can be
attested (in which case its antiquity is doubtful). A good reading from the former perspec-
tive will always be bad from the latter and vice versa. This makes the question of why
the German critics repeatedly prioritized hypothetical oral sources over the manuscript
tradition all the more puzzling.
140
140 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
The Argument from (Postulated) Antiquity and
the Argument from Ideology
This concluding section examines two related arguments, the argument from (postulated) antiquity and the
argument from ideology. The irst refers to the Mahābhārata critics’ habit of declaring that certain passages are
old because they are postulated as old. The second refers to their ideological reasons for doing so, namely, proving
the baleful nature of Brahman domination for India.
Refutation of the argument: Neither argument is actually an argument. The argument from (postulated)
antiquity merely asserts the antiquity of certain passages without demonstrating it. The argument from ideology
elevates the German scholars’ anti-S emitic prejudices to a irst principle and uses this, in turn, to sustain the
kind of circular, counterfactual and logically fallacious arguments we have seen. These prejudices hold the key
to understanding the German scholars’ work, speciically their insistence on a tendentious Brahmanic redaction
of an earlier heroic epic.
Throughout this chapter, we have tried to rehabilitate the hypothesis of contamination
from an oral source. We irst deined and clariied three types of contamination. We then
examined ways to objectively reconstruct the source of contamination. We next studied
the problems with asserting contamination from a nonextant oral source and showed that
it only caused the stemma to shift in unpredictable ways. Finally, we tried to see whether,
if we kept everything else the same and allowed contamination from an oral source
only into a recent copy, the hypothesis could work. In every case, the hypothesis proved
untenable. Even after we made the ultimate concession— that we knew not only which
manuscript had undergone contamination but also which two interpolations it owed to
the hypothetical oral epic—w e still found the hypothesis indefensible. It must therefore
be abandoned.
If the hypothesis of contamination from an oral source cannot be defended, the
hypothesis of a Brahmanic redaction of an earlier oral epic likewise becomes unsus-
tainable.64 This afects not only Bigger’s so-c alled normative redaction but also his
so- called prehistory of the normative redaction as pre- Pāñcarātra, Pāñcarātra and post-
Pāñcarātra redactors allegedly interpolated large quantities of their theological doctrines
into an earlier Ks ̣atriya epic. Since there is no longer any reason for assuming the exis-
tence of this epic, we must likewise abandon this thesis. A critical clariication of the
critics’ arguments for it revealed that they had, in every instance, assumed its existence
as the basic condition for their reconstructions and textual histories rather than demon-
strating it.65 These reconstructions, moreover, amounted to massive interventions in the
tradition. Nowhere in the history of scholarly editing have interventions been made on
this scale in the name of “critical” scholarship.66 We must suspect that the Mahābhārata
critics’ aim was not the restoration and preservation of the text, not even of its “best”
readings,67 but a campaign of erasure, indoctrination and conversion.68
Whereas historical investigations are necessary and useful, what the Mahābhārata
critics provided in the name of a history of the text— or, rather, a Textgeschichte, which
is very diferent69— was not an objective history but a ictional narrative about the
Brahmans’ baleful inluence over India. Its roots in German Protestantism are now evi-
dent. Its anti- Semitic sources, motivation and intent are no longer debatable.70 Redeining
the Mahābhārata critical edition as a “normative redaction” in question- begging ways
141
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 141
does not advance the case for a Brahmanic redaction of an earlier Ks ̣atriya epic.71
As the German scholars’ last hope for reviving their racist, sectarian and xenophobic
narratives, its overcoming marks a crossroads for Mahābhārata studies.72 As we saw, the
circumstance that editors can reconstruct an archetype does not mean that this text (the
codex unicus of the archetype) was the sole one in existence in its time. Even if someone wanted
to expunge the tradition, he could not have known that he had to redact this exemplar
rather than any other, since he could not have known that it rather than any other would
produce descendants that survived. We could perhaps argue that the Brahmans redacted
all exemplars ever in existence, so that regardless of which exemplar we reconstruct as our
archetype we will end up with a Brahmanic version of the text. A conscious decimation of
all sources that ever existed such as the analytic critics posit for the Mahābhārata, however,
has never been observed. Neither would it be possible in ancient times, lacking centralized
repositories and electronic databases, to locate all exemplars in existence. Even if the argu-
ment is that the Brahmans need only have destroyed suicient numbers of exemplars
of the Ks ̣atriya epic to ensure that their version, rather than the competing Ks ̣atriya
version, survived, we could not explain how they located these exemplars.73 Moreover, if
they destroyed exemplars individually there was not one redaction but several unless we
wish to maintain that the destruction was separate from the act of redaction. How did
they collect the exemplars? Which one did they select as the base for their redaction?
Were they indiferent to the choice or was the version selected already a proto- Brahmanic
epic? The alleged exemplars, moreover, are not manuscripts but refer to oral narratives.
How then could the Brahmans have decimated them?
Even if the argument is that the Mahābhārata critics, lacking a knowledge of the
stemmatic method, wished to focus on the history of the text, they have not succeeded
in providing a history of the tradition. A history of the text is, of course, a necessary
and desirable auxiliary to the abstract reconstruction in the stemma. We recognize
its importance. But it must begin with the text after its irst emergence (or what can
be reconstructed as such). A good example is the work of Veronika von Büren, who
researches the manuscript tradition of Isidore’s Etymologies:
The notice on Receswinthus does not therefore seem to originate from any of the eighteenth-
century witnesses. The oldest original occurrences are provided by D and H, both following
the French tradition. Bischof proposed localizing the origin of D in the region of Murbach.
For H he proposed an origin in western France on account of the style of writing, reminiscent
of that of Tours, and pushed back its date, previously ixed at the start of the century. The
spelling of H is full of Visigothic symptoms such as uncertainty in the use of the initial h (habel
for Abel, 1.VII; XVII. 10.1 ortus for hortus), hesitation between K and Ch (kam for Cham, 1. VII),
b– p (scribtum, 1. VII), b– v (XVI.25.1 iubat corr. iuvat), e– I, q– c (locuntur for loquuntur, 1. VIII), o– u
(Epicoros for Epicurus, 1.VIII), i– g (II.2.67 Jasius for Gasius). A good deal of these irregularities
have been corrected soon after the copy, sometimes even by the copyist. They must therefore
come from the model, like the syllabiication of words, especially in the titles (for example
XVI.25 de pon de ribus), that one inds in the Visigothic evidence AKLM. This model also
permitted the confusion r– s (II.2.64. ab Iscule H ab Hercule H2), which is again the case with
Visigothic manuscripts of the eighteenth century. For his text, H is sometimes in agreement
with KLM, but more often with D and the group L*Bby, thus the testimony of Theodulf. In
142
142 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
the chapter on rhetoric igures of the second book, which H and D possess with the group of
Theodulf, HD are consistent with each other, with some rare exceptions, and join almost sys-
tematically the testimony of Theodulf. The decoration of H, the initials outlined in green or
yellow, are reminiscent of manuscripts at Fleury. I think that H made use of the manuscripts
that Theodulf had gathered to design his Isidorian edition. Very likely he had it copied in one
of his scriptoria, Fleury or Micy S. mesmin, on an Italian model. I have been able to establish
that he served subsequently in a sciptorium of Hincmar of Reims.
One therefore can state that the basic version from the end of the 5th book is the one
transmitted by the Italian witnesses (and T) and that all the textual additions are linked to the
activity of Theodulf. It is possible that he is even at the origin of the epitome of this chronicle,
whose foreign character with respect to the composition of the Etymologies already irritated
Porzig and subsequently Reydellet.74
Von Büren’s arguments are not stemmatic but they are empirical, being based on her
analysis of the copyists’ diferent styles and usages (the usus scribendi). Her work contrasts
with the German Mahābhārata critics’, who neither know nor care about manuscript
culture and scribal practices in ancient India, yet invoke the Mahābhārata’s apparent het-
erogeneity to discount its textual integrity.75 One could just as well suspect the authenticity
of Isidore’s Etymologies, a work no less diverse in its contents.76 We are aware that specu-
lation about Isidore’s sources exists. But here also, a diference exists between classical or
romance philologists and the Mahābhārata critics. We only need compare, for instance,
the work of a scholar such as Jacques Fontaine with that of John L. Brockington (discussed
‘Codex inemendatus’ d’lsidore
edition de Braulio I partie en III livres
Chronicon L * cod li ’c lte as li ew dis uig no oth rds de De natura rerum 750
Travaux pour le LG (Théodulf et autres)
Bern
AA 90.23 l LG
S. Gall D H a Reg lat 310 T 800
C
Familie espagnole
C2
Edition de Théodulf
BbeY Avant 820
f F d l v y Bern 36
Figure 29 Von Büren’s stemma of the manuscript tradition of Isidore’s Etymologies
Source: Reproduced from von Büren, “La place du manuscrit Ambr. L 99 sup. dans la transmission des
Étymologies d’Isidore de Séville,” 43.
143
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 143
in Appendix 18) to dispel the illusion that the Mahābhārata critics actually identiied the
sources the Mahābhārata’s alleged composers used.77 In fact, contrary to their claims, the
Mahābhārata critics have not considered the work’s sources at all—i ts reuse and trans-
formation of Vedic ritual and philosophy, its borrowing from Purān ̣ic cosmologies, its
references to the dharma s ūtras and ́āstras, its citation of all the known branches of knowl-
edge and its relation to the Sanskrit traditions of kāvya and alaṅkāráāstra.78 Rather, by
obsessively focusing on the so- called Ks ̣atriya epic, they overlooked valuable testimony in
the work itself about its sources, its reception and its proper interpretation.79 As Bigger’s
work demonstrates, the German Indologists disputed the Mahābhārata’s form even after
a critical text became available. Even though the stemma provides the only objective
basis for studying the text’s history (and the edition itself is, at present, our only source of
knowledge about the tradition), the German scholars chose to discount its evidence for a
fetish history of an original oral epic and its Brahmanic “contamination.” We conclude
by presenting two contrasting igures— Von Büren’s stemma of the manuscript tradition
of Isidore’s Etymologies (Figure 29) and a inal stemma (Figure 30) that summarizes all the
arguments the analytic critics have made for their view of the Mahābhārata.
Original
K atriya/ Bardic
ω
P1
Hyperarchetypal
β contamination Brahmanic
P2
γ
P3
δ
Extra-stemmatic
Archetype θ
contamination
(alleged normative redaction)
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
Witnesses
K V B D T G M
Figure 30 Hyperarchetypal contamination, extra- stemmatic contamination and the resil-
ience of tradition
144
144 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Figure 30 combines elements of Bigger’s so- called prehistory of the normative redac-
tion with Sukthankar’s stemma. It indicates the transmission prior to the reconstructed
archetype as Bigger imagines it. The two upper cones overlaid over each other represent
the Kṣatriya and the Brahmanic traditions, respectively. Over time, as elements are inter-
polated into the Kṣatriya epic from Brahmanic sources, the former declined until at θ it
ceases to exist. The elements l, m and n survived past the alleged normative redaction’s
constricting inluence and reentered the tradition below the archetype (recombinant
transmission). Whereas some elements survived past the alleged normative redaction’s
constricting inluence and reentered the tradition below the archetype (recombinant
transmission), others were retained in the redacted text itself and thence transmitted
to the witnesses (resilient transmission). After the occurrence of a normative redaction
at θ, the tradition again diverged. (The narrowing of the upper cones into the norma-
tive redaction therefore does not represent the same thing in both cases. In the case of
the Kṣatriya epic, it represents the gradual decline of this tradition. In the case of the
Brahmanic work, it represents a standardization of texts rather than a decline.)
These two igures—v an Büren’s stemma and our stemma—i llustrate better than words
ever could the diference between conscientious historical and philological research and
empty and untenable speculation. They simultaneously illustrate the direction in which a
responsible Mahābhārata criticism must now develop.
Notes
1 “[…] il [l’éditeur] doit s’eforcer, par tous les moyens dont disposent sa science et son ingéniosité,
de retrouver, par dessous, les constantes de la tradition ‘verticale’. C’est à ce prix, et à ce prix
seulement, qu’il pourra déterminer la réalité, et éventuellement l’ampleur, d’une transmission
horizontale.” Jean Irigoin, “Quelques rélexions sur le concept d’archétype,” Revue d’histoire des
textes 7 (1977): 242– 43.
2 For references to a written tradition as opposed to an oral one, see James L. Fitzgerald, “The
Many Voices of the Mahābhārata,” review of Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to the
Education of the Dharma King, by Alf Hiltebeitel, Journal of the American Oriental Society 123, no. 4
(2003): 803– 18 and James L. Fitzgerald, “Mahābhārata,” in The Hindu World, ed. Sushil Mittal
and Gene Thursby (New York and London: Routledge, 2004), 52– 74.
3 Mahābhārata critics appear unaware of Maas’s deinition of the archetype as “the source
text with which the irst branching began.” Paul Maas, Textkritik, 4th edn. (Leipzig: B.
G. Teubner, 1960), 6. Because they erroneously think a critical edition is made solely by elim-
inating interpolations, they think no reason exists why this process should not continue ad
ininitum. Austin referees Bigger’s work thus: “Important here in his [Bigger’s] framing of the
‘M0’ moment is the looming presence of the subsequent M+N materials, which establish the
patterns of lux and inlation of the normative redaction over time. For Bigger it is thus only
natural to seek, now through higher text- critical tools, these same patterns of lux and inla-
tion within the M0 text itself.” Christopher Austin, “Evaluating the Critical Edition of the
Mahābhārata: Inferential Mileage and the Apparatus Materials,” Journal of Vaishnava Studies
19, no. 2 (2011): 76. In his view, nothing prevents us from positing an ancestor of M0 (the
archetype) on analogy with the relation of the archetype to its witnesses (his so-c alled M+N
moments). “If we have nothing available to take us back beyond M0—n o means to trace with
any certainty the processes leading to and producing the archetype—w e may look to the evi-
dence of M+N, which may leave us with the suspicion that the M0 text represented by the CE
will, upon inspection, reveal some of the same kinds of patterns of addition and accretion as
145
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 145
do the manuscripts from which it was constituted. According to this view, to resist the possibility
of M– N moments is to turn the ‘screen shot’ of the CE into a kind of Ur-M Bh. Perhaps most
importantly, it may be suggested that the evidence of M+N makes the refusal to consider the
existence of M– N unreasonable.” Ibid., 77. The problem with this argument is that if we can
posit an ancestor of θ called θʹ on analogy with the relation of θ to its witnesses (θʹ: θ :: θ: Ś, K,
etc.), we can also posit an ancestor of θʹ on analogy with the relation of θʹ to θ (θʹʹ: θʹ :: θʹ: θ).
Thereafter we could keep positing ancestors as follows: θʹʹʹ: θʹʹ :: θʹʹ: θʹ, θʹʹʹʹ: θʹʹʹ :: θʹʹʹ: θʹʹ,
θʹʹʹʹʹ: θʹʹʹʹ :: θʹʹʹʹ: θʹʹʹ and so on.
4 See Mary Carroll Smith, “The Mahābhārata’s Core,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 95,
no. 3 (1975): 480– 81. See also James L. Fitzgerald, “Triṣtụ bh Passages of the Mahābhārata,”
Epic Undertakings: Papers of the 12th World Sanskrit Conference, vol. 2., ed. Robert P. Goldman
and Muneo Tokunaga (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, 2009), 95– 117, and James
L. Fitzgerald, “Toward a Database of the Non- Anuṣṭubh Verses in the Mahābhārata,” in Epics,
Khilas, and Purān ̣as: Continuities and Ruptures. Proceedings of the Third Dubrovnik International Conference
on the Sanskrit Epics and Purān ̣as, ed. Petteri Koskikallio (Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences
and Arts, 2005), 137– 48.
5 We put “style” in scare quotes because, obviously, the Mahābhārata critics mean something
else by the term than editors, for whom it refers to either an author’s style (deducible from
multiple works known to be written by him) or to a scribe’s style (again, deducible from his
manuscripts and peculiarities of handwriting or dialect). The Mahābhārata critics do not think
a single author existed. They know nothing about the language or regional dialects at the time.
They have made no study of the scribal tradition. Rather, when they use the word style, what
they mean is the distinction between Brahmanic and heroic poetry, a distinction they make
on the basis of the contents of this poetry (or, rather, since it all occurs in the Mahābhārata, the
contents of the parts assumed Brahmanic, etc.)
6 Even Van Buitenen, though aware of “the antibrahminism of Western scholarship of the
last century,” falls into the trap of positing a “Brahmanization.” He distinguishes four stages
of the epic: “The Central Story,” “The Fuzzy Edges,” “The Second Perimeter” (the stage
of “inept mythiication”) and “The Third Perimeter” (identiied with “Brahminization”). For
his comments, see J. A. B. van Buitenen, “The Mahābhārata: Introduction,” in J. A. B. van
Buitenen, trans., The Mahābhārata, vol. 1: The Book of the Beginning (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1973), xiii– xxiii.
7 Besides the obvious prejudices in Mahābhārata studies such as the prejudice against
“Brahmanism” rooted in German anti- Semitism, the prepossession in favor of a heroic,
bardic epic rooted in German romanticism and the prejudice that all “higher” cultural
achievements in ancient India (including the parts of the epic considered genuine, heroic,
rational, free-s pirited, etc.) were owed to the Aryans or Indo-G ermans, epistemic prejudices
also exist about the correct interpretation of texts, the economy of meaning within which
texts emerge, the ontological status of language and the value of philosophy and ethics. We
speciically mean these here.
8 The so- called analytic school traces back to the work of Hopkins. See Edward W. Hopkins, “The
Bhārata and the Great Bhārata,” The American Journal of Philology 19, no. 1 (1898): 1–2 4 and
Edward W. Hopkins, The Great Epic of India: Character and Origin of the Mahab̄ har̄ata (New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1901). Simon Brodbeck, “Analytical and Synthetic Approaches in Light of the
Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata and the Harivamṣá ,” Journal of Vaishnava Studies 19, no. 2
(2011): 223– 50 provides an overview of the two terms and their associated schools.
9 Timpanaro’s deinitions in Sebastiano Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, ed. and
trans. Glenn W. Most (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 179. Reeve argues that
R. D. Dawe, The Collation and Investigation of Manuscripts of Aeschylus (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1964), 159– 60 used the term before Timpanaro, but does not seem to have
invented it. Michael D. Reeve, “Stemmatic Method: ‘Qualcosa che non funziona?’ ” in The
Role of the Book in Medieval Culture: Proceedings of the Oxford International Symposium, September
146
146 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
26– October 1, 1982, ed. P. Ganz, Bibliologia 3 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1986), 66, no. 20. See ibid.
for Reeve’s criticisms of Timpanaro’s deinition of extra-s temmatic contamination, which
leaves him “wondering how anything can be extrastemmatic in the stemma of a whole tradi-
tion” (Reeve’s italics). Reeve’s criticism does not concern, as Trovato thinks, “the consequences
that extra- stemmatic contamination has, according to Timpanaro, on bipartition, and not the
fact […] that a medieval or Renaissance copyist could easily draw on early witnesses which
have disappeared without leaving surviving copies.” Paolo Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted
to Know about Lachmann’s Method: A Non- Standard Handbook of Genealogical Textual Criticism in the Age
of Post- Structuralism, Cladistics, and Copy- Text (Padua: Libreriauniversitaria, 2014), 137. Rather, as
Reeve clariied in a draft version shared with the authors, it concerns “a purely logical objec-
tion to calling anything ‘extrastemmatic’ in the stemma of a whole tradition: ‘from outside’ what
stemma, then? One can always draw up a stemma of some witnesses and leave the rest out of
it” (Reeve’s italics). Trovato’s “extra- archetypal” is therefore preferable. Reeve’s objection does
not apply here, as the analytic critics do not mean contamination from a part of the stemma
outside our hypothetical stemma (that is, the stemma we draw up) but from a source outside
even the “real” stemma—i ndeed, a source so distinct from the epic tradition that we must posit
a sinister Brahmanic takeover of the latter as the reason they became associated. See also the
next note.
10 Despite the similarity of name, hyperarchetypal contamination difers from what Trovato
calls “extra- archetypal contamination.” The latter refers to the circumstance that “a ms. that
descends to some extent from a known exemplar contains high-q uality variants not found in
any known ms. or subfamily,” in which case we assume that its scribe simultaneously drew on
a second source from a branch lying outside the tradition descended from the archetype, a
branch that ultimately did not survive—h ence the name extra- archetypal contamination. If the con-
tamination occurred from a manuscript from a branch of the tradition, one or more of whose
members survived, then their common ancestor—t hat is, the ancestor they share with surviving
manuscripts of other branches—w ould be the archetype, and the contamination would be
intra- stemmatic. Trovato’s extra- archetypal contamination is, in fact, a synonym for Timpanaro’s extra-
stemmatic contamination, preferable not only because it clariies that the contamination occurred
from a branch that descends outside of the archetype or from a higher- order ancestor than
the archetype but also because it avoids the misleading suggestion that contamination could
occur from outside the stemma, which it, of course, cannot (hence Reeve’s criticism cited in
the previous note). What Timpanaro, strictly speaking, means is that it occurs from outside
the stemma of the surviving manuscripts, that is, the stemma that we draw up. In contrast,
hyperarchetypal contamination refers to the circumstance that the Mahābhārata critics consider the
archetype itself a composite of two diferent sources—a Kṣatriya and a Brahmanic tradition—
on no other ground except that they think they can identify the perceived class interests of the
two groups at work in diferent parts of the text. The contamination thus occurs during the for-
mation of the archetype, that is, from above the archetype into it, as the preix hyper emphasizes.
It difers from extra- archetypal contamination in that contamination does not occur from a branch
outside the tradition descended from the archetype into an extant source but from a source
unrelated to the tradition into the archetype, a source that is, for this reason, really outside the
stemma. Hence, Timpanaro’s extra- stemmatic contamination, had it not already been claimed and
had Trovato’s extra- archetypal contamination established itself instead, would have been more
appropriate. A corresponding term does not exist in classical philology, probably because, while
we know of extant archetypes that reveal the inluence of two hands, no one has suggested that
a reconstructed archetype is a mix of two traditions. For Trovato’s discussion of extra-s tem-
matic contamination, see Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method,
134– 38 and see especially ibid., 137–3 8 for his justiication for retaining Timpanaro’s term.
The quotation is from page 134. See also Mortimer Chambers, review of Thucydidis Historiae,
Vol. I: Libri I– II, by Carolum Hude and Otto Luschnat, Classical Philology 51, no. 1 (1956): 44,
to our knowledge the earliest known reference to an “extra-a rchetypal” manuscript or source.
147
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 147
Trovato incorrectly attributes it to Edward N. O’ Neil, review of Juvénal, les baladins et les rétiaires
d’après le manuscrit d’Oxford, by Jean Colin, Classical Philology 51, no. 1 (1956): 42– 44.
11 Andreas Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata: Seine Darstellung im Rahmen des Textes und seiner
Entwicklung (Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1998), 145. In a footnote, Bigger clariies that by
“all along” (schon immer) he “of course, does not mean that the Mahābhārata existed since the
beginning of time.” Rather, he “means the textual corpus resulting from the irst redaction of
the Mahābhārata.” Ibid., 145, n. 1. “Textual corpus” suggests a written work, but elsewhere
he argues that the Mahābhārata was irst “transcribed” during the normative redaction. He
also refers to the normative redaction as the “sole written version.” See ibid., 111 and 118. We
therefore assume that he means a body of oral retellings.
12 Ibid., 107. Bigger cites four sources in support: Moriz Winternitz, Geschichte der indischen
Litteratur, vol. 1, 2nd edn. (Leipzig: C. F. Amelangs, 1909), 266; D. D. Kosambi, “The
Autochthonous Element in the Mahābhārata,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 84,
no. 1 (1964): 43; Van Buitenen, “The Mahābhārata: Introduction,” xxi and Klaus Mylius,
Geschichte der altindischen Literatur (Bern: Scherz, 1988), 91 and 105. Kosambi writes that “the
MBh began as a “Kuru lament, changed into a Pandu song of victory; absorbed Naga
myths during acculturation; acquired fresh episodes from the Mathuran Kṛṣṇa saga; and
was brahminised to some extent by the Kaśyapas, but overwhelmingly by the Bhṛgus into
its present form.” Kosambi, “Autochthonous Element,” 43. Mylius claims that “in contrast
to Vedic literature, epic literature emerged primarily in Kṣatriya circles,” whereas the later
“bridge narrations” “are not always borne by the anti-a scetic, active attitude of the Kṣatriyas
but have been occasionally composed and inserted into the epic by the Brahmans.” Mylius,
Geschichte der altindischen Literatur, 91 and 105. Winternitz provides the strongest support for
Bigger’s Brahmanization hypothesis. His comments are examined later. In contrast, Van
Buitenen provides only qualiied support for Bigger’s views. He notes, “It would be easy at
this point to be traduced into believing that a diferent mentality has taken over the grand old
baronial tradition, and to identify that mentality with that of the brahmins. But it is hard to
revive the antibrahminism of Western scholarship of the last century, since all the evidence
points to a necessary symbiosis of brahmin and baron; as our text has it, ‘The baronage is in
league with brahmindom, and brahmindom is allied with the baronage.’ Perhaps we should
rather think that the baronial-b ardic tradition, out of which the epic grew, was expiring and
absorbed into another tradition of wandering reciters of brahmin-t ype lore.” Van Buitenen,
“The Mahābhārata: Introduction,” xxi.
13 See Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 107: “The Bhārgava layer represents one of the earliest
Brahmanic layers in the developmental history of the MBh. However, for these Brahmans
the Bhārgava were not necessarily their own family, but rather the Brahmans par excellence,
the preeminent family. If the Bhārgava layer is really the earliest Brahmanic layer, the oldest
Balarāma layer must be attributed to the period before it. […] That the Brahmans had little use
for such a Kṣatriya [as Balarāma] is conirmed by the fact that the Nārāyaṇīya layers, which
became inluential at a time when the transmission of the MBh already lay in the Brahmans’
hands, had little to add to the igure of Balarāma beside Saṃkarṣaṇa. […] In my opinion, the
Baladeva tır̄thayātra stands on the threshold or, rather, already on the other side [of this change].
Its religiosity, which speciically emphasizes a reverential attitude vis-à - vis the Brahmans, makes
it likely that the redactors responsible for this passage were Brahmans. This is possibly one of
the oldest passages in the MBh, which trace to a Brahmanic inluence.”
14 Ibid., 145.
15 Ibid., 145– 46.
16 Reeve points out that stemmatists can reconstruct an archetype, but not much above it. They
can posit an ancestor that had particular sections or particular leaves or was written in a par-
ticular script, but whether they would be doing so qua stemmatists is debatable. We could
hypothetically argue that before the archetype x and y must have happened, for the following
reasons. But any argument of this type must be noncircular and independently veriiable.
148
148 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Historical sources must exist— testimonia, citations, documentary evidence and the like— that
verify it. Finally, it may appear that the analytic critics’ argument is an inductive argument
of the kind “the surviving witnesses were interpolated, so it is likely that the archetype or its
ancestors were too.” The problem is that their argument is precisely not inductive. All the empir-
ical examples of interpolation are—a nd they themselves not only grant but underscore this fact—
examples of Brahmanic interpolations into a Brahmanic work, whereas they posit Brahmanic
interpolations into a Kṣatriya epic, for which no proof has yet been found. The argument is, at best,
hypothetical, while its proof is viciously circular.
17 Angelika Malinar, The Bhagavadgıt̄ā: Doctrines and Contexts (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2007) features the term interpolation 36 times, whereas layer occurs 45 times. Vishwa
Adluri, review of The Bhagavadgıt̄ā: Doctrines and Contexts, by Angelika Malinar, History of Religions
50, no. 1 (2010): 102–0 7 notes Malinar’s ininitely malleable identiication of layers. For a
critique of earlier schemes for layers, see Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee, “Paradigm
Lost: The Application of the Historical-C ritical Method to the Bhagavadgītā,” International
Journal of Hindu Studies 20, no. 2 (2016): 199– 301.
18 The following discussion is based on Timpanaro’s. His text was modiied and integrated with
the running text. Lachmann’s original comments are cited in the notes where possible.
19 Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, 139.
20 Ibid., 140.
21 Ibid. The original reads: “Diese Änderungen, welche bald dieser, bald jener Schreiber
übersehen, und jeder mit neuen vermehrt hat, herauszuinden, das ist die Aufgabe des
Herausgebers.” Karl Lachmann, “Der Nibelungen Lied, herausg. von v. d. Hagen. Breslau
1816,” in Kleinere Schriften zur deutschen Philologie, vol. 1, ed. Karl Müllenhof (Berlin: G. Reimer,
1876), 87.
22 Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, 140.
23 Accepting Bornmann’s emendations. See Fritz Bornmann, “Sui criteri di ‘recensio’ meccanica
enunciati da Lachmann nel 1817,” Rivista di Letterature Moderne e Comparate 15 (1962): 45–5 3.
Bormann’s emendations are discussed in Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, 142.
This discussion is not reproduced here, as the details of Lachmann’s method are less important
than the observation that a minimum number of manuscripts arranged in a minimal architec-
ture is needed to reconstruct the source of contamination.
24 Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, 140. The presentation follows Timpanaro’s
discussion with the aforesaid emendation. In the original, Lachmann’s rules read: “(1) Drey
Handschriften unter unseren vieren überstimmen alle Mal eine. (2) Wo je zwey überein
stimmen ist BG < EM (d.h. in Stellen, wo B mit G übereinstimmt, die einstimmige Lesart von
E und M vorzuziehen), GE > BM, GM > BE. (3) Wo drey Lesarten sind, da ist BG < E—M
(die Lesart, welche BG gemeinschaftlich haben, die beiden andern in E und M vorzuziehen),
GE > B— M, GM > B— E; hingegen EM = B— G (die Übereinstimmung von E und M führt
gegen die zwey Lesarten von B und G zu keiner Entscheidung), BM = G— E, BE = G— M.
(4) Eben so ungewiss bleibt die ursprüngliche Lesart, wo alle vier uneinig sind.” Lachmann,
“Der Nibelungen Lied, herausg. von v. d. Hagen. Breslau 1816,” 87.
25 Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, 141.
26 Ibid., 143.
27 Unless we can show both readings are corruptions of an original. In the Mahābhārata, the two
hyparchetypes difered not only in readings but also in entire accounts, so this cannot apply.
28 Reeve writes, “if each [scribe] behaves eclectically as in your hypothetical example, it will be
hard to draw up a stemma at all, because there will be errors shared by each of the three pos-
sible pairs where the other ms. has a true reading that couldn’t have been conjectured from the
shared one. Whether it then makes sense to speak of an archetype at all [would] depend […]
on the nature of such errors as all three share. Missing chunks of text or large transpositions
that disrupt the low are the kind of thing that leads editors of classical texts and doubtless
149
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 149
others to postulate an archetype even if they can’t draw a satisfactory stemma below it.” In his
opinion, whether one “one can tell where the contamination happened— in the archetype or
somewhere below it— [will, ultimately,] depend on how the pairs behave, and the argument
may well turn on probabilistic assumptions about the habits of scribes.” Personal communica-
tion, e- mail message to authors, January 1, 2011.
29 The following discussion draws on M. L. West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique (Stuttgart: B.
G. Teubner, 1973). West speaks merely of errors, whereas the Mahābhārata editors had to deal
both with errors and with extensive divergences between texts. We consider this limitation later.
30 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 118.
31 In West’s analysis, B is an extant copy, whereas γ is an inferred subarchetype. Nonetheless,
assuming that we can reconstruct ε from Ñ, V and B and assuming that we inferred γ as ε’s source,
contamination of D would seriously complicate our inferences about γ’s relationship to D.
32 The argument is, of course, only hypothetical. No good foundation exists for comparing extant
witnesses with inferred sources until a stemma is established, but this shows just how arbitrary the
analytic critics’ claims about sources and transmission are without a rigorous stemma. Because
contamination makes it impossible to draw up a stemma with conidence, it erases the distinction
between more probable inferences and less probable ones. This is, of course, the Mahābhārata
critics’ real aim. By vitiating a perfectly valid stemma and arguing from hypotheticals, they
replace serious discussion with arbitrary speculation. Compare Bigger’s use of “it is conceiv-
able” (denkbar wäre), “possibly” (möglicherweise), “probably” (wahrscheinlich) and “perhaps” (vielleicht).
For citations see, in order, ibid., 15, 35, n. 76, 47, 55, n. 150, 67, 99, 117, 121, 141 and 148; 7,
n. 44, 51, n. 132, 60, 61, n. 180, 62, n. 185, 63, 72, 75, 94, 98, 100, n. 111, 107, 121, 126, 130,
134 and 139; 33, 38, 39, 53, 63, 66, 70, 72, 74, 75, 84, 88, 89, n. 58, 92, 96, 97, 98, 102 (also
102, n. 118), 104, n. 126, 105, 106, 107, 111, 112, 114, 117, 118, 119, 122, 123, 126, 129, 131
(also 131, n. 76), 132 (also 132, n. 81), 136, 139, 141, 143, 147 and 149; and 10, 31, 48, 60 (also
60, n. 176), 64, n. 190, 70, n. 5, 76, n. 32, 84, 85, 93, 97, 103, 110, 106 and 124.
33 West does not distinguish between extra-s temmatic and intra-s temmatic contamination, but
since A in his scheme is a lost manuscript, Timpanaro’s distinction applies. It lets us distinguish
contamination between extant witnesses from contamination from sources not in our stemma.
The circumstance that θʹ is an oral source rather than a written exemplar is irrelevant for the
argument.
34 This is especially true if we considered θ a contaminated exemplar (contamination with the
Brahmanic source ωʹ). In this case, we would disregard θ’s readings, and D would be identical
with ω.
35 We, of course, know that D represents a late and inferior group of manuscripts descended from
γ. The diiculty is therefore merely hypothetical. We would reject contamination from an older
source θʹ. But it nevertheless shows that, as long as we do not know the actual transmission,
contamination will lead to misleading inferences.
36 Theoretically, several such intermediate sources could have existed. A stemma, however, only
records the nodes from which two or more lines branch because without a minimum of two
manuscripts or manuscript (sub)families for comparison, we cannot infer the existence of a
(common) ancestor. We thus posit the minimum number of intermediate nodes necessary to
connect a family of manuscripts based on their observed diferences and agreements, even
though, most likely, signiicantly more manuscripts existed between the nodes than recorded.
“The lines of stemmata, like geometric points, are composed of ininite points.” Trovato,
Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 148.
37 Sukthankar notes, “S is the ultimate source from which all versions of the Southern recen-
sion are, directly or indirectly, derived and which is appreciably longer than N, and far more
elaborate (textus ornatior).” V. S. Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” in The Ad̄ iparvan for the First Time
Critically Edited, vol. 1 (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1933), xxxi. See also
ibid., xxxvi: “The Southern recension of the Ādi at least is thus not merely longer, but also
150
150 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
fuller, more exuberant, more ornate than the Northern. It may therefore be itly styled, in rela-
tion to the Northern, the textus ornatior.”
38 Sukthankar identiies seven types of changes in the southern manuscripts over the northern
manuscripts in the “Prolegomena”:
1. “Variants of isolated words or phrases, (a) unimportant and (b) important.”
2. “Larger variants between continuous passages, as a whole, the total extent remaining
approximately the same.”
3. “Expansion of the text in S without materially altering the nature of the contents or the
course of the narrative.”
4. “Southern additions which alter the purport of the fable as narrated in the Northern
recension.”
5. “Additions in S, due to the illing out of lacunae (real or imaginary).”
6. “Multiplication of ights and battle scenes.”
7. “Omissions in S, as compared with N.” Ibid., xxxvii– xlvii.
Under the third category, he lists six types of changes, including: “additions in S, due to
the explicit mention of the observance of the correct and complete Brahmanic ritual and
ceremonial on the proper occasions”; “expansion in S of existing scenes by the addition of
speeches or detailed descriptions and by other digressions”; “additions of little ethical, moral
and sententious maxims, to which S, permeated as it is by a conscious didactic purpose, is
particularly partial”; and “additional stanzas in S with, perhaps, a certain amount of sexual
appeal, bearing the taint of later decadence.” Ibid., xl and xlii– xliii. The increasing com-
plexity of ritual is usually cited as evidence for the southern recension’s Brahmanic character,
but actually, all the changes, including the expansion of the battle scenes, are characteristic
of the Mahābhārata’s later development. They cannot be cited as evidence for an original
Kṣatriya epic. Bigger’s suggestion that “[Mahābhārata] 1.211– 13 likewise belong among
the Balarāma passages that preceded the Brahmanic layers. The problems discussed there
unequivocally belong in Kṣatriya circles” (Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 107) illustrates just
how persistently the myth of a “primitive Kṣatriya tale of love and war” (Sukthankar) endures.
Scholars appear willing to discount tangible proof that the Mahābhārata’s Kṣatriyas are its
own invention for a reality no less imaginary (that is, their view that these Kṣatriyas once really
existed). Simon Brodbeck, review of Strı:̄ Women in Epic Mahābhārata, by Kevin McGrath, Indo-
Iranian Journal 53, no. 1 (2010): 91 perceptively notes: “If McGrath’s self- inlicted problems of
textual deinition seem rather perverse, one might be tempted to speculate more broadly in
search of an explanation. The reason projects such as McGrath’s can proceed—e ven after the
production of the Poona critical edition—h as to do, I suspect, with a kind of socio-e xistential
desire that formed a context for the early heyday of European Indology and has been fossilised
within the discipline ever since.”
39 Scholars have tried to peg the argument that the northern recension is closer to the original
story on Sukthankar’s comment that the southern recension is characterized “by its precision,
schematization, and thoroughly practical outlook. Compared with it, the Northern recension is dis-
tinctly vague, unsystematic, sometimes even inconsequent, more like a story rather naïvely narrated,
as we ind in actual experience.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xxxvi (Sukthankar’s italics). But
Sukthankar never once speaks of an original story. He also does not use the term Kṣatriya in
the “Prolegomena.” Certainly, Brahmanism is articulating itself ever more richly in the epic,
but this does not mean that its earlier stages were, for their lack of development, Kṣatriya
rather than Brahmanic. See Alf Hiltebeitel, Nonviolence in the Mahābhārata: Śiva’s Summa on
R ̣ṣidharma and the Gleaners of Kurukṣetra (London and New York: Routledge, 2016), 46, 146 and
104, n. 19.
40 Actually, matters are not so clear. Since θ itself is a mix of Kṣatriya and Brahmanic sources
(ω and ωʹ), N could have inherited its “Kṣatriya” elements from θ. The probability, however,
is slight, since according to Bigger, θ is a Kṣatriya text only to a trivial degree. In contrast,
151
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 151
the likelihood that N inherited Kṣatriya elements from θʹ is greater. This is, of course, the
reason Bigger introduces it into the stemma. Unfortunately, no evidence exists to support
either the claim that the Kṣatriya tradition survived to reenter from an alternative source θʹ
or the claim that the Brahmans overwrote θ. Indeed, the sole purpose of introducing θʹ into
the stemma (apart from avowedly “increasing” the chances of N being a Kṣatriya epic) is to
make the latter claim appear plausible. In reality, θ is neither Brahmanic nor non-Brahmanic.
It only appears “Brahmanic” by the postulated contrast with another source, which allegedly
descended independent of the Brahmanic tradition from the Kṣatriya epic. Once this latter
source is admitted, it appears inevitable that we should discount θ’s evidence for it. In efect,
Bigger has made us reject the only source we possess (our reconstructed archetype) for a non-
existent source.
41 See Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lv: “In my opinion, therefore, this fact of the concord
between ν and S in small details, coupled with the almost entire lack of agreement as regards
the additions peculiar to ν or S, is the strongest argument imaginable for the independence of
these two versions, and consequently for the primitive character of their concordant readings.
It is needless to point out that this is a factor of supreme importance for the reconstruction of
the original” (Sukthankar’s italics).
42 Ibid., lvi.
43 Besides not being very old, the reconstructed archetype also will not ofer a good text.
Sukthankar notes that the Śārāda codex itself contains “corruptions and interpolations” that
“must be carefully corrected and controlled with the help of the other versions, particularly of
those of the rival recension.” Ibid., lxi. If we eliminated S, we could no longer correct these
problems. Our reconstruction of N will ofer a worse text than Sukthankar’s reconstructed
archetype.
44 Ibid., xci.
45 West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique, 36. In dealing with an “open” recension, West
recommends eliminating manuscripts that resist stemmatic analysis and whose readings are less
important for the reconstruction of the archetype, and focusing instead on manuscripts that do
descend “directly enough from an archetype for it to be reconstructed.” Ibid., 38.
46 The idea that we can introduce uncertainty into the stemma to make space for an oral
epic is a fallacy. It is like claiming that if we shuled four jokers into a pack we are likelier
to draw an ace than before. We would think someone who claims this either a fool or a
cheat. Since introducing uncertainty into a system afects all outcomes equally, it cannot
increase the chances of some outcomes over others. We can only inluence the likelihood
of drawing an ace if we shuled a large number of aces into the deck, that is to say, if we
stacked the deck.
47 Andreas Bigger, “The Normative Redaction of the Mahābhārata: Possibilities and Limitations
of a Working Hypothesis,” in Stages and Transitions: Temporal and Historical Frameworks in Epic
and Purān ̣ic Literature. Proceedings of the Second Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit
Epics and Purān ̣as, ed. Mary Brockington (Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts,
2002), 24.
48 For references to “parallel transmission,” see Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 18 (also 18,
n. 98), 106 (also 106, n. 132), 117 and 149. For references to “parallel tradition,” see ibid., 158
and 164. And see also ibid., 108 (“versions that ran parallel” and” “parallel-t ext”), 111 (“par-
allel versions”), 112 (“a parallel version”), 114 (“a parallel version” and “this parallel version”),
115, n. 14 (“both parallel versions”), 116 (“genuine parallel version”), 117 (“parallel version,”
also: “parallel versions,”), 117, n. 26 (“parallel versions”), 118 (“parallel versions”), 124 (“the
parallel version” and “southern parallel version”), 131 (“parallel version”), 132 (“parallel
version”) and 165 (“parallel version”).
49 Ibid., 111.
50 Giorgio Pasquali, Storia della tradizione e critico del testo (Florence: Le Monnier, 1952).
152
152 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
51 West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique, 50.
52 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 118.
53 More precisely, contamination from an alleged oral source should be treated like the scribe’s
own innovations, since we neither have grounds to assume its existence nor could we distin-
guish such contamination (if it occurred) from his own innovations. Although Bigger argues
that the scribe could have heard this version, we cannot know this and hence have no reason
to assume it. Otherwise, any one could assert of any reading that it was not the scribe’s own
innovation but an “ancient” reading heard from a secret tradition of illuminati dedicated to
preserving good readings.
54 In the examples Timpanaro cites, extra- stemmatic contamination is posited to explain good
readings found in an extant source, readings it can owe neither to the primary source it was
copied from nor to any other extant source (from whatever family) nor to a nonextant member
of one of these families. In this case, we posit that its good readings must have descended
from a diferent branch of the tradition altogether, that is, a branch connected with the others
through an ancestor of the archetype. Compare his precise explanation of the conditions under
which we may posit extra- stemmatic contamination: “There are correct readings at which no
medieval copyist- philologist (in certain cases not even the best modern philologist) could arrive
conjecturally. A more serious danger consists in the possibility that a copyist, for example, of
the α branch […] might have healed errors or illed lacunas not by conjecture and not even by
checking one of the other witnesses that have survived to our day, but by collating a manuscript
of a completely diferent branch or tradition which was later lost.” Timpanaro, The Genesis of
Lachmann’s Method, 179. In contrast, Bigger cites extra-s temmatic contamination (although he
does not call it that) as a justiication for the goodness of the passages he selects. They are not
good because of their inherent quality (which he never evaluates) but because they are posited
as not having descended from the Brahmanic tradition. The argument is not only circular; it
is perverse. We shall therefore, henceforth, refer to it as his circular, prejudicial and false hypothesis of
the contamination of a tendentious Brahmanic redaction of an earlier oral Kṣatriya epic with the hypothetical
remnants of this fantasy epic, reserving extra- stemmatic contamination for legitimate instances of a phe-
nomenon well known in textual criticism.
55 This is “the Argument from (Postulated) Antiquity” or, more simply, “the Argument from
Assertion.” See the next section.
56 See Bigger, “The Normative Redaction of the Mahābhārata,” 24: “If we assume that there was
a normative redaction, an archetype that can be reconstructed, we must at least assume that
this text, even if orally transmitted, was already ixed. It is therefore no longer a loating oral
tradition as we know it from many other cultures in which epics are transmitted orally, but a
ixed oral text, similar to the Vedic corpus, though not so rigidly ixed. It is possible that our
normative redaction had the form of a ixed oral text and there is no way of disproving it, but
I still think it is more plausible to assume that the normative redaction was the irst written
MBh. This may also explain why it was possible for one redaction to have come to dominate
the whole manuscript- tradition.”
57 Ibid.
58 Actually, Bigger’s criterion is not “the more heroic reading is preferable” but “what is imagined
as the more heroic reading is preferable.” As we saw, he has no way of knowing that the reading
he identiies as the original is identical with the reading of the putative heroic epic—t hat is to
say, that it descended unchanged from the latter. It could be a composite of the author/ bard’s
original intention and what the scribes understood or heard or transcribed in each individual
case. From Bigger’s perspective, however, the distinction is irrelevant. Rather than understand
reading as editors do (that is, as a lexical or semantic unit that, for this reason, is sensitive to even
the slightest change), he understands it as a complete mise- en- scène, a set of ideological tropes
and/o r motifs he thinks characteristic either of Kṣatriyahood or of Brahmanism and thus
serve to distinguish the former from the latter. The putative heroic epic’s readings can thus
153
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 153
undergo as much deterioration as they like; it will not alter the fact that they indicate a diferent
strand and stratum of Indian thought and history than the alleged lectiones brahmanicae.
59 As “the oldest form of the text which it is possible to reach, on the basis of the manuscript material available”
(Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxxvi; Sukthankar’s italics), the constituted text should be ipso
facto the most Kṣatriya version of the text if the history of India has been a history of progres-
sive Brahmanization, as the Indologists argue. In that case, the Indologists, who are dissatisied
with anything except the purest specimen of the Kṣatriya epic, should accept this text. Even
if we grant them that it represents the outcome of a Brahmanic redaction, they should accept
it as the closest thing to the Kṣatriya epic we shall ever possess, since we have no standard of
comparison outside of the Mahābhārata’s later textual history and this history reveals a pro-
gressive Brahmanization. Hence the need to discover within this history, that is, the history of
the Mahābhārata’s subsequent transformations— a history that is recorded in the critical appa-
ratus, surviving fragments of the Kṣatriya tradition. Bigger goes to the only place someone who
rejects the constituted text can— its critical apparatus—h oping to ind what he did not in the
former: a relection of what he thought the Mahābhārata would be.
60 The criterion is Holtzmann Jr.’s, who expresses it thus: “We thus ind some similarities in the
conditions of the most ancient Indian and the most ancient Germanic periods; here, as in the
latter, we encounter a battle- lusty warrior race with all the seeds of culture alongside a cruel
crudeness of passion. Whether here one must suppose [that the epic is] a recollection of a pri-
mordial age during which they lived together or a further development that ran parallel under
similar existential conditions, I cannot decide here. [But] it is certain that the Mahābhārata
has preserved traces for us that reach back to a very early period of Indian antiquity; that
therein recollections of an Indo-G ermanic primordial age have been preserved, is, so far at
least, at best plausible.” Adolf Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahābhārata (Kiel: C.
F. Haeseler, 1892), 51.
61 Compare ibid., 45– 46 (Holtzmann’s emphasis): “Here we must, in the irst place, emphasize
the thoroughly warlike worldview that characterizes the soul of the old parts of the epic. […]
Instead of the elegiac softness, the resignation, being tired of life, of later Indian literature
the raw warrior- like air of the old Germanic North blows against us here. If we were ever to
succeed in determining the oldest cultural stage of the Indian race attainable to research and
to dissolve away almost by means of a chemical process all inluences of the Brahmanism that
is gradually developing […] we would ind conditions before us only a little diferent from those
described by Tacitus as unique to the ancient Germans. But even in its contemporary ruined
form the Mahābhārata often delivers us the best commentary on Germania. Here we read of the
passion for gambling of the Germans, of how they wagered possessions and property, wife and
child, [and] inally even themselves.” And compare also Moriz Winternitz, Geschichte der indischen
Litteratur, vol. 3 (Leipzig: C. F. Amelangs, 1920), 1– 2 (italics added): “The ancient heroic poetry
that we saw in the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa was also doubtless originally ‘courtly’
poetry. The bards (sūtas), who were the transmitters of this ancient heroic poetry, lived at the
princes’ courts where they praised them in song. But they also accompanied them into battle
to hymn the warriors’ heroic deeds as they saw them irsthand. These court bards were closer
to the warriors than the learned Brahmans. They were often the warriors’ charioteers in their
military campaigns and participated in the warrior lifestyle. It was still a rough age as these heroic
poems arose, an age of battle and crude customs where the hunt, dicing and contests were among the princes’
favored occupations. And only during revelries, festivals, victory celebrations and sacriicial feasts
did the bards recite their ballads. Only later, as court life became more reined did ever more
learned poets take the bards’ place, poets who had been raised in the Brahmans’ schools and
competed with them in learning.”
62 Winternitz, Geschichte der indischen Litteratur, vol. 1, 261–6 4 ofers the best testimony for
how a narrow, anachronistic understanding of “epic” limited Western scholars’ appreci-
ation of the Mahābhārata. He writes: “Alongside this itihāsa literature […] there must
154
154 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
also have existed genuine epic poems, heroic poems [Heldengesänge], and perhaps also cycles
of epic ballads in the ancient period. After all, the two epics that survived in our times,
the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyan ̣a, are only the sediment of a long period of epic compo-
sition that preceded them. Long before these two epics existed as such, bards must have
sung songs about the great battle of nations [Völkerschlacht] that forms the subject of the
Mahābhārata and about the deeds of Rāma, the hero of the Rāmāyaṇa. Moreover, it is
inconceivable that the battles of the Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas and the exploits of Rāma con-
stituted the sole subjects of poetry. Doubtless, many other heroes and great events in some
of the other dynastic lines were also hymned. Not all of this ancient heroic poetry, whose
existence we must assume, disappeared without a trace. Some of it survived in our two epics
in ruins and fragments. […] The epic poems must have arisen in the circles of these bards
who, at any rate, must have been very close to the warrior caste [Kriegerstande]. However, what
we now know of as the national epics of the Indians—t he Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyan ̣a—
are not the old heroic ballads that the royal bards and traveling minstrels of ancient India
sang, ballads that great poets or, at least, skilled, poetically talented compilers reworked
into uniform compositions. Rather, they are collections of poems of disparate contents and
inconsistent value that arose in the course of centuries as a result of ongoing insertions and
changes. Naturally, old heroic ballads form the core of both works, but in large measure
the more religious itihāsa literature was incorporated into them and the Mahābhārata, in
particular, has almost completely lost its character of an epic because of the insertion of
extensive religious teachings. In truth, we can only speak of the Mahābhārata as an ‘epic’
and as a ‘poem’ to a very limited degree. Yes, in a certain sense the Mahābhārata is not a
poetic creation at all but rather a complete literature [eine ganze Litteratur]” (emphasis in orig-
inal). Note how Winternitz’s expectations completely shape his reception of the text (must
have, inconceivable, doubtless, must assume, naturally, etc.).
63 See Lieve Teugels, “Textual Criticism of Late Rabbinic Midrashim: The Example of Aggadat
Bereshit,” in Recent Developments in Textual Criticism: New Testament, Other Early Christian and
Jewish Literature, ed. Wim Weren and Dietrich-A lex Koch (Assen: Van Gorcum, 2003), 209–
10: “The traditional paradigms of textual criticism of classical and biblical literature do not
apply to most rabbinic works. First, textual criticism works best on authored works. Second,
in textual criticism as it is usually conceived, diferent sorts of (mechanical) errors are used
to determine the relation between the witnesses and consequently to make a stemma that
should eventually lead to the reconstruction of a text as close as possible to the original. Both
conditions are very questionable as to many rabbinic texts. As to the irst point, almost all
rabbinic works are collective enterprises, accumulations of traditional materials, compiled,
arranged and edited by subsequent authors-e ditors. As to the second, the co- existence of
oral and written traditions in rabbinic literature opposes the idea of an ‘original text,’ that is,
where it regards early and classical rabbinic works.” Although Teugels is speaking of the rab-
binic tradition, which, in the Indologists’ minds, ofers the closest parallel to the Brahmanic
tradition, his criticisms also apply to their hypothetical oral, bardic tradition. The Indologists
cannot simultaneously claim that they do textual criticism and seek an oral epic. In truth,
while both conlation and expansion occurred, the Mahābhārata tradition was extremely
conservative, as Sukthankar records: “Taking away something from the received text of the
Mahābhārata and passing it of as the original work is a thing categorically diferent from
adding something to it. To add small details here and there, embellishing and amplifying the
original, would be merely a gentle and lowly service ad majorem gloriam dei. Even long pieces
may sometimes be added, if they are actually found in other Mahābhārata manuscripts;
and occasionally, even if they are not found in the current manuscripts, provided there is
at least oral tradition to support their claims.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lii. No evidence
exists that the Brahmans, at any time, removed anything once it had acquired scriptural sanction. The idea
that the Brahmans savagely and vindictively removed from the text everything reminiscent
155
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 155
of former Kṣatriya supremacy is a fantasy emerging from the German scholars’ Protestant
anticlericalism. See the next but one note.
64 Contamination from an oral source is required to posit an oral epic that is the source of that
contamination. Once the existence of this source is granted, a Brahmanic redaction is required
to explain why we ind no evidence for it (beyond the passages asserted to be remnants of it). If
contamination from an oral source cannot be demonstrated, we have reason neither to assume
an oral epic nor its destruction at the Brahmans’ hands.
65 A reconstruction of the thesis’s origins is beyond the scope of the present book. For complete
sources and translations, see Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee, The Nay Science: A History of
German Indology (New York: Oxford University Press, 2014), chapters 1–2 . We mention some key
names here, however. The irst person to assert that the Brahmans’ aim was “to turn the heroic
book [Heldenbuch] into a tool of indoctrination about the gods, laws and duties” was Christian
Lassen. Lassen added, “It is in the nature of their [social] position and can also be deduced
from various provisions of their legal code that the Indian priestly caste had a clear awareness
of the means suitable for securing it lasting dominance over the minds of the remaining folk.
It therefore cannot surprise us that we ind epic poetry being used as a tool of an addiction to
spiritual domination. […] There was no more suitable means of raising the warrior caste in
the priestly spirit than linking instruction about religious and social laws to the narratives that
already enjoyed general approval. That such an intention was realized in the diaskeusis of the
Mahâbhârata is clear to me.” Christian Lassen, “Beiträge zur Kunde des indischen Alterthums
aus dem Mahâbhârata I: Allgemeines über das Mahab̄ har̄ata,” Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes
1 (1837): 83 and 86. Thereafter, Goldstücker, reviewing Lassen’s Indische Alterthumskunde, 4 vols.
(Bonn and Leipzig: H. B. Koenig, 1847– 61), gave the thesis canonical status. “The groundwork
of the poem, as mentioned before, is the great war between two rival families of the same kin;
it occupies the contents of about 24,000 verses. This, however, was overlaid with episodical
matter of the most heterogeneous kind. […] Nor was this merely [a] matter of accident in the
sense in which such a term might vaguely be used. A record of the greatest martial event of
ancient India would have emphatically been claimed as the property of the second or military
caste, the Kshattriyas. […] But such an exaltation of kingly splendour and of the importance of
the military caste, would as naturally threaten to depress that of the irst or Brahmanical caste.
Brahmans, therefore, would endeavour to become the arrangers of the national epos; and as the
keepers of the ancestral lore, as the spiritual teachers and guides, as priestly diplomatists, too,
they would easily succeed in subjecting it to their censorship. […] It became thus the aim of the
Brâhmanas to transform the original legend of the great war into a testimony to the superiority
of their caste over that of the Kshattriyas. And this aim was efected not only by the manner
in which the chief story was told, but also by adding to the narrative all such matter as would
show that the position and might of a Kshattriya depends on the divine nature and favour
of the Brâhmana caste.” Theodor Goldstücker, “Hindu Epic Poetry: The Mahâbhârata,” The
Westminster Review, n.s., 33 (1868): 388– 89. The thesis survived into the twentieth century and
shaped plans for a critical edition. Winternitz, one of the collaborators on the Mahābhārata
critical edition, wrote: “We know that literary activity in ancient India lay most often in the
hands of the priests, the Brahmans. We saw how they brahmanized the old, popular magical
chants of the Atharvaveda and how they confounded the alien, indeed, antagonistic philos-
ophy of the Upanisạ ds with their priestly wisdom. The more beloved and popular the heroic
ballads became, the greater the Brahmans’ interest in gaining power over this epic poetry must
have been. They knew how to confound this originally purely worldly poetry with their own
religious compositions and their worthless theological- priestly knowledge. The result was that
legends about the gods, mythological narratives of Brahmanic origin but also, to a great extent, didactic
segments concerning Brahmanic philosophy and ethics and Brahmanic law entered, were incorporated
into, the Mahābhārata. For this priestly caste, the popular epic provided a welcome means to
disseminate their own teachings and thus to strengthen and to consolidate their power and
156
156 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
their inluence. They were the ones who inserted all the numerous sagas and legends (itihāsas)
that recount the wonders of the famous seers of the primordial age, the Rṣịs, the ancestors of
the Brahmans— how through sacriice and asceticism they gained terrifying power not only
over humans but also over the gods and how, when angered, they could bring down lords and
nobles, indeed, even divine kings. But the Mahābhārata was too much a book of the people,
too much the property of other social groups, especially of the warrior caste that it could really
ever become a Brahmanic work or the property of some Vedic school. Indeed, it was not the
Veda- knowing, learned Brahmans who participated in expanding the Mahābhārata— hence
the strikingly poor knowledge about the true Brahmanic theology and science of sacriice— but
the Purohitas, priests who, like the sūtas (bards), were in the kings’ service and thus came into
closer contact with the epic poetry. This less learned priestly class was the one, too, that later
served as temple priests at the famous cult centers and pilgrimage sites most often dedicated to
the gods Visṇ ụ or Śiva and preoccupied themselves with cultivating the local sagas associated
with such places as well as with the legends concerning the gods Visṇ ụ and Śiva. As we saw,
this transpired mainly in the Purānạ s but also in the Mahābhārata into which numerous local
sagas and myths about Visṇ u
̣
and Śiva composed in the style of the Puran̄ a
̣
s as well as puran̄ a
̣
- like cosmologies,
geographic lists, and genealogies found their way.” Winternitz, Geschichte der indischen Litteratur, vol. 1,
265– 66 (all emphasis Winternitz’s).
66 Compare the contributions in David C. Greetham, ed., Scholarly Editing: A Guide to Research
(New York: Modern Language Association of America, 1995).
67 As Contini observes, “The ‘best’ manuscript is never a completely ‘good’ witness: the irreg-
ular quantitative distribution of its ‘goodness’ or certainty, for which only imperfect graphic
representations have been suggested to date, is the foundation of the composite edition, which
is obviously the symbolic projection of a tension towards a comparatively even level of cer-
tainty against the axiologic discontinuity ofered by ‘reality’ when this is critically questioned.”
Gianfranco Contini, “La critica testuale come studio di strutture (1971),” in Frammenti di ilologia
romanza: Scritti di ecdotica e linguistica (1932– 1989), vol. 1, ed. Giancarlo Breschi (Florence: Edizioni
del Galluzo, 2007), 69 (Pugliatti’s translation). Identifying and sourcing “better” readings from
other parts of the tradition is therefore a perfectly legitimate endeavor. One can also, where
necessary, contest editorial choices. But as we saw in the previous section, the Indologists
did not actually argue from readings. Rather, they merely identiied passages they considered
“Kṣatriya” in origin. They neither asked whether their readings were good as readings nor
how, assuming that the passages were original, they (that is, their readings) could have avoided
deterioration. Neither the goodness of a reading nor its attestation from the tradition should
be an argument against its potentially “Brahmanic” character.
68 As we surmised in Adluri and Bagchee, The Nay Science, 391 (italics in original): “German
Indology thus sees itself not merely as learning and collecting objective knowledge as in the
case of natural sciences. It is more: the German Indologist directly intervenes in history and
changes it. On the one hand, Indians are to be shown to be at the mercy of the tyranny of
their misshapen, lecherous, and fantastical gods. Even more urgently, they are to be shown as
being subject to the tyranny of priestly authority. Texts need to be puriied of Brahmanical
interpolations and metaphysical speculations. Freedom on a political and cultural level,
in this idiom, can only be secured when the task of securing texts coincides with purifying
them. Thus, we have seen in the third chapter the profuse enthusiasm with which German
Indologists vied with each other to ind excuses to dissect the Gītā. If only Brahmanical and
bhakti aspects were removed, Indians, as brethren in the world humanitarian project, could
stand up as good, free Kṣatriyas, interpreted here to mean as good Prussian soldiers. Or very
nearly so.”
69 As clariied in Chapter 1, Textgeschichte is inaccurately translated as “history of the text.” It
refers, rather, to an a priori racial and anti- Semitic history created from the texts to conirm a
Protestant view of history.
157
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 157
70 We already saw that the thesis of an original heroic epic originated with Christian Lassen,
the father of racial anti- Semitism. In later years, the thesis played a crucial role in his ideas
about the “Semitic” and the “Indo-G ermanic” races. Lassen writes: “History is evidence
that the Semites lacked the harmonious balance of all psychic powers through which the
Indo- Germans became preeminent. […] The Semite cannot separate the relationship of
the world to man in general from the relationship of the world to his own ‘I.’ He cannot
represent ideas in the mind in pure objectivity. His way of looking at things is subjective and
egotistical. His poetry is lyrical [and] hence subjective. His spirit expresses its joy and its pain,
its love and its hatred, its admiration and its scorn. […] Even if he expands his horizon it is
only to represent his tribe as an individual over against other tribes. […] He is unsuccessful
at [creating] epic because here the ‘I’ of the poet recedes before the object [and] even less at
dramatic works, which demand that the poet shed his personality even more completely. [In
contrast,] the Indo- Germans possess, alongside the lyrical, also the other genres of poetry.
They alone produced a national drama. They alone produced the great heroic poems
[Heldengedichte] that relect the great deeds of antiquity handed down in the legend in glori-
ied form, that present the entire worldview of the spirit of a people [Volksgeistes] to us and
are present as the result of the poetic efort of an entire people. The Semite is lacking in the
material of the epic, but not the saga, which he poetically ornaments and develops but does
not combine into larger cycles and, instead, preserves in his memory as primordial history.”
Christian Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde, vol. 1: Geographie und die älteste Geschichte (Bonn: H.
B. Koenig, 1847), 414–1 5.
71 See Bigger, “The Normative Redaction of the Mahābhārata,” 20: “The assumption that there
was an archetype, a single text from which all mss available have descended, is a conditio sine qua
non for any critical edition. It forms the basis of the Critical Edition of the MBh. In taking the
Critical Edition for what it is meant to be, we are accepting (silently or openly) the historical
existence of an archetype. Let me now take one step further: if we assume that the archetype
is a historical reality, what is this reality we are talking about? German philology has coined
the word Endredaktion (inal redaction) for the archetype of the MBh. I prefer ‘normative redac-
tion’ for the following reason: it does not suggest that this redaction was the last one that ever
occurred in the history of the MBh. Rather, it is most probably one among others. What makes
it so important is the fact that this redaction came to dominate the whole written tradition of
the Sanskrit MBh; it became normative for this part of the transmission. Thus, ‘normative
redaction’ is a itting name. We may now assume, as a working hypothesis, that the text of the
Critical Edition of the MBh is a reconstruction of this normative redaction. […] So far, I have
outlined a working hypothesis whose kernel—t he assumption that there was an archetype—
formed the basis of the Critical Edition of the MBh, even if the people working on it were not
always aware of this fact.”
72 See ibid. for Bigger’s attempted redeinition of the critical edition: “The critical edition is
just a kind of screenshot, a frozen moment in a loating tradition. That this tradition kept
on loating, even after the normative redaction, can be seen from the many *- and appendix-
passages which are found in the mss. The normative redaction is thus the earliest text we can
possibly establish with the methods of lower textual criticism, and it therefore provides the
starting point for higher textual criticism, the object of which is to explore the textual history
of the MBh before the normative redaction. It is, in the terminology of this volume, a stage
from which we can try to reconstruct further stages before and after it, as well as the transitions
between them.”
73 One solution is that the Brahmans identiied and eliminated the most prominent exemplars,
the ones most likely to generate rich traditions. But how could they have known this in
advance? It thus seems that the Brahmans must have eliminated all exemplars in existence
without exception, for any single survivor could have become the ancestor of a rich assemblage
of descendants.
158
158 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
74 Veronika von Büren, “La place du manuscrit Ambr. L 99 sup. dans la transmission des
Étymologies d’Isidore de Séville,” in Nuove ricerche su codici in scrittura latina dell’Ambrosiana, Atti del
Convegno Milano, 6– 7 ottobre 2005, ed. Mirella Ferrari and Marco Navoni (Milan: Vita e Pensiero,
2007), 43– 44.
75 A good example is Winternitz. A comparison of his “philology” with Von Büren’s is instruc-
tive. Unlike Von Büren, who argues from observed facts about the scribes’ practice, Winternitz
uses the epic’s diversity of contents to argue for a multiplicity of authors. And whereas Von
Büren seeks to reconstruct the transmission of the Etymologies, Winternitz focuses on an a
priori and merely hypothetical history of development of the epic as it allegedly arose from
Vedic, pre- Vedic and Brahmanic sources. His work is thus, at best, a contribution to bib-
lical criticism and its methods of source criticism (Quellenkritik) rather than an objective and
secular textual criticism. “Thus, even what we can call the ‘genuine epic’ [eigentliche Epos]
is, as it has come down to us, assuredly not the work of a single poet. Even this ‘core’ of the
Mahābhārata is no longer the ancient heroic poem. Rather, the latter is contained in it in
highly diluted form. We saw that a horrendous quantity of the most disparate compositions
grew up around this core: heroic ballads from diferent circles of legends, Brahmanic mythic
and legendary compositions, ascetic poetry and doctrinal poems of all kinds comprising the
simplest ethical maxims to comprehensive philosophical poems, codiied books of law and
entire Purānạs. Whoever wishes to believe, along with the orthodox Indians or with Dahlmann,
that our Mahābhārata is the work of a single individual, must [also] assume that this man
was simultaneously a great poet and a miserable bungler, a wise man and an idiot, a brilliant
artist and a laughable pedant, to say nothing of the fact that this miracle worker would have
to be a knower and adherent of the most contrary religious views and the most contradic-
tory philosophical doctrines. Likewise, as concerns language, style and meter the Mahābhārata’s
constituent parts do not exhibit any uniformity. We can only speak in general terms of ‘epic
Sanskrit’ as the language of the popular epics. In reality, the language of the epic is older
in parts, that is, closer to ancient Indian of the Vedic prose compositions, than in others.
[…] As concerns style, we can only say in general terms that the epic is as yet far from the
so- called ‘Kāvya style,’ that is, the style of later poetry, which is characterized by an excessive
use of ornaments (alamkāras). But passages that already suggest this Kāvya style are not
lacking. Along with them, we ind portions composed in the naïve style of the old Itihāsas
such as are narrated in the Brāhmaṇas and Upaniṣads, whereas in numerous other passages
the careless Purāṇa style dominates. As concerns meter, the śloka that developed out of the
old anuṣṭubh is the epic meter par excellence. But older and later forms exist of this śloka
and all of them are present in the Mahābhārata. Further, our epic also contains old prose
sections, whose prose is occasionally rhythmic, alternating with strophes. Likewise, both the
older form, which still resembles the Vedic meter, and more recent forms of the triṣṭubh meter
occur frequently in the Mahābhārata, though the śloka is nearly 20 times more common.
Indeed, we also encounter individual examples of the artistic verse forms of classical Sanskrit
poetry already in the Mahābhārata. Thus everything indicates that the Mahābhārata does not
have a uniform origin but consists of older and more recent sections belonging to diferent
centuries. Content and form equally conirm that some parts of the Mahābhārata trace back
to the period of the Veda, whereas others must be contemporary with the late productions
of Purāṇic literature.” Winternitz, Geschichte der indischen Litteratur, vol. 1, 392– 94 (all emphasis
Winternitz’s).
76 The translators of the irst complete English translation of Isidore’s Etymologies note, “To
get an idea of what a seventh- century Irish monk, or a lecturer at a cathedral school in
the eleventh century, or an Italian poetry of the fourteenth century, or a lexicographer of
the sixteenth century [that is to say, almost anyone except a German professor from the
nineteenth century] could learn from the Etymologies, one might pick a bit of lore from each
159
RECONSTRUCTING THE SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION 159
of the twenty books in which the work has come own to us,” and then they list the following
examples:
• Caesar Augustus used a code in which he replaced each letter with the following letter of
the alphabet, b for a, etc. (I.xxv.2).
• Plato divided physics into four categories: arithmetic, geometry, music and astronomy (II.
xxiv.4).
• The term cymbal derives from the Greek words for “with” and “dancing,” sun and bala (III.
xxii.12).
• A physician needs to know the Seven Liberal Arts of Grammar, Rhetoric, Dialectic,
Arithmetic, Geometry, Music, and Astronomy (IV.xiii.1– 4).
• In ancient times execution by sword was preferred as speedier (V.xxvii.35).
• Architects use green Carystean marble to panel libraries, because the green refreshes weary
eyes (VI.xi.2).
• Esau had three names, meaning “red” (for the stew he made), “bloody” (for his complexion)
and “hairy” (VII.vi.33– 34).
• Aristotle says that Zoroaster, the irst magician, composed 2 million verses (VIII.ix.1).
• A soldier (miles) is so- called because once there were 1,000 (mille) in one troop (IX.iii.32).
• The word for a garrulous person (garrulus) derives from the name of the constantly
chattering bird the jackdaw (graculus) (X.114).
• In the womb, the knees (genua) are pressed against the face, and help to form the eye sockets
(genae); hence their name (XI.i.108).
• The ibis purges itself by spewing water into its anus with its beak (XII.vii.33).
• Because of its brightness, lightning reaches the eyes before thunder reaches the ears (XIII.
viii.2).
• Gaul is so named from the whiteness of its people, for “milk” in Greek is gala (XIV.iv.25).
• Minerva is “Athena” in Greek; she is reputed to be the inventor of many arts because var-
ious arts, and philosophy itself, consider the city of Athens their temple (XV.i.44).
• Amber is not the sap of the poplar, but of pine, because when burned it smells like pine
pitch (XVI.viii.6).
• An altar was dedicated in Roma to Stercutus, who brought the technique of dunging
(stercorare) ields to Italy (XVII.i.3).
• The battering ram takes its name “ram” from its character, because it butts walls (XVIII.
xi.1).
• The women of Arabia and Mesopotamia wear the veil called theristrum even today as a
protection from heat (XIX.xxv.6).
• Wine (vinum) is so called because it replenishes the veins (vena) with blood (XX.ii.2).
The Etymologies of Isidore of Seville, trans. Stephen A. Barney, W. J. Lewis, J. A. Beach and
Oliver Berghof (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 3. We shudder to think
what an Indologist such as Winternitz would have done with the Etymologies. Most likely, he
would have decided that because these things are not considered knowledge in his time, they
could not be knowledge and therefore one individual could impossibly have compiled them.
77 See Jacques Fontaine, Isidore de Séville: genése et originalité de la culture hispanique au temps des Wisigoths
(Turnhout: Brepols, 2000). See also the collected essays in Jacques Fontaine, Tradition et actualité
chez Isidore de Séville (London: Variorum, 1988).
78 This is why in Appendix 17 we turn to the commentarial tradition. Unlike the German
Indologists, the indigenous commentators were always aware of the intellectual universe within
which the Mahābhārata locates itself. They not only took its claim to encyclopedic wisdom
seriously; they also forged intertextual connections between the Mahābhārata and other works.
The Indologists dismissed the commentators’ views as the opinion of “orthodox” (strenggläubig)
Indians and claimed they were replacing it with historically accurate scholarship, but, in fact,
160
160 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
it was precisely the Indians who were historical and the Germans who were motivated by a
religious, that is to say, iconoclastic frenzy.
79 In service of their Lutheran anti-J udaic and anti- rabbinic narratives, the German scholars not
only disregarded the work itself; they also disregarded everything we know about the Indian tra-
dition. Contrary to their claim about a separate heroic and/o r bardic tradition alongside the
Brahmanic tradition, literary transmission in India has always been in the Brahmans’ hands.
Moreover, contrary to their charge of reckless innovation, the Brahmanic tradition has always
been remarkably conservative. It represents a single unbroken tradition of exegesis and com-
mentary. The Indologists’ insistence on an “epic” tradition in contradistinction to the Vedic is
especially puzzling when one recalls that the Mahābhārata’s self- proclaimed title, itihāsa purān ̣a,
is a Vedic genre, occurring for the irst time in Atharvaveda 15.6.11. The Brāhmaṇas pro-
vide for the narration of itihāsa and purān ̣a narratives between certain rites (see, for example,
Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 11.5.6– 7 and 14.5.4 and 10). Chāndogya Upaniṣad 7.1.2, 7.1.4, 7.2.1
and 7.7.1 and Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.4.10 also refer to itihāsapurān ̣a. Chāndogya Upaniṣad
7.1.2 speciically adds that the itihāsapurān ̣a is pañcama veda, the ifth Veda.
161
162
The irst few folios of the oldest extant manuscript of the Ādiparvan (formerly in the collection of the Rajaguru
Pandit Hemraj and now in the National Archives Kathmandu; accession number NAK 5/ 356)
Source: Reproductions courtesy of the Staatsbibliothek, Berlin (A 28– 5 in the digital repository of the Staatsbibliothek)
newgenrtpdf
163
Chapter Three
CONFUSIONS REGARDING
CLASSIFICATION
The editorial formula of adopting the base ms. unless there are manifest errors actually leads to a reconstructive
edition, but without the application to this reconstruction of a method capable of dealing with the dynamics of
variants and accounting for them in the edition.1
— Lino Leonardi, “Il testo come ipotesi”
Classiication: Typological and Genealogical
Many criticisms of the Mahābhārata critical edition arise from a misunderstanding about how editors clas-
sify manuscripts, how they determine iliation and how they reconstruct—v ia eliminating either the readings
of witnesses or entire witnesses— the archetype. Crucially, arguments for diferent classes of manuscripts (or
entirely new “recensions”) are based on the erroneous assumption that because a group of manuscripts lacks
certain passages characteristic of other manuscripts, the former constitute a family, even though the dichotomy
is merely typological, not genealogical, and as yet no iliation has been established between the manuscripts so
separated.
The problem is not simply that, misled by their conidence in their ability to recover an
“original,” German Mahābhārata scholars extended textual criticism beyond its legit-
imate domain. Rather, they had not understood its basic principles, namely, that the
editor must start with the manuscript evidence and cannot make inferences beyond what
the evidence warrants. In their eagerness to participate in the “critical” undertaking
now under way—a reconstruction of the Mahābhārata that would refute Indian views
of the text as an encyclopedic work of ethics, law and philosophy2— they neglected to
familiarize themselves with the basic steps of textual criticism. Indeed, as we see in this
chapter, they failed to grasp even “the fundamental principle of textual criticism,”3 the
principle by which iliation is determined.
Recall that the crux of Andreas Bigger’s argument for the critical edition as a “norma-
tive redaction” was his thesis that “Ñ4 […] could be related with Ś1 and K0– 3 and con-
stitute a recension together with them.” In that case, he argued, “there is a possibility that
the textual passages mentioned earlier [App. 1, nos. 63, 75, 80, 81 and 85] were originally
contained in the normative redaction,” but “lost in this recension.”4 Bigger concluded
that this “would overturn the previous maxim ‘short equals old,’ ” but it would permit us
to “come closer to the normative redaction’s actual form.”5 Bigger’s reason for hypoth-
esizing that Ñ4 constituted a “recension” with Ś1 and K0–3 was that “all these passages
are not attested in the manuscripts Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4.”6 He conceded that Ñ4 “appears
not to belong to this group on the basis of the Schriftartenprämisse [sic].” However, he
164
164 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
continued, “this [principle] has lost its unimpeachability with Grünendahl’s discussion”7
(the reference is to Reinhold Grünendahl’s “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata-
Handschriften”), and from this he concluded, as we saw earlier, that Ñ4 could be related
with Ś1 and K0– 3. Bigger fails to realize that this dichotomy is “merely typological, not
genealogical.”8 As yet, he has only sorted the manuscripts into two groups—a n interpo-
lated and a non- interpolated group— but “in the genealogical sense he has not yet shown
that the uninterpolated manuscripts form an ordo, classis, or familia.”9 He has not shown
that the manuscripts that do not feature the interpolation are related through a relation-
ship of descent. Further, he does not realize that the absence of the same passages from
two or more manuscripts is not evidence of their closer relation,10 since this can only be
established by considering their shared corruptions rather than readings.11 Jacques Froger
writes:
The method known as the “common error method” reconstructs the genealogy of the
manuscripts by taking as the sign of a common origin, not just the common characteristics
(internal or external), nor the common readings (good or bad), but only the erroneous
readings. Its governing principle is thus, “common errors entail a common origin.”12
For Bigger to fulill his claim that Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 constitute a recension, he must
show they have common errors, which permits us to infer one or more, more or less
mediate ancestors, but he does not address this at all. Rather, his sole argument for
hypothesizing that the six manuscripts have a common ancestor more recent than
either N or θ is, as he says, that certain passages are “not attested” in all of them,13
even though this criterion neither permits him to establish iliation nor— once ili-
ation has been established on the basis of shared corruptions—i s it of any use in
identifying “recensions.” Indeed, the term itself is used incorrectly, since, strictly
speaking, what he has is not a recension but a class of manuscripts identiied on the
basis of not featuring a set of passages found in the remaining manuscripts. In other
words, he has committed the error of calling “β everything that in reality is merely
‘non-α .’ ”14
As this problem goes to the heart of the attempt to “place the classiication of the
[Mahābhārata] manuscript tradition on new foundations,”15 we focus at length on it
in this chapter. We irst show why the presence of shared corruptions is the “only truly
probative evidence”16 for iliation, before discussing how, using this principle, an editor
eliminates either individual readings or entire manuscripts to reach the archetype. The
remainder of this chapter deals with several confusions regarding classiication found in
the work of Grünendahl.17
Determining Filiation
Filiation can be established only through shared errors, which permit us to identify two manuscripts as more
closely related than others of that family (all of which will contain the same text, but not the same errors,
which are unique to this branch of the tradition). It is hence incorrect to establish iliation on the basis of shared
readings, as they identify the two manuscripts only as members of the family chosen for study (manuscripts
165
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 165
of the Mahābhārata), but do not permit us to deine them as a speciic branch of that family—m anuscripts
descended from the irst source of the error or errors.
Even though the principle that iliation can only be established using shared innovations
is the axiomatic foundation of textual criticism,18 it is frequently misunderstood in prac-
tice.19 In the irst chapter, we noted that Lachmann’s method is a mechanical process in
that it relies on “simple rules and calculations of probability”20 to determine the relations
of iliation between manuscripts. As Peter F. Dembowski notes,
In the case of a work extant in several manuscripts, the editor strove to establish a rigorous
classiication. Ideally, this classement des manuscrits would disclose the generic relationships
between the manuscripts as well as their relationships to the hypothetical original (O).
Lachmannian classiication was based on the crucial idea of common error, so much so that
the method has often (and rightly) been called ‘the common error method.’ Simply put, this
method assumes that two or more manuscripts will not contain the same error unless they
descend from the same ‘ancestor.’ The manuscripts that share the common error are said to
constitute the same family.21
The basic idea behind the method is the “assumption that the errors are, by deinition,
corruptions of a ‘good’ ancestor—t hat is to say, manuscript iliation became apparent.”22 The
notion that manuscript iliation becomes apparent when one looks at the inherited errors
of manuscripts— these “fossils” of the process of textual transcription, as Paul Maas calls
them— underpins the critic’s practice. Since no scribe would intentionally copy errors
from a source text (although he will copy passages from it), if his manuscript contains all
of the former’s errors, plus at least one more unique error, then we can infer that the irst
manuscript must have been his source.23 Crucially, this means iliation cannot be demon-
strated directly from the fact that the manuscript also contains these passages found in a
second, for the same passages could also have occurred in a third, or a fourth and so on.
Rather, to establish iliation, we must demonstrate that this manuscript could not contain
these errors unless it had this source (for the errors, especially if they are signiicant, are
likely unique to this source). Let us consider some examples.
In the section titled “Leitfehler” (errores signiicativi) of his Textkritik, Maas noted: “The
dependence of a witness from another cannot, as a rule, be directly demonstrated but
only via ruling out independence.”24 Of the two types of errores signiicativi he listed, the
so- called Trennfehler (errores separativi) acquire especial signiicance, since a witness’s inde-
pendence against another can only be established if the irst (A) contains an error not
found in the second (B) and this error could not have been corrected through conjecture
in the period that separates the irst from the second.25 However, this only establishes B’s
independence against A, since A could be descended from B. Consequently, to establish
mutual independence, we must ind a corresponding separative error in B. In contrast, the
circumstance that A contains errors not found in B does not justify the conclusion that
these errors existed in a hypothetical source text α. To establish this, we require a second
witness B that also includes them. If we can demonstrate that it is unlikely that A and
B arrived at the errors independently— that is, that the errors are Bindefehler or errores
166
166 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
conjunctivi— and neither is A descended from B nor B from A (by establishing separative
errors in both), we can assume that A and B inherited them from a common ancestor α.
These relationships can be expressed graphically as follows:
(a) A (b) B (c) α(lostarchetype)
| | /\
B A A B
Type (a) can be excluded only if we ind a separative error in A against B, while type
(b) can be excluded only if we ind a separative error in B against A. If we ind a sepa-
rative error in A against B and one in B against A and at least one conjunctive error in
both, then and only then is type (c) demonstrated. These diagrams illustrate how pre-
cisely mathematical textual criticism is. Although inferential, the method is rigorous,
permitting not just any inference but only valid ones—i nferences that must be true
because all other alternatives can be excluded.26
Why can a common text or common readings not establish iliation? The answer
can be expressed in terms of the conlicting aims of the two operations or, rather, of the
redundancy of the principle of common readings after its irst application:
Froger seems to have been translating “identity of reading implies identity of origin,” but he
was wrong to call it an “illogisme,” because witnesses that share true readings owe them to
the original just as much as witnesses that share errors owe them to a corrupt descendant of
the original. Not only, in fact, is the principle sound, but it does an important piece of work
not done by the narrower principle about “la communauté des fautes”: it identiies the family
whose members require classiication, the family of witnesses to a particular text. […] The
principle about shared errors is merely an adaptation of the broader principle to the easily
overlooked and seldom controversial fact that one family has already been assembled: the
family selected for study. Why is it a fallacy to apply the broader principle within that family?
Textual critics usually reply that original readings may survive anywhere in a tradition, which
is true but not obviously to the point. It is a fallacy precisely because the principle has already
been used for deining that family. Alternatively, it is not a fallacy as long as one remembers
that the families now to be deined are sections of that family.27
In our case, this means after we apply the principle the irst time to establish that Ś1,
K1– 6, Ñ1– 4 and so forth are members of the family of Mahābhārata manuscripts, we
cannot apply it again to deine more speciic families. For this, we require the speciic
readings that originated in just this branch of the family, which, from the perspective of
the archetype, can only be corruptions of the original or errors. Thus, we would have to
examine innovations that arose in speciic branches of the tradition (for example, in Ś or
K or Ñ) and, from these, we might conclude that Ś and K are related through a more
recent ancestor (ν) or that Ś, K and Ñ are related through a more remote ancestor (N).28
The circumstance that some manuscripts in these groups do not share certain features
does not prove them related,29 because to the extent that these features are innovations
in other branches of the tradition, they say nothing about Ś, K and Ñ other than
that they are conservative and to the extent that these features are innovations in these
167
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 167
branches— hypothetically accepting Bigger’s theory that Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 dropped the
interpolation— they could have occurred independently.
Eliminating Witnesses
A comparison of the constituted text with variant readings or passages rejected from it will not permit us to
establish an earlier stage of the transmission. At most, we might establish that a reading rejected by the editor
is preferable and restore it in our text, but this text will still be, by deinition, the archetype and not a supra-
archetype of the kind critics think they can produce by randomly selecting passages from the appendices (on the
grounds of their presumed “Kṣatriya” origins).
Even if we accept Bigger’s argument that Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 together constitute a recen-
sion, it is not clear what this argument achieves. For, in any case, as the editor proceeds
up the stemma, eliminating witnesses or individual readings and unifying the branches
of the tradition, he would have to make a decision between the reading of this branch
(which does not contain the appendix passages 63, 75, 80, 81 and 85) and the other
branch (which does contain them). Bigger would presumably opt for the inlationary
tradition’s reading, since he argues that “there is a possibility that the textual passages
mentioned earlier could have been lost in this recension,”30 but this argument sufers
from petitio principii. The real question is: how is the editor to adjudicate between two sets
of readings, given that he does not know which of them is correct?
The critical edition eliminates these passages as interpolations from the constituted
text on the presumption that scribes added material but never consciously omitted any-
thing. Bigger’s argument relies not only on restoring material from the critical apparatus
to the constituted text but also on comparisons between this material and the consti-
tuted text to make inferences about the heroic oral epic. This is misguided because while
we can compare the readings of one or more manuscripts and use this to challenge
the editor’s inferences, no comparison of the constituted text with one of the witnesses
used to constitute it will return us to an earlier state of the tradition. It is easy to under-
stand why the inference is erroneous: if a comparison of the archetype θ with one of its
witnesses led us to a supra- archetype θ′, then the comparison of the supra- archetype θ′
with one of its witnesses or with the archetype θ itself, which in this case acts as one of the
witnesses for θ′, would lead us to a supra- supra- archetype θ′′, and so on.
The principle that one cannot consider the archetype as a text on par with its
witnesses is not new: it is a special instance of eliminatio codicum descriptorum. In the most
concise formulation of the principle by Maas it states “that a witness is worthless (that
is, worthless as a witness), when it derives purely from an extant source text or one that
can be reconstructed without its help. Should one succeed in demonstrating this of one
witness (cf. § 8), the witness must be eliminated (eliminatio codicum descriptorum).”31 To explain
the principle, Michael D. Reeve ofers a simpliied bipartite stemma αCH with one
subarchetype γ. In this simpliied stemma (Figure 31), CEH have “no authority against
α.” However, “if […] someone were to ask […] ‘can any of CEH be eliminated?’, the
answer would be not ‘yes, all of them, because they all descend from α,’ but ‘no’ or
‘only if we have α’ or ‘it depends on the readings.’ ”32 To illustrate these four instances,
168
168 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
α α
γ γ
C E H C E H
appellatur nominatur vocatur appellatur vocatur vocatur
α α
γ γ
C E H C E H
appellatur appellatur vocatur appellatur appellaturappellatur
Figure 31 Eliminatio
Source: Reproduced from Reeve, “Reconstructing Archetypes: A New Proposal and an Old Fallacy,” 328.
Reeve proposes four stemmata: in the irst, C has the reading appellatur, and E and H the
readings nominatur and vocatur, respectively; in the second, C reads appellatur and E and
H both read vocatur; in the third, C and E read appellatur, but H reads vocatur; and in the
fourth, CEH all read appellatur.
Of these four, in the irst “there is no purely stemmatic way of determining what
reading γ or α had” (we have three distinct readings, any of which may be correct), with
the consequence that “no elimination is possible, whether of a reading or a witness.”
In the second, “γ plainly had vocatur, so that elimination is possible, whether of EH or
of their reading vocatur (vocatur— that is, as the reading of EH, not as a reading alto-
gether).” In other words, if both branches of the bipartite stemma EH have the identical
reading, the reading of their source text can be considered secure (vocatur). In this case,
γ is secured and EH can be eliminated.33 However, this does not mean we can eliminate
vocatur as a reading, since we now have a bipartite stemma Cγ, where one branch has
the reading appellatur and the other vocatur. As hyparchetypes, it is impossible to decide
between the two on stemmatic grounds. Once one grasps the principle of eliminatio
codicum descriptorum, it is easy to follow the remaining diagrams. In the third of Reeve’s
examples, α and γ “plainly had appellatur,” “so that elimination is again possible, not
just of H or its reading vocatur but also of CγE or their reading vocatur.” The agreement
between C and E tells us that the original reading in α must have been appellatur and that
this reading descended via γ to E but not to H, which contains the erroneous reading
vocatur. Hence, both the witness H and its reading vocatur can be eliminated (eliminatio
lectionum singularium). But since the text of α also now counts as secure (its reading must
be appellatur), CγE can be eliminated. Finally, in the fourth and last example, “α and γ
even more plainly had appellatur,”34 so we can eliminate both the manuscripts CγEH and
their reading appellatur.
169
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 169
Ascent up a stemma thus often, though not always, lets us eliminate witnesses. The
point is not so much to establish the conditions under which eliminatio codicum descriptorum
is possible as to show that the comparison of a reconstructed archetype with its elimi-
nated witnesses is not going to tell us more about that archetype. It certainly is not going
to permit us to go beyond the archetype. Descent back down a stemma once we have
reconstructed the archetype is not going to tell us more about it, and if we compare the
reading of α in Reeve’s third example with H, we will not be any the wiser for it. It would
be erroneous to claim that vocatur was the better reading all along, but this is exactly what
Bigger’s argument (and by extension the arguments of those who claim to ind evidence
for a heroic Kṣatriya epic via comparing the constituted text with its critical apparatus)
amounts to. In the remainder of this chapter, we look at how these two errors—a confu-
sion about iliation and a confusion about eliminatio— have led to calls to place the critical
edition “on new foundations” in the work of Grünendahl.35
The Argument from Brevity and the Argument from False Premises
In creating the critical edition, Sukthankar followed the evidence of the shortest witness, the Sá r̄ada ̄codex, and
reprinted the readings of this manuscript as his constituted text. However, as the Sá r̄ada ̄codex was not the shortest
witness (for the Nepal̄ı ̄manuscript Ñ4 is shorter by 63 passages), the critical edition must be begun anew.
Refutation of the argument: This conclusion would only be justiied if the editor actually reprinted the
readings of the Śāradā codex as his constituted text. In point of fact, he compared manuscripts of diferent
classes to reconstruct the reading of the archetype. He showed in several cases that the Śāradā codex itself
contained interpolations and additions. This means that what is decisive is not the length of the Śāradā codex
over the Nepālı ̄manuscript NAK 5/ 356, but whether passages in the constituted text exist, which are not
attested in the latter, something Grünendahl (who raises the objection) has not shown.
Grünendahl’s irst line of attack on the stemma comprises a pair of related arguments
that we call the argument from brevity and the argument from false premises. It is not so easy
to state the irst, for it sufers from the fallacy of complex question. At its simplest, the
argument from brevity can be stated as the view that the editor ought to base his recon-
struction on the shortest witness. Grünendahl’s formulation of the argument is more
complex. On one hand, he implies that this principle was adopted for the Mahābhārata
critical edition. On the other, he argues that it was incorrectly applied, for the witness
thought the shortest (Ś1) proved not to be the shortest. The argument from brevity thus
entails two separate claims, the irst of which rests on a misapprehension regarding tex-
tual criticism (reconstruction should be based on stemmatic logic), and the second of
which is demonstrably false (the critical edition is not based on the shortest manuscript).
Consequently, Grünendahl’s third claim (that the principle was incorrectly applied in the
critical edition) is also false. In fact, the only part of his argument that is true is that Ś1 is
not the shortest known witness, but as Sukthankar was the irst to point this out in 1939,
it is unclear what Grünendahl hopes to achieve.36
For the sake of clarity, in the following we reserve the designation “the argument
from brevity” for the irst part of Grünendahl’s tripartite argument, the view that the
editor ought to base his reconstruction on the shortest witness. In contrast, we desig-
nate the second and third parts—t he assumption that this was the principle adopted
170
170 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
for the Mahābhārata critical edition and the assumption that this principle was incor-
rectly applied in the critical edition—a s the “argument from false premises” (if the prin-
ciple was not adopted, the question of its correct or incorrect application is moot; hence
the third part also rests on false premises). It is important to disambiguate between the
diferent stages of the argument for, as we see in what follows, the persuasiveness of
Grünendahl’s case rests on his confusion of the two. His overarching conclusion that the
Mahābhārata critical edition must be begun anew using the Newārī manuscript Ñ4 as
the base appears persuasive to him only because of his misperception that the constituted
text is based on the shortest witness. Had he understood that the constituted text is based
on stemmatic logic, he would have seen that the critical edition already controlled for
the issues he raises. The discovery of a shorter manuscript will not signiicantly alter the
critical edition because the constituted text is already shorter than its shortest witnesses.
Precisely because it is shorter than any known witnesses, it permits us to identify the
expansions in these texts.
The argument from brevity irst occurs on page 107 of Grünendahl’s article. He
states: “among the manuscripts used [for the critical edition], the manuscript S1́ takes on a
preeminent role for Sukthankar.”37 He writes that “he [Sukthankar] justiied this less in
terms of its quality than in terms of its textual extent”38 and as evidence presents Table 1.
Initially, it is not clear what this table is supposed to demonstrate. Grünendahl explains
that in the irst row he lists what he calls the “pure textual additions” of the northern
recension,39 an expression he clariies as follows: “By pure textual additions I mean in the
following those star and appendix passages, which represent a factual increase of the text.”
He glosses this peculiar formulation as follows: “[passages] which thus do not merely ofer
another line or another verse in place of a line or a verse of the constituted text or insert
parts of the constituted text in another position.”40 According to his calculations, the northern
recension “exhibits 1021 pure textual additions,”41 and he further breaks them down into
Table 1 Grünendahl’s list of interpolations in the northern recension
Ñ1 Ñ2 Ñ3 Ñ4 Ś1 K0 K1 K2 K3 K4
total 316 422 267 87 (?) 250 150 201 277 518
Ś1 available 237 317 210 75 105 178 112 149 193 378
V1 B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6
379 380 318 408 387 408 404
270 282 225 303 286 299 300
Da1 Da2 Dn1 Dn2 Dn3 D1 D2 D3 D4 D5 D6 D7
416 393 492 494 501 446 441 430 573 446 348 335
309 291 356 359 364 324 330 253 399 360 232 231
Source: Reproduced from Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizerung von Mahābhārata-Handschriften,” 108–9.
171
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 171
“957 star passages listed in the footnotes and 64 textual passages listed in appendix I.”42
Already, it is not clear whether “pure” is meant to qualify “textual additions” or some
other expression of which it is a component, for surely it is one thing to speak of “pure
textual additions” and another to speak of “pure textual additions of manuscript x.”43 The
latter, if it is to have a meaning at all, must refer to the net expansion of manuscript x— that
is, the pure textual additions in the irst sense minus whatever the manuscript omits of the
constituted text, but Grünendahl does not consider this at all. He takes the number of
additions as representative of the text’s size, but this is to assume that all our manuscripts
reproduce perfectly the text of the archetype, which is a gross oversimpliication.44 He also
treats all additions as identical for the purposes of calculation even though the shortest
star passages are single- line insertions, whereas the longest appendix passage is 462 lines
(App. I, 114, inserted on a separate folio in D4, the only northern manuscript to feature
it). Clearly, then, treating all additions as representing an equivalent “factual increase in the
size of the text” is misleading and will produce erroneous results.
We do not even need to know the length of every passage to show this. Let us grant
the view that every addition counts as identical. We may assume a standard unit for this,
such as the number 1 (each addition represents an insertion of one line). In Grünendahl’s
table, an expansion of 430 lines in D3 stands opposed to an expansion of 573 lines in
D4, which is the same as saying that D4 is longer than D3 by 143 lines. We know of at
least one expansion (App. 1, 114) that it is not an insertion of one line. Substituting the
true igures for this passage we arrive at a igure of 1,034 for the expansion of D4 (573 –
1 + 462) and the diference between D4 and D3 is now not 143 lines, but 604 lines. Of
course, if we were to carry out the calculation consistently, D3 may have longer insertions
where D4 has shorter ones so that the igures for the two might once again approach each
other. But this already shows that treating additions as identical for the purposes of cal-
culation is a careless way of doing things: it misleads us not only about the true extent of
the witness texts but also about the true extent of interpolation. In Grünendahl’s table, a
less interpolated manuscript could easily appear more interpolated.45
The principle that the shorter reading is preferable (brevior lectio potior) is well known
in textual criticism, but it cannot be applied dogmatically. Whereas additional sentences
and phrases in manuscripts are as likely the additions of copyists as the author’s work,
this does not always hold. The additional passages may go back to a second edition of
the author’s work.46 In any case, as Martin L. West reminds us, “The quality of a man-
uscript can only be established by reading it. And when an opinion has been formed
on the quality of a manuscript, it can be used as a criterion only when other criteria
give no clear answer. […] Each variant must be judged on its merits before the balance
can be drawn and a collective verdict passed.”47 It is absurd to treat the shortest witness
as unfailingly accurate in each case. It may have additions of its own, as Sukthankar
demonstrated of the Ś āradā codex.48 Further, in asserting the argument from brevity,
Grünendahl overlooks a crucial point. The principle brevior lectio potior is part of the canon
of principles of the textual critic, but it is not the whole of that canon. It cannot replace the
need for recensio. Only the latter will permit us conidence in our judgments, because we
are now looking at the witness, even the shortest, in the context of the entire tradition. We
are not simply deducing from its relative shortness that it has the correct text but using its
172
172 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
length as one of the criteria in that comparison to assess its relative merit.49 Grünendahl goes
astray because he focuses exclusively on the question of “interpolations” and poses this
question in purely quantitative terms.50 But, in fact, it is not what is correctly transmitted
(treating interpolations as part of the text transmitted from the ancestor to the witnesses)
but the unique errors (errores signiicativi) each scribe introduces that permit us to deduce the
interrelationship between manuscripts.
Reeve notes that “there are still people who build stemmata not just on insigniicant
errors but on agreement in the truth,”51 but Grünendahl’s use of interpolations to estab-
lish families is even more problematic. He has yet to show that basing the reconstruction
on Ñ4 rather than Ś1 would lead to a signiicant alteration of the archetype. Doubtless
he thinks it would, but this is because he applies a false standard. According to him,
Sukthankar premised his reconstruction on the Ś āradā codex and he takes this princi-
pally, if not solely, to mean that Sukthankar looked to this text when deciding whether
to include or exclude interpolations. According to his calculations, Ś1 has a surplus of
63 “pure textual additions” over Ñ4, which fact he uses to insinuate that if the reconstruc-
tion had been based on Ñ4, the archetype would have been shorter by this amount. We
have already seen that the calculations are based on poor math: if all or even a signii-
cant portion of Ñ4’s insertions were longer than those of Ś1, the conclusion would not
hold. But the more serious problem concerns Grünendahl’s misguided belief that he has
shown something signiicant by showing that Ñ4 is shorter than Ś1 by a large amount,
namely, that this diference implies a similar reduction in the length of the archetype.
A look at the second part of his argument is revealing. After introducing the table,
he writes: “Because of the fragmentary nature of Ś1, its total number of interpolations
cannot be identiied: 329 additions of the northern recension correspond to missing parts
of this manuscript.”52 To circumvent the problem, he introduces the second row of his
table. This row, he says, only takes into consideration the 692 textual additions that corre-
spond to the extant parts of Ś1. He inds that 105 of these interpolations also occur in Ś1
and, of these 105, 14 interpolations “ ‘do not also occur in all versions’ [of the northern
recension!].”53 “However, it is remarkable that except for Ś1, all 14 additions are found
only in K1. This conirms not only the close connection between Ś1 and K1 as noted by
Sukthankar […] but also, I hold, justiies us in the assumption that the cell containing
a question mark in the list above, namely, the total number of textual additions in Ś1—
including those in the missing parts of the manuscript—i s probably in the same range
as that of K1.”54 From this, Grünendahl concludes, “even so the text available in Ś1
is signiicantly shorter than that in most of the other manuscripts.” “However,”—a nd
this is decisive for him—“ the title of ‘shortest known version’ unambiguously belongs to
another manuscript, namely, Ñ4.”
From this discussion and from a second table (which we discuss later on) it is clear
what Grünendahl hopes to show from these igures. He takes the additions in witness
texts as indicative of their excess length over the constituted text. He begins with the fact
that the critical edition lists 1,021 additions (whether or not we call them “pure” here
is irrelevant for the argument) and then reduces these to the 692 additions that he can
check against the Ś āradā codex. He then distributes these 629 additions across the 29
columns of his table (some repeatedly, since they are shared across witnesses) to arrive at
173
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 173
the number of passages each witness has in excess of the constituted text. From the fact
that Ñ4 has 87 additional passages as compared with Ś1, which has 150, he concludes
that Ñ4 is shorter than Ś1. So far he is on safe ground (ignoring for the moment the
problem with his identiication of number of additions with extent of addition), but
he also has not said anything that was not common knowledge. The function of these
inexact and misleading calculations cannot be to demonstrate Ñ4’s brevity. Rather, from
Grünendahl’s perspective, they are signiicant because they imply that the diference in
length between Ś1 and Ñ4 signiicantly afects the constituted text. Thus, he repeats
twice, “To be sure, Sukthankar himself conceded this [that Ñ4 is the shorter manuscript]
in his article, however he did not draw the consequences that would have resulted for
his editorial principles from this fact.”55 “He himself [Sukthankar] later corrected his
main argument, namely, that it [the Kaśmīrī version] was the shortest version, in favor
of Ñ4— however, without drawing the consequences that resulted from this fact for his
classiication of the manuscripts. For, when this claim can no longer be maintained, his
entire demonstration built upon it is beside the point.”56
What these “consequences” are can be easily gleaned. From Grünendahl’s table, it is
clear that he imagines that since Ñ4 is shorter than Ś1 by 63 insertions the constituted text
must contain an excess of 63 insertions over Ñ4. But this is not true! It would only be true
if in reconstructing the archetype Sukthankar had actually followed the argument from
brevity. In that case, he would have followed what he thought was the shortest text— as
Grünendahl claims he did, albeit incorrectly, since Ś1 is not the shortest manuscript. In
reality, of course, Sukthankar’s reconstruction is based on the stemma. In other words,
he has compared diferent manuscripts and manuscript classes to infer the reading of
their archetype. His method is additive rather than subtractive: he compares manuscripts
to see what is common to them and how readings were transmitted and corrupted over
time. He thus takes the reading of the archetype— the one that explains the others—
rather than taking one manuscript as his ideal and stripping away everything from the
others not contained in the former. Contrary to Grünendahl’s assertions, the constituted
text does not follow any one manuscript, shortest or otherwise. Grünendahl ought to
have seen this: his own table shows that Ś1 has additions over the constituted text!
That means what is decisive is not the diference in length of Ñ4 over Ś1 (– 63
insertions), but the diference in length of Ñ4 over the constituted text. This is something
Grünendahl has not calculated.57 He has not shown that Ñ4 is shorter than the consti-
tuted text, which would imply that certain passages have been included in the latter even
though they are not attested in one of its witnesses. He has in fact demonstrated the
opposite. His table clearly shows that Ñ4 is longer by 87 insertions than the constituted
text. The table also shows that the constituted text, as the archetypal text attested in
independent witnesses, is shorter than all known witnesses of the tradition— as it must be if it is
older than the latter and we know that the Mahābhārata was expanded over centuries.58
It is easy to see that the real source of these elementary errors is Grünendahl’s
misplaced faith in the argument from brevity. A simple comparison of four groups—
interpolations unique to Ś1, interpolations unique to Ś1 and K1, interpolations in Ś1
and K1 with other witnesses and interpolations in N without Ś1 and K159— shows how
Grünendahl imagines a reconstruction based exclusively on the principle brevior lectio
174
174 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Table 2 How Grünendahl imagines the process of constitution
Ś1 Ś1 and K1 Ś1 and K1 N
(unique (unique (with other (without ́1 and K1)
interpolations) interpolations) witnesses)
*374 *1735 App. 1, no. 331 App. 1, no. 63
*2161 App. 1, no. 58 App. 1, no. 75
App. 1, no. 118 App. 1, no. 80
App. 1, no. 81
App. 1, no. 85
Note: 1. Ś1 is missing for this passage.
potior might look. For the sake of simplicity, we restrict ourselves to the appendix passages,
though the argument is no diferent if we include the star passages as well.60 We have four
columns as shown in Table 2.
Following Grünendahl’s understanding of critical reconstruction, we would include
the passage *374 as it is present in the shortest text, which we have adopted as the norm
for the reconstruction. We would also include the passages *1735 and *2161, since they
too occur in Ś1 and the fact that they also occur in K1 is either incidental or at most ofers
further conirmation for them. We would also include the three appendix passages nos.
33, 58 and 118, even though they are found in other northern recension manuscripts.61
In fact, as can be seen from the table, once we invoke the argument from brevity, we can
exclude only one group of interpolations: those absent from Ś1 and K1.
The problem with the argument from brevity, then, is that it does not yield a crit-
ical principle for reconstruction, or, if it does, then only a very weak one, since it only
permits us to exclude the interpolations of the fourth column but not those of the irst
three. Basing a reconstruction on the shortest known witness is not a critical procedure,
for it presumes that the shortest witness contains the most authoritative text. This, how-
ever, need not be the case for several reasons.62 Even if we consider the shortest version
more authoritative than the others, this applies only to its total length and not to its indi-
vidual readings. Grünendahl goes astray because he presumes that the shortest version’s
readings have not sufered any degradation. From his perspective, it suices for the editor
to reprint this witness’s text (perhaps correcting obvious errors), but this is because he
focuses exclusively on interpolations rather than the readings. He does not see that it is
easier to notice and control for interpolations, especially the obvious interpolations found
in the Mahābhārata tradition, than it is to identify the changes to the reading of the arche-
type. From the nonspecialist’s perspective, the former appear far more signiicant. They
leap immediately to his eye, whereas to notice the presence of a likely hiatus that troubled
later copyists and led to various attempts at emendation requires a greater facility with the
language (as well as a thorough knowledge of the principles of textual criticism).
From the textual critic’s perspective, however, the small diferences in readings accu-
mulated over the course of centuries are more signiicant. They permit him to deduce
the genealogical relationships between manuscripts. If two manuscripts have two large
interpolations or one has a larger interpolation than the other, we cannot say anything
175
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 175
about their relationship simply by looking at the interpolations. Even if one manuscript
did not have the interpolation, we could not declare it the source of the interpolated one.
If the interpolation is obvious, the scribe of the shorter manuscript may have chosen
to ignore it. Alternatively, the interpolation may have been present only in a diferent
branch of the tradition, so that our scribe was unaware of it. Without a stemma, we
would not even be able to identify the interpolation as an interpolation: the larger man-
uscript may go back to a second edition of the text made by the author or the “interpo-
lation” may have been on a separate folio that was lost before our scribe made his copy.
Without looking at the passage in context and assessing the balance of probabilities, we
could never determine the true state of afairs.
Already, Grünendahl’s exclusive reliance on interpolation or, rather, lack of interpo-
lation as a criterion for choosing the best witness displays great uncertainty regarding
textual criticism. The problem is further compounded when he imputes the same mis-
guided view to Sukthankar and, furthermore, criticizes him for not correctly applying
the principle brevior lectio potior. He argues: “Since Sukthankar argues exclusively in terms
of quantity, he can really only elevate Ś1 to the norm in a quantitative respect. This
would correspond to his conviction that one—m anifestly in contrast to extent!— may not
constitute the text on the basis of individual manuscripts, indeed not even [on the basis of]
individual versions or recensions.”63 A few pages later, he repeats: “It is true of the constitutive
manuscripts [sic] in general what was already noted regarding Ś1: Sukthankar reaches
his decision in favor of Ś1 and the K group not on the basis of qualitative but rather on
the basis of quantitative aspects.”64 And again: “ν alone appears in general not to ofer a
suicient qualitative foundation for the constitution of the text.”65
Yet, as we have seen, the only person who looks at manuscripts in a purely quantita-
tive respect is Grünendahl. He is the one who coins the peculiar expression “pure textual
additions,” and he is the one who thinks that it is legitimate to look at additions only in
terms of whether they represent a “factual increase of the text.” He is the one who sets aside
the passages’ placement, whether they replace or repeat a part of the archetypal text, and
whether they alter the order of its passages.66 He is the one who thinks that all insertions,
regardless of their length, can be treated as the same for purposes of comparison. He is
the one who creates a misleading table where the number, not extent, of interpolations is
supposed to indicate a witness’s length. He is the one who does not look at readings in con-
text, trying to determine whether one can be derived from the other, but advocates a recon-
struction based on the shortest witness. He is the one who thinks the argument from brevity
ofers an adequate theoretical foundation for a critical edition and he is the one who thinks
that the discovery of a shorter witness must make a signiicant diference to the constituted
text. The notion that Sukthankar reconstructed the archetype on the basis of the extent— in
contrast to the content— of a single manuscript is Grünendahl’s own delusion.
A closer look at Grünendahl’s article shows that he has misunderstood a key phrase
in Sukthankar’s discussion of the Ś āradā codex. Describing the advantages of this man-
uscript, Sukthankar writes:
While it is the shortest extant version, it is a demonstrable fact that it contains relatively
little matter that is not found, at the same time, in all other versions of both recensions. It is clear,
176
176 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
therefore, that it must contain, relatively, less spurious matter than any other known version.
That is precisely the main reason why it is taken as the norm for this edition.67
Grünendahl repeats this exact sentence, which he appends to his discussion of why the
S ́āradā manuscript was chosen as the textus simplicior. He writes: “On the basis of his esti-
mate [of the length of the manuscript] he [Sukthankar] identiies S1́ as the ‘shortest known
version,’ as the textus simplicior that contains relatively little ‘that is not also found in all other
versions of both recensions.’ ” Thereafter, he presents his table of textual additions in the
manuscripts of the northern recension and, on the basis of these calculations, arrives at
the conclusion that “of these additions [Grünendahl means the 692 listed in the second
row] S1́ features 105, among them 14 whole additions, about which one can say along
with Sukthankar that they occur in S1́ but ‘not also in all other versions’ ” and then notes
parenthetically: “of the northern recension!” and he adds an exclamation for emphasis.
But while he repeats the phrase “not also in all other versions,” he completely inverts
its meaning. In Sukthankar’s text, the phrase is inserted to underscore that Ś1, though
signiicantly shorter than the other witnesses, is not an abridgement or a diferent branch
of the tradition. From the fact that the text of Ś1 coincides to a great extent with that
found in the other manuscripts, Sukthankar concludes that it must contain “relatively
less spurious matter.” This is, of course, why it was taken as the norm for this edition
(that is, because of its signiicant coincidence with the tradition, yet its comparatively
pure state). Grünendahl repeats the statement almost verbatim and the irst time he cor-
rectly understands the force of the qualiication. He notes that Ś1 was chosen as the
textus simplicior on the grounds that it “contains relatively little ‘that is not also found in all
other versions of both recensions.’ ” He correctly construes “not also found in all other
versions of both recensions” as referring to the fact that Ś1 has few unique additions of
its own. Yet, the second time, he completely misunderstands the force of the qualiica-
tion: this time he applies it to the interpolations and says that we can say of them “along
with Sukthankar that they occur in Ś1 but ‘not also in all other versions.’ ” On the basis
of this misunderstanding, he now presents Table 3.
This table shows the 14 interpolations Grünendahl identiies as found in Ś1 but “not
also in all other versions.” In the irst column, he lists the 14 passages. Thereafter, he
enters a “1” in the column if the passage is found in the respective manuscript, leaving
the column blank if it is not. If the manuscript is incomplete and the section containing
the passage is missing, he enters a “0” to indicate its absence. At the bottom, he lists the
total for each manuscript.
Grünendahl does not comment on the table other than to note that “they [‘[the] 14
additions, about which one can say along with Sukthankar that they occur in Ś1 but “not
also in all other versions” ’] are compiled in the list on p. 111. It is remarkable thereby
that, with the exception of Ś1, all 14 additions are attested only in K1.”68 From the pre-
ceding it is clear what he thinks to show with this table. Because he thinks that Sukthankar
followed the argument from brevity in constituting the archetype, he reads Sukthankar’s
comment that the Ś āradā codex contains “relatively little matter that is not found, at the
same time, in all other versions of both recensions” as an assertion to the efect that the Ś āradā
codex’s additions are attested in all other versions. It is on this presupposition and this
177
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 177
Table 3 Grünendahl’s table of the distribution of interpolations in the northern recension
Ñ1 Ñ2 Ñ3 Ñ4 Ś1 K0 K1 K2 K3 K4 V1 B3 B5 B6
1735* 1 1
2161* 1 1
2080* 1 1
1772* 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
2081* 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
App. I, 121 1 1 1 1
1301* 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1
2077* 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
2118* 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
969* 1 1 1 1 1 1
1528* 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1855* 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1499* 1 1 1 1 1 1
961* 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Totals: 6 4 1 1 14 9 14 8 8 9 3 3 2 4
Da1 Da2 Dn1 Dn2 Dn3 D1 D2 D4 D5
1735*
2161*
2080* 1 1
1772* 1 1 1 1 1
2081* 1 1
App. I, 121
1301* 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
2077* 1 1
2118* 1 1 1 1 1
969* 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1528* 1 1 1 1
1855*
1499* 1
961*
Totals: 1 1 4 4 4 2 6 4 9
T1 T2 G1 G2 G3 G4 G5 G6 M5
1735*
2161* 0
2080* 0
1772*
2081* 0
App. I, 121 0
1301*
2077* 0
2118* 0 1
969*
Table 3 (Continued)
178
178 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Table 3 (Cont.)
T1 T2 G1 G2 G3 G4 G5 G6 M5
1528*
1855*
1499*
961* 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Totals: 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1
Source: Modiied from Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizerung von Mahābhārata-Handschriften,” 110.
presupposition only that Sukthankar would have been justiied in constituting his text on
its basis, for in that case, Ś1’s additions are additions in the tradition as a whole as well
and may, therefore, legitimately be included in the constituted text. Little wonder, then,
that Grünendahl thinks he has a fatal objection to Sukthankar, when he now presents a
table (Table 3) demonstrating incontrovertibly that the Ś āradā codex’s additions are not
universally attested in the tradition. As he puts it, the Ś āradā codex contains “14 whole
interpolations, about which one can say along with Sukthankar that they occur in Ś1 but
‘not also in all other versions.’ ” According to him, this is a devastating objection to basing
the constituted text on Ś1, for, as his table shows, Ś1 has additions that are at last partly
unique to it, and this means its text (which was already shown to be not the shortest)
cannot reliably be followed in constituting the archetype.
Grünendahl has evidently been misled by the negation in “relatively little matter that
is not found, at the same time, in all other versions of both recensions.” Sukthankar’s point was
not that Ś1’s additions were found in all other manuscripts. Rather, he was emphasizing
the fact that, with few exceptions (his “relatively little matter”), Ś1’s text was identical
with that of all the other versions. To express this state of afairs, he chose the phrase
“not found […] in all other versions.” From his perspective, the important point was that
the archetypal text of Ś1 is attested in all other versions. Grünendahl, however, interprets
him as saying that what is decisive is that the additions are attested in all other versions,
and he constructs a complex table to show that this is not so. However, it is irrelevant for
an addition whether it is found in only one manuscript or in only some. Nothing is gained
for an addition’s lack of originality to demonstrate that it is not found in all of the other
versions and yet, this is precisely what Grünendahl does. For the same reason, he thinks
this table now casts doubt on the advisability of constituting the archetype using Ś1 as a
base, since Ś1 has additions not shared with all the other manuscripts.
But the table would be an objection to Sukthankar only if Grünendahl had shown
that Sukthankar included certain passages in the constituted text on Ś1’s authority,
even though they are not attested in other witnesses. But ex hypothesi the passages are
not included in the constituted text: they are identiied as interpolations in Ś1, which is to
say, they are additions to the archetype reconstructed in the critical edition. That we
can identify these passages as interpolations at all is due to the fact that Sukthankar by
following the stemmatic method could successfully reconstruct the text of the archetype.
All Grünendahl has done with this table is take passages identiied as interpolations in Ś1
and show that they are not found in all other versions of the northern recension, and all
179
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 179
this in order to argue for their status as interpolations! The only thing that follows from
this pretentious table is that Ś1 contains some passages not found in other versions but he
could have shown this more easily had he simply listed the interpolations unique to Ś1
(or, since there is only one, the interpolations unique to Ś1 and K1). His table is neither
a comprehensive list of passages attested in Ś1 but not in other manuscripts nor a list of
passages attested in Ś1 and other manuscripts (the former would be the unique additions
in Ś1; the latter the non- unique additions in Ś1). The table merely shows that Ś1 has some
passages not shared by all the other manuscripts, but as this has no further bearing on the
reconstruction we can replace it with a simpler table (Table 4), showing that:
1. Ś1 is not free from unique interpolations (column 1).
2. Ś1 and K1 are not free from unique interpolations either (column 2).
3. Ś1 and K1 sometimes share interpolations with other witnesses or with the northern
recension as a whole (column 3).
4. However, Ś1 and K1 are also free of some interpolations found in the northern
recension as a whole, which is the reason for giving their reading greater credence
(column 4).
This fourth point is crucial. It is the reason for Sukthankar’s greater conidence in Ś1 and
K1. Grünendahl should have attacked this point, if he wished to overturn Sukthankar’s
edition, but he does not address it at all. Instead, his table is of the form “Ś1 and K1
without N as a whole.” We can append it as a ifth column to Table 4 where its redun-
dancy is obvious.
We have chosen to expose the laws in Grünendahl’s argument through care-
fully reproducing his calculations, but he could also have looked at Sukthankar’s
Table 4 Grünendahl’s error in constituting the text
Ś1 Ś1 and K1 Ś1 and K1 N Ś1 and K1
(unique (unique (with other (without Ś1 (without N
interpolations) interpolations) witnesses) and K1) as a whole)
*374 *1735 App. 1, no. 331 App. 1, no. 63 1735*
*2161 App. 1, no. 58 App. 1, no. 75 2161*
App. 1, no. 118 App. 1, no. 80 2080*
App. 1, no. 81 1772*
App. 1, no. 85 2081*
App. 1, no. 121
1301*
2077*
2118*
969*
1528*
1855*
1499*
961*
Note: 1. Ś1 contains a lacuna here.
180
180 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
“Prolegomena.” Had he read Sukthankar’s explanation of his principles, he would have
seen that his (Grünendahl’s) argument is based on false premises, above all, the erroneous
assumption that the constituted text is based on the shortest manuscript. Sukthankar is
aware of the problem with basing the constituted text on one manuscript. “By following
any manuscript—e ven the oldest and the best—w e shall be authenticating just that arbi-
trary mixture of versions which it is the express aim of this method to avoid!”69 He explic-
itly cautions against following any one manuscript uncritically: “The optimistic view that
any extant manuscript, however old and trustworthy, of some favoured version or recen-
sion, could give us, with a few additions and alterations, the text of Vyāsa’s Bhārata or
Mahābhārata is the index of a naive mentality and does not need any elaborate refuta-
tion.”70 Sukthankar emphasizes that the Ś āradā codex also cannot be followed uncritically.
He notes that although “an unbiased comparative survey of the diferent versions leads
one to the conclusion that the Ś āradā (Kasḿ īrī) version is certainly the best Northern
version, and probably, taken as a whole, the best extant version of the Ādi,” it is “not by
any means, entirely free from corruptions and interpolations.” “These must be carefully
corrected and controlled with the help of the other versions, particularly of those of the
rival recension.”71 He notes several such passages, proving that his reconstruction is based
not on Ś āradā readings alone but on a comparison of manuscripts of all versions.72
Sukthankar knew that stemmatic reconstruction will give him a text older than any of
the existing versions. Contrary to Grünendahl’s belief that he followed Ś1’s reading uncrit-
ically, thinking it the shortest, he notes the advantages of the inlated southern recension:
It should thus seem that the inidelities of the Southern recension are conined mainly to
a tendency to inlation and elaboration. In parts unafected by this tendency, it is likely to
prove, on the whole, purer, more conservative and more archaic than even the best Northern
version. The Southern variants, therefore, deserve the closest attention and most sympathetic
study.73
Grünendahl’s assertion that Sukthankar relied primarily on a quantitative metric for
reconstruction is a red herring, arising from his own confusion of quantitative with qual-
itative criteria.74 Sukthankar’s method, as his explicit statements in the “Prolegomena”
demonstrate, is stemmatic and in keeping with established canons of textual criticism.
Describing the method to be followed in the section “What is then possible?,” he notes:
With that end in view, we must examine as many manuscripts— and above all as many classes
of manuscripts— as possible, and group them into families. We must try to ascertain and eval-
uate the tradition of each family, eschewing late and worthless material. We may then consider
the relation of these traditions in regard to the variae lectiones, and the genuine and spurious
parts of the text. Beyond that, we have to content ourselves with selecting the readings [that
are] apparently the earliest and choosing that form of the text which commends itself by its
documentary probability and intrinsic merit, recording again most carefully the variants, and
the additions and omissions.75
In contrast, Grünendahl does away with the stemma and instead introduces the spurious
criterion of “extent” (Umfang) to determine the best manuscript. It is on this basis that he
181
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 181
declares that the reconstruction should have been based on Ñ4. In his encomium of this
manuscript’s virtues, he does not mention the quality of its readings even once. Instead,
he repeatedly emphasizes that Ñ4 must be given preference because it is the shortest man-
uscript. When he ignores the placement of additional passages, their intrinsic probability
and the transition from the text to the interpolation, he actually does what he accuses the
editor of doing: he reduces interpolation to a purely quantitative problem.
Grünendahl states, “To be sure, Sukthankar himself conceded this [that Ñ4 is the
shorter manuscript] in his article, however he did not draw the consequences that would
have resulted for his editorial principles from this fact,”76 but he overlooks a crucial
point: the fact that Sukthankar was aware that Ñ4 was shorter than Ś1 and yet did not
radically alter his edition suggests that it was not based on the argument from brevity.
Likewise, when he suggests, “He himself [Sukthankar] later corrected his main argument,
namely, that it [the Kámīrī version] was the shortest version, in favor of Ñ4—h owever,
without drawing the consequences that resulted from this fact for his classiication of the
manuscripts. For, when this claim can no longer be maintained, his entire demonstration
built upon it is beside the point,”77 he should have realized that the fact that Sukthankar
did not do so is a sign that the classiication— contrary to what Grünendahl thinks— was
not based on length.
Grünendahl introduces the specious theory that Sukthankar thought it acceptable to
constitute the text on the basis of the extent of one manuscript, in contrast to constituting it
on the readings of one manuscript (cf. “This would correspond to his [Sukthankar’s] con-
viction that one—m anifestly in contrast to extent!— may not constitute the text on the basis
of individual manuscripts, indeed not even [on the basis of] individual versions or recensions”78)
not realizing that if Sukthankar refused to countenance the latter, he could hardly have
done so of the former. Had Sukthankar really—a s Grünendahl claims—m ade one text
the “basis” of his edition, Ś1 could not have additions over the constituted text.79 The
circumstance that Sukthankar can identify passages in Ś1 itself as additions shows that
his approach was stemmatic and based on, as he puts it, the “eclectic but cautious utilization
of all manuscript classes.”80 Grünendahl has been misled by Sukthankar’s statement that he
made “the Ś āradā version the norm to follow.”81 He takes this to mean that Sukthankar
thinks that the Ś āradā codex, by virtue of being the shortest, contains the oldest text of the
Mahābhārata and that all the editor must do is edit this manuscript, treating it as the bon
manuscrit, and he will obtain the archetype. He thereby ignores Sukthankar’s qualiication
that the Ś āradā version is by no means “entirely free from corruptions and interpolations”
and that these corruptions and interpolations “must be carefully corrected and controlled
with the help of the other versions, particularly of those of the rival recension.”82 And
while Sukthankar thought the ν recension ofered the oldest text of the Mahābhārata,
even this statement requires qualiication: it ofers the oldest text relative to the other
extant witnesses, not the oldest text simpliciter. In fact, via comparing it with other versions,
especially the rival southern recension, which though inlated preserves several archaic
readings, the editor can arrive at a text older than that contained in Ś1: the text of the
archetype.83
The evidence thus far conirms that the critical edition is not based on the criterion
of length. Sukthankar’s method is stemmatic: he compared readings in each individual
182
182 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
case to arrive at the reading of the archetype. There is only one circumstance in which
he mechanically adopted the reading of Ś1 and K without an intrinsic justiication. Here
also he notes its exceptional nature.84
If Grünendahl nevertheless insists that Sukthankar followed the argument from
brevity, it is because of the role it plays in his justiication for beginning the critical edition
anew.85 From his perspective, the argument allows him to make global claims about the
critical edition. It allows him to claim that the discovery of a shorter manuscript (Ñ4)
implies that the Mahābhārata must be re- edited using Ñ4 as the base.86 He no longer
needs to study hundreds of manuscripts or evaluate thousands of readings from the con-
stituted text. Rather, through an arithmetic sleight- of- hand, whose confusion we already
uncovered, he can give the impression that the constituted text would undergo a major
revision on substituting Ñ4 for Ś1. In reality, it would not, since each reading is individ-
ually justiied. Even in cases where Ñ4 and Ś1 difered, this would imply a change to the
archetype only where Sukthankar, encountering cross- recensional agreement and unable
to derive the reading of the archetype from either reading, reprinted the reading of Ś1
and K in the constituted text.87 Finally, the argument from brevity has a further advan-
tage in that it permits Grünendahl to ignore manuscript quality, or rather, to reduce the
question of manuscript quality to one of quantity. He can now claim that the sole reason
Ś1 was adopted as the norm for the edition was that it was the shortest known text. Once
he does this, the qualitative role the Ś āradā codex played in the constitution of the text
is no longer evident. The way is open to question Sukthankar’s manuscript classiication.
The Argument from a Misapprehension Concerning Classiication
(Schriftartprämisse)
The Mahābhārata manuscripts were classiied into versions on the basis of their script, according to a principle
Lüders irst articulated in 1908 (the script is characteristic of the version). However, this classiication is erro-
neous, inasmuch as the script proved not characteristic of the version and neither the variant readings nor the
additional passages were consistently characteristic of speciic versions.
Refutation of the argument: The Mahābhārata manuscripts were classiied not by their script, but by their
text. The term version is a synonym for a manuscript’s text. If the editors nonetheless looked to the script as a
irst, extrinsic indicator of a manuscript’s text, this is because, in practice, it was often a reliable guide to the text
contained in a manuscript. The editors were not blind to the circumstance that sometimes a manuscript, contrary
to their expectation of it, could contain the text of another version. They often reassigned manuscripts assumed
to belong to one version on the basis of their scripts to another (whose members were all in a diferent script).
If the editors had merely looked to the script, they could neither have drawn up a stemma nor reconstructed the
reading of the archetype.
The argument from brevity and the argument from false premises are only the irst part
of Grünendahl’s attack on the stemma. In this irst part, he focused on the basis, or,
rather, what he thought was the basis, of the constituted text. In the second part, he turns
to the basis of the stemma itself, targeting what he thinks is its principle of classiication.
As this second part of the argument is also based on a misunderstanding of Sukthankar’s
work, we call it the argument from a misapprehension concerning classiication (or Schriftartprämisse
183
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 183
for short, to use Grünendahl’s term for his misinterpretation). As this misapprehension
is at the heart of Grünendahl’s criticisms of the Mahābhārata critical edition, we look
at it in detail.
Grünendahl introduces the term Schriftartprämisse on page 104 of his article. He does
not deine the term, but merely introduces it with the words: “on the basis of this the-
oretical foundation, which I in the following would like to characterize by the term
Schriftartprämisse, Sukthankar then groups the manuscripts included for his edition of the
Ādiparvan into ‘recensions’ and ‘versions’ in the Prolegomena published in the 7th fascicule
(of 1933).”88 According to Grünendahl, this principle— that is, the practice of classifying
manuscripts on the basis of their script—h as a long tradition in Mahābhārata scholar-
ship. He traces its origins back to Heinrich Lüders’s 1901 study of the Mahābhārata’s
south Indian recension, where, according to him, Lüders articulated the underlying prin-
ciple for the irst time:89
Almost everywhere we encounter diferent recensions of a work in India, we ind that these
recensions are speciic to a particular area. In part, this is due to the fact that the Brahmans,
who were responsible for the written transmission of the literature, were typically not familiar
with foreign alphabets. In this manner, the transmission of a work was gradually isolated to a
region. It is therefore quite possible that manuscripts in Telugu, Malayalam, and other types
of scripts would ofer a diferent text than the Grantha manuscripts from the Tamil region.90
Grünendahl asserts that thereafter Lüders irst applied the principle in his 1908 Druckprobe
(a sample critical edition of the Mahābhārata). He claims that whereas Lüders did not
explicitly formulate the Schriftartprämisse, its inluence is evident in his grouping of the
manuscripts:
To my knowledge, it is nowhere explicitly stated what conclusions Lüders arrived at on the
basis of his material. His Druckprobe of 1908 only gives indirect information regarding his
views, namely, in the form of the list of manuscripts appended to the end [p. 18], which
is divided into Kashm īr Version / Bengālı ̄Version / Nāgarı ̄Version by Arjunamiśra / Nāgarı ̄Mixed
Version / Nāgarı ̄Version by Nıl̄akan ̣ṭha/ Southern [Grantha and Telugu] Version. At the root of this
classiication lies the implicit understanding that the manuscripts may be classiied according
to their script.91
According to Grünendahl, the principle gained general acceptance with its adoption
in the Mahābhārata critical edition. He notes: “V. S. Sukthankar adopted it [Lüders’s
practice of classifying manuscripts by script] in his Foreword to the 1. Fascicule of the
Ādiparvan and arranged the manuscripts used by him accordingly,”92 and Lüders, in
his review of the irst and second fascicules of the Ādiparvan, gave it his explicit seal of
approval: “It is generally observed that, in India, for works that have been transmitted in
diferent versions, the script is characteristic of the version. Lacking familiarity with for-
eign scripts, the copyists would copy the manuscripts in the alphabets they were familiar
with. However, the boundaries drawn by the script are in part blurred.”93 Thereafter,
Grünendahl claims, the principle gained canonical status once Sukthankar grouped “on
the basis of this theoretical foundation […] the manuscripts included for his edition of
184
184 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
the Ādiparvan into ‘recensions’ and ‘versions,’ ”94 representing them in the stemma seen
in Figure 32.
This stemma is familiar to us from our discussion of Sukthankar’s edition. It is the
stemma presented in his “Prolegomena” to the Ādiparvan and it is based, as we have
seen, on a continuous attempt to understand and reine the manuscripts’ relationships
to each other based on the details that emerged in the recensio. Grünendahl presents it
at the end of his discussion of manuscript classiication to suggest that it was drawn up
immediately after the classiication and solely on the basis of the latter. He describes
Sukthankar’s creation of the stemma as follows:
Sukthankar here distinguishes two recensions, the northern and southern, and nine versions
that are mainly constituted according to paleographic criteria. Their arrangement in the
stemma manifestly follows a geographic logic, namely, in the case of the northern recen-
sion from northwest to east (Ś āradā → Bengali) and in the case of the southern recension
from north to south (Telugu → Malayālam). Between these two blocks stand the Devanāgarī
manuscripts; these are once again distributed geographically: apart from the Devanāgarī
manuscripts of the so-c alled K version, which Sukthankar separates out and places along-
side the constitutive Ś āradā manuscript [sic], he distinguishes ive sub- versions, namely, the
versions of the four commentators and the so- called composite version.95
From the preceding discussion, we know that Grünendahl does not make a distinction
between the classiication of manuscripts and the constitution of the text. His discussion
of Lüders’s Druckprobe shows that he thinks that what was decisive about Lüders’s edition
was the arrangement of manuscripts into groups, based not on their text but on their
script.96 He now goes further: he extends this reasoning to the stemma. Thus he claims that
“on the basis of this theoretical foundation” “Sukthankar group[ed] the manuscripts
included for his edition of the Ādiparvan into ‘recensions’ and ‘versions.’ ”97 From
Vy rata
Ur-Mah bh rata
N S
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
(other than K)
Figure 32 Grünendahl reproduces Sukthankar’s stemma
Source: Reproduced from Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xxx.
185
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 185
Grünendahl’s perspective, there is continuity between the classiication of manuscripts
and drawing up the stemma. He sees the two as identical for, in his view, all Sukthankar
had to do and in fact did was to list the versions he identiied from left to right in
order of geographic sequence and then draw connecting lines between them. In his
mind, no distinction exists between ordering the individual witnesses or witness groups
along a line (which is merely a pragmatic choice and thus part of “presentation”98) and
assigning the various hyparchetypes and the archetype (the latter two identiied on the
basis of recensio) a place within the stemma. Since he does not work with manuscripts,
all three steps— classiication or, more precisely, choice of sigla, recensio and constitutio—
appear the same to him. According to him, an editor takes manuscripts, assigns them
to groups based on script, lists the scripts from left to right, posits recensions and
versions (constituted, he opines, “mainly […] according to paleographic criteria”) and
so arrives at a stemma.
What he thereby overlooks is that this would at most give Sukthankar a matrix of
manuscripts arranged from “northwest to east” and from “north to south,” but not a
stemma. The editor could not know how he is supposed to draw up the lines between
the manuscripts or manuscript groups represented by sigla on the sheet before him.
As yet, he has only identiied these groups but has no insight into their relationships.
Only the latter permits him to draw up a stemma, for a stemma, in the inal analysis,
is only a visual representation of the editor’s understanding of the relations of ili-
ation between manuscripts. It is only on the basis of these relations of iliation, as
they become clear to him in and through the recensio, that he will have an under-
standing of the hyparchetypes and subrecensions from which the individual versions
are descended. Sukthankar does not “distinguish” “two recensions, the northern and
southern”; he is led to assume their existence based on what the witnesses tell him. No
more than he distinguishes two recensions according to geographic orientation does
he constitute a “version” on the basis of paleographic criteria: the term version refers
to—i n fact, it is a synonym for—t he text contained in a manuscript. Grünendahl’s error
is twofold: (1) on one hand, he has not grasped the true basis for the classiication,
which is the text itself (as it must be, if we are to reconstruct the archetype); (2) on the
other, he has confused the script as an initial—a nd extrinsic— indicator for the version
of the text contained in a given manuscript with script as the basis for constituting a
version. We take a closer look at both misunderstandings here, as they are instructive
regarding both the editorial process and the errors that manifest if one is unfamiliar
with the principles of textual criticism. We begin with a discussion of the true basis
of classiication.
Classiication, Choice of Sigla, Elimination of Manuscripts and
Construction of a Stemma
Although we have referred throughout to recensio and analysis of the relations of ilia-
tion between manuscripts, we are yet to understand exactly how they work in concert to
enable an editor to reconstruct the archetype. In Chapter 1, we introduced the idea of
186
186 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
a stemma codicum without discussing how an editor arrives at a stemma. Contrary to
what one might think, an editor does not propose a stemma: he accepts the stemma as
it emerges in and through the recensio. There is a certain reciprocity between the editor’s
initial assumptions regarding the tradition (obviously, he must have some idea about
the tradition if he is to sort and arrange the manuscript material) and the stemma on
which he inally settles. However, an editor cannot simply draw up a stemma and then
attempt to it the manuscript material into it. If the proposed stemma is artiicial, the
manuscripts will contradict it at every turn: the editor will soon realize the tradition could
not have developed as he assumed. Even for a stemma based on a preliminary recensio, he
will often ind minor reinements and modiications to the stemma are necessary as the
recensio unfolds. This can be seen from Sukthankar’s edition of the Ādiparvan, where he
drew and redrew stemmata until he arrived at one that satisied him as the one that best
accounted for the observed facts.99
The best stemma is one for which the evidence grows richer as the reconstruc-
tion proceeds. Because the relationship between recensio and the stemma is a her-
meneutic relationship—a n editor proposes a stemma based on the indings of his
initial recensio, but then in turn looks to the stemma while conducting a more extensive
recensio100— the Lachmannian method is extremely robust in practice. In the best cases,
stemma and recensio reinforce each other, leading to a high degree of conidence in the
reconstruction.
Assuming the manuscript material has been collected and the editor has made a
preliminary study of it, the irst stage is to organize the material. This is the stage West
refers to as “presentation.”101 The editor will choose sigla and present an account of
the manuscripts he used. At this stage, he will only focus on laying out his material
and a discussion of ainities between manuscripts will often, in practice, be more
convenient after he has introduced his system of nomenclature. Sukthankar’s list of
manuscripts forming the critical apparatus of the Ādiparvan ofers a good example
(Figure 33).102
The principle Sukthankar adopts in designating manuscripts is self- explanatory: each
manuscript is denoted using the capitalized irst letter of the respective script, while the
diferent manuscripts of one script are distinguished using the subscript cardinal num-
bers 1 … n. In cases where there are subversions in the same script, Sukthankar appends
a second subscript letter or number (Da1 for the irst of two Devanāgarī manuscripts of
Arjunamiśra; Da2 for the second and so on). Even though these sigla bear an obvious
reference to the script of the version, the manuscripts are not grouped on the basis of
script. This can be seen both from the fact that we could have replaced them with others;
for instance, the series of letters from a to i or from r to z with no change in meaning (the
sigla are only markers) and from the fact that manuscripts are often—i n contradiction to
their script— placed under diferent groups when their text warrants it. For instance, the
K manuscripts are a group of Devanāgarī manuscripts separated out from the remaining
Devanāgarī manuscripts because of their ainity to the Ś āradā codex. Likewise, of the
three Ś āradā manuscripts examined for the edition only one contained a Ś āradā text.
The other two were found to be recent manuscripts, written in modern Ś āradā script and
containing Nīlakaṇṭha’s text.103 Sukthankar also notes that among the manuscripts he
187
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 187
examined for the critical edition he found a Devanāgarī copy of the Grantha version.104
And although most of the manuscripts of the Devanāgarī version were in Devanāgarī
script (explaining the use of the siglum D), this is not universally true: the Devanāgarī
version can be found in almost any script. Sukthankar speciically mentions the case of
Ś āradā, Bengālī, Telugu and Grantha copies of the Devanāgarī version.105
Figure 33 Sukthankar’s list of manuscripts forming the critical apparatus
Source: Reproduced from Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” vii–ix.
188
188 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Figure 33 (Continued)
189
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 189
Regardless of what Grünendahl claims, there is no justiication for thinking that script
was the criterion of classiication. At this stage, the editor has merely introduced his system
of nomenclature. If that system bears a reference to the predominant (but not sole) script
of that group as their most visible feature, this does not mean that he has grouped them
according to their script. The latter must take place based on the actual textual ainities
between the manuscripts, which the editor can only determine once he studies the man-
uscript evidence. Thus far, he has only informed the reader about the sigla he has used
to identify the manuscripts and possibly (as is the case in Sukthankar’s “Detailed Account
of the Manuscripts”) about their relative quality. The editor has as yet not told the reader
anything about their relations of iliation. Under discussions of manuscript quality, he may
introduce further considerations such as his decision to treat certain manuscripts as a class
or to exclude others he considers unimportant for the purposes of constitution.106 This can
only occur once he has some familiarity with the texts contained in the manuscripts. Only on
the basis of a preliminary inspection can he identify manuscripts as being of such and such a
type, of falling under such and such a version and so on. As he begins to read and compare
the manuscripts, he will notice that their text is not always identical: some manuscripts will
ofer one text and the others another. These diferences may range from small albeit signif-
icant changes in orthography to extensive revisions to the text. In the latter case, the editor
will assume that he is dealing with diferent versions of the work according to the principle
“tantopere inter se diferunt, ut paene quot codices, tot textus esse dicere possis” (“They
difer so much among themselves, that [as a result] you could say that there are almost as
many texts as there are codices”).107 Accordingly, he will endeavor to group the manuscripts
in a way that best relects their variation in content and he will do this regardless of whether
they have the identical script or whether he has an ideal exemplar to deine their identity.108 In fact, the
manuscripts themselves, or, rather, their contents will tell him whether they belong together.
Let us assume that the editor has given his manuscripts a name and, based on their
supericial ainities, he has also placed them into certain groups. As yet he only has the
beginnings of a stemma and not the stemma itself. Nothing at this stage permits him
to propose or the reader to intuit the relationship between manuscripts. The stemma
presumes a great deal more information than either of these stages ofers us. In fact, only
when the editor undertakes a full-s cale recensio will he begin noticing ainities between
manuscripts, and only this will permit him to unify the lines of tradition and, over time,
to arrive at a stemma. Let us take Sukthankar’s edition of the Ādiparvan as an example.
Sukthankar starts out by selecting the sigla Ś, K, Ñ, V, B, D, T, G and M as markers
for the diferent manuscripts or manuscript groups. These letters, as we have noted, refer
to the scripts of the diferent manuscripts, but it would be erroneous to think that the
manuscripts are therefore classiied on the basis of their script. Thereafter, the editor
may also decide to neglect for the purposes of constitution certain manuscripts or that
ceteris paribus certain manuscripts can be treated as substitutes (for example, M6–8 , which
replaced M1.2.4 after adhyāya 53). He has thus decided to exclude for the purpose of
stemmatization their relationship to each other and to treat them as descendants of a
hypothetical ancestor M, whose existence can be inferred on the basis of the similarity of
their text. Thus far he has only chosen his sigla and entered them in a single row on the
sheet before him. He has not yet begun to identify the relationship of the groups to each
190
190 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
other. For the purpose of demonstration, we shall assume he has nine manuscripts lined
up from 1 to 9. He now assigns individual markers to these manuscripts using the letters
Ś, K, Ñ, V, B, D, T, G and M. He thus has the following array:
| | | | | | | | |
′
S K N V B D T G M
This array does not yet tell him anything about the relationships between the manuscripts.
It only tells him that he has lined them up from left to right and that he has assigned a
unique marker to each of them. We have followed Sukthankar’s convention of using cap-
ital letters deriving from the irst letter of the underlying script (in all except two cases,
Maithilī [= V] and Nepālī [= Ñ]), but we could also have employed any other sequence
of letters such as abcdefghi. The sigla need only be unique: they specify neither an intrinsic
relationship between sign and the object so designated nor how this object will relate to
other objects in the series. In order to bring these markers (or their underlying objects)
into a relation, two more steps are required. The array only tells us that the markers are
unique; it does not as yet say anything about the objects so designated. Thus, we must
make a further assumption, namely, that the objects so designated are also unique, so that
to each unique marker corresponds a unique object. Using our previous convention, we
might express this as follows:
|S′ |K |N |V |B |D |T |G |M |
Just as the irst array only told us that each object was designated using a unique marker,
the second line merely assumes that each of the objects so designated is unique. In prac-
tice, there will be some variation, since contamination cannot be ruled out. Thus, Ñ may
sometimes feature B’s reading, sometimes K’s and sometimes D’s (and this will occur
throughout its length), but as long as this variation is not serious enough to undermine the
basic distinctions we have drawn, it will not be a problem.109 Returning to our example,
we have assigned a label to each of our manuscripts and we have also ascertained that
contamination between them is not so signiicant as to undermine any inferences as to
genealogical iliation. On their own these two principles are insuicient for drawing up
a stemma. They merely tell us that each text has been assigned a unique designation (its
respective siglum) and that each text is assumed to be suiciently unique for the purposes
of recensio. But they do not as yet tell us anything about the relations of iliation between
the texts. For that, we must look at the texts themselves. Only once we begin to look at
the latter will the lines begin to bend this way and that. We can represent this as follows:
/ \ / | \ \ / \ \
′
S K N V B D T G M
(The beginnings of a stemma)
And it is only when we carry this out consistently across all our groups, unifying lines as
they approach each other and positing intermediate archetypes, that we will ultimately
191
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 191
attain a stemma. For instance, during the recensio, we might ind that Ś and K are often alike,
whereas Ñ, V and B share certain features with each other. In that case, we might extend
our lines backward, positing intermediate hyparchetypes for the two groups— ν for Ś and K
and ε for Ñ, V and B.110 Progressing in this manner, we would begin to gradually unify the
tradition, arriving ultimately at the ancestor from which all our witnesses are descended.
In this example, we assumed that the editor proceeded from left to right in laying out
his manuscripts, but he could have followed any other order. Our reason for preferring
this sequence is that it corresponds to Sukthankar’s praxis and thus permits us to better
understand how his stemma in particular was developed. But even in Sukthankar’s case,
the sequence of manuscript groups from S ́ through M is immaterial. He begins with the
northernmost group, but—c ontrary to Grünendahl’s contention—h e does not lay out his
manuscripts according to geographic logic. The order he follows is that of their prob-
able sequence, with the Ś-K group breaking of irst to form the ν subrecension, the γ
subrecension thereafter giving rise to the D manuscripts and, via an intermediary ε, to
the ÑVB group. To the right, he similarly lays out the witnesses of the southern recension,
moving in a circuit from the T-G group, which broke of from S via the σ subrecension, to
M, probably the earliest subgroup to break of from S. The manuscripts’ order is due as
much to the logic of presentation (as far as possible no lines should cross) as it is to sequence.
A simple experiment demonstrates that the order of the groups to which Grünendahl
attaches such importance is irrelevant: we might easily reverse our stemma from right to
left and again within the subrecensions from right to left with no loss of meaning (Figures
34 and 35).
Vy rata
Ur-Mah bh rata
S N
γ
ν
σ
ε
Telugu Grantha Malay lam rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar
T1.2 1 V1
Figure 34 Sukthankar’s stemma reversed 180 degrees around a central axis
192
192 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Vy rata
Ur-Mah bh rata
SS N
γ
ν
σ
ε
Malay lam Telugu Grantha Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar rada K
T1.2 V1 1
Figure 35 Reversed stemma with the subrecensions in turn reversed around a central axis
Both charts demonstrate that the versions’ orientation, whether from north to south or
from south to north, is irrelevant. The second chart additionally shows that the versions’
east– west orientation is irrelevant. We could also insert a third chart, which displaces
the Malayālam toward Nepali or rotates the ε subrecension around its axis to put
Bengālī next to Grantha. In all of these cases, the essential relationship of the manu-
script groups to each other (for example, that Ñ, V, B and D break of from N or that
the shortest lines of transmission are S—M and N— ν— Ś(K)) remains the same. Clearly,
the manuscripts are not oriented according to geographic considerations. If Sukthankar
nonetheless followed a discernable geographic logic, this is because this is how most
of us, Grünendahl included, read a map— that is, from left to right and from north
to south. But to assume from this that Sukthankar followed geographic considerations
in organizing his stemma— indeed, that he, as Grünendahl says, “is at pains to let his
classiication of the manuscripts appear ‘natural’ ”— is to misunderstand the irst step of
preparing an edition: presentation.111
Content as the Real Basis for Classiication, Descent from Ancestors,
Ideal Types and Divergence from the Norm
Grünendahl’s errors are elementary, but he could have avoided them in a simple
way: he could have read Lüders and Sukthankar. Both scholars are clear that the real
basis for grouping manuscripts must be their text, and they do so in the very passages
Grünendahl cites. For instance, in the 1901 text Grünendahl cites as the earliest source
193
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 193
articulating the so-c alled Schriftartprämisse, Lüders explicitly distinguishes between the
script and the text:
Almost everywhere we encounter diferent recensions of a work in India, we ind that these
recensions are speciic to a particular area. In part, this is due to the fact that the Brahmans,
who were responsible for the written transmission of the literature, were typically not familiar
with foreign alphabets. In this manner, the transmission of a work was gradually isolated to a
region. It is therefore quite possible that manuscripts in Telugu, Malayalam, and other types
of scripts would ofer a diferent text than the Grantha manuscripts from the Tamil region.112
Grünendahl cites this passage, but completely misunderstands the point. Lüders is not
trying to distinguish versions by script: he already has diferent versions before him. In fact, he
indicates this in the very irst line (“Almost everywhere we encounter diferent recensions
of a work in India”). Grünendahl does not notice it and instead claims that “Lüders’s thesis
[regarding the reciprocity between script and version] proved not true insofar as none of
the numerous variants in his Druckprobe actually corresponded to one of his ‘versions’ dis-
tinguished according to its script. This did not lead to any fundamental doubts about the
correctness of the thesis; rather it was its fate to have a great inluence on Indological tex-
tual criticism in general and on the critical edition of the Mahābhārata in particular.”113
Grünendahl also overlooks the fact that Lüders’s central concern is not with the scripts
in themselves. Rather, Lüders pays attention to the scripts only insofar as they are an index
for changes to the text, changes signiicant enough to justify speaking of a version of the
text. Thus, he notes: “It is therefore quite possible that manuscripts in Telugu, Malayalam,
and other types of scripts would ofer a diferent text than the Grantha manuscripts from the
Tamil region.”114 Grünendahl overlooks not only the reference to the “diferent text[s] ”
but also the force of the “possible”: Lüders is merely stating that it is possible that the
manuscripts in Telugu, Malayalam and so on might ofer a diferent text than the Grantha
manuscripts; whether they actually do so can only be determined by looking at the text. More
than any other passage, this one ofers the clearest refutation of the so-c alled Schriftartprämisse.
It explicitly states that the text contained in a manuscript is the real basis of the classiication.
Contrary to Grünendahl’s assertion, Lüders did not group the manuscripts depending on
whether they were written in Telugu, Malayalam or Grantha script. Rather, he grouped
them depending on whether the text they contained approximated one or the other of the
known versions of the Mahābhārata. And if he identiied these groups using the names of
the scripts predominantly associated with those versions, this was because the script often
proved the best indicator of the version contained in a manuscript. This can be clearly seen
from Lüders’s appendix at the end of his 1907 Druckprobe (Figure 36).
Contrary to Grünendahl’s assertion that “at the root of this classiication lies the
implicit understanding that the manuscripts may be classiied according to their
script,”115 this list shows that the script was not the basis for classiication. Lüders separates
out a Kaśmīrī version even though no such script exists. Moreover, he splits up his 20
Devanāgarī manuscripts into four groups, while retaining the same siglum (N) for all of
them! The Grantha and Telugu manuscripts, though difering in terms of their script,
are listed as one version (Lüders’s southern version). The real basis of classiication thus
must be the text of the manuscripts.
194
194 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Figure 36 Lüders’s list of the manuscripts collated for his sample critical edition
Source: Reproduced from Lüders, Druckprobe einer kritischen Ausgabe des Mah bh rata, 18.
ā ā
Similar problems afect Grünendahl’s discussion of Sukthankar. He cites the latter’s
remarks from the section titled “Classiication of Manuscripts,” but deliberately inverts
their order to suggest that Sukthankar irst turned to the script as the deining charac-
teristic of a manuscript and only thereafter separated out versions. In actual fact, what
Sukthankar says is:
The manuscript material is divided naturally into recensions by the scripts in which they are
written. Corresponding to the two main types of Indian scripts, Northern and Southern, we
get two main recensions of the epic. Each of these recensions is again divided into a number
of sub- recensions, which I have called “versions,” corresponding to the diferent provincial
195
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 195
scripts in which these texts are written. This principium divisionis is not as arbitrary as it might
at irst sight appear. The supericial diference of scripts corresponds, as a matter of fact, to
deep underlying textual diferences. [He continues:] It is common experience in India that
when we have a work handed down in diferent versions, the script is invariably characteristic
of the versions. The reason for this concomitance between script and version appears to be
that the scribes, being as a rule not conversant with any script but that of their own particular
province, could copy only manuscripts written in their special provincial scripts, exception
being made only in favour of the Devanāgarī, which was a sort of “vulgar” script, widely used
and understood in India.116
This passage clearly shows that Sukthankar irst noted the existence of diferent
recensions of the work and only thereafter proceeded to the script as the probable reason
for the work’s fragmentation into distinct versions. In fact, he proceeded exactly as
Lüders before him had done. Unnoticed by Grünendahl, he also reveals his principle for
choosing names or sigla for his groups: he says that he has called the diferent recensions
he encountered “ ‘versions,’ corresponding to the diferent provincial scripts in which
these texts are written”— hence a Ś āradā or a Kaśmīr version, a Nepālī version and so
on. Rather than distinguish versions according to script, Sukthankar identiies versions
and then designates them using their most visible characteristic: the predominant script
in use for that version.
Grünendahl inverts the order of the passages and introduces Sukthankar’s remarks on
the prevalent association of certain scripts with certain versions (the lines beginning “It is
common experience in India that when we have a work handed down in diferent versions,
the script is invariably characteristic of the versions”) with the words: “Sukthankar him-
self formulates the Schriftartprämisse as follows (Prolegomena, p. vii).”117 Not only does
he thus place the consequent before the antecedent but he also presents Sukthankar’s
remarks in a less lattering light. He introduces the irst half of the paragraph (the lines
beginning “The manuscript material is divided naturally into recensions by the scripts in
which they are written”) (which he cites second) with the words: “Sukthankar considers
the scripts the ‘natural’ criterion for the distinction of recensions (according to the two main
types: north Indian and south Indian scripts) and subrecensions, which he calls versions
(Prolegomena, p. vii)”118 and he footnotes the word “natural” with the words: “Sukthankar
is at pains to make his classiication of the manuscripts appear ‘natural.’ ”119
Sukthankar explicitly refers to the text as the real basis of classiication in a second
passage. He writes:
With regard to the versions described above, it must be frankly admitted that they do not, by
any means, form water tight compartments. The isolectional boundaries, as is natural, do not
coincide, but are independent of each other; in other words, the textual peculiarities, which
are, in inal analysis, the real basis of our classiication, never have, as a matter of fact, an
identical area of distribution.120
Grünendahl is aware of this passage for he cites it.121 He once again dismisses it. He
introduces it with the words: “in another place, however, Sukthankar restricts the
Schriftartprämisse and leads them over into an argument that makes these textual
196
196 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
peculiarities (‘deep underlying textual diferences’) the real basis of his classiication
(Prolegomena, p. lxxv)”122 and thereafter writes: “Accordingly, the textual peculiarities also
do not ofer a secure theoretical foundation for a classiication of manuscripts?”123
Obsessed with discrediting Sukthankar, Grünendahl uses all his powers of skepticism
and irony to cast doubt on Sukthankar’s classiication of the manuscripts. Yet what he
overlooks in this remark is that if, as he says, “the textual peculiarities also do not ofer a
secure theoretical foundation for a classiication of manuscripts,” no classiication would
be possible. If we cannot classify manuscripts by their text, we cannot produce a critical
edition.
Grünendahl’s confusion of the text with its manuscript becomes especially manifest
from his discussion of the Ś āradā and Kaśmīr versions. He questions Sukthankar’s
assumption of a Ś āradā version, which he correctly identiies as the cornerstone of
Sukthankar’s edition. Thus, he cites Sukthankar’s opinion that the Ś āradā manuscript
Ś1 “seems to be the only extant genuine representative of the old version of Kaśmīr,”124
but argues that “Precisely because there is no further representative of this supposed
‘old version of Kashmir,’ the existence of such a version, based on the material of one
manuscript of the Ādiparvan, cannot initially be considered demonstrated, especially
since external indications for this are sparingly forthcoming.”125
Contrary to Grünendahl’s claim, a single manuscript is suicient to assume the
existence of a version of the text when that manuscript difers signiicantly from the
others. If we ind that the text has characteristics not shared by other manuscripts or
vice versa, we would assume that it is not derived from the known branches of the tra-
dition and we would therefore draw a new line representing this branch of the tradi-
tion. A single manuscript is suicient to posit a version, even though its relation to the
others may not be immediately apparent. For instance, if we were to ind a manuscript
x (its script is irrelevant for assigning it a place in the stemma) that cannot be descended
from any of our known versions (the nine groups from Ś through M), we would enter it
at the bottom of our stemma to one side and await the results of the recensio to deter-
mine its relation to the other groups in the stemma. In fact, this is the normal state of
afairs: unless an editor had evidence to the contrary, he would treat all manuscripts
as unique exemplars in his stemma, entering a unique siglum for them. Sebastiano
Timpanaro’s stemma for Lachmann’s edition of the Nibelungenlied, which we saw ear-
lier, may serve us here as an example (Figure 37).
ω
B φ (φ2)
G E M
Figure 37 Treating each manuscript as an independent witness
Source: Reproduced from Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, 140.
197
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 197
Though Timpanaro’s rather than Lachmann’s, this stemma clearly shows that
although Lachmann possessed only a single exemplar of manuscript B, he neverthe-
less treated it as an independent witness, as any editor would do. An editor would have
no reason to eliminate it from his stemma unless he had reason to believe it was a codex
descriptus (a manuscript derived from an extant ancestor or one where the reading of
the ancestor can be reconstructed without its help).126 It is possible that during compar-
ison, he might ind that this lone manuscript’s readings were not very good or that the
other manuscripts did not support them, but this would be a case of eliminatio lectionum
singularium rather than eliminatio codicum descriptorum. The editor might thus choose the
readings of his other manuscripts over this lone one, but he would have to justify his
choices in each case. He could not simply eliminate the witness, especially one as impor-
tant as the Ś āradā codex.127
Grünendahl has been misled by the fact that, in the Mahābhārata critical edition,
the editors for the most part were dealing not with single manuscripts but with groups of
manuscripts whose internal relationships resisted analysis and that therefore had to be
treated as members of a class. From this, he concludes that as Sukthankar did not possess
a group of manuscripts for the Ś āradā version, this means he had insuicient grounds for
assuming such a version. What Grünendahl overlooks thereby is that the Mahābhārata is
not a typical case. The normal state of afairs is single manuscripts or manuscripts whose
relationship to each other can be stemmatized, and these would be entered as indepen-
dent witnesses in our stemma. West’s stemma may serve as an example (Figure 38).
This stemma features 14 individual witnesses, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, N
and O, related via the (no longer extant) hyparchetypes β, γ, δ, ε, ζ, η and θ. The rela-
tionship of nine manuscripts, A, B, C, D, E, F and M, N, O, can be easily clariied and
they are therefore treated as independent witnesses. In contrast, the manuscripts G, H,
K, I and L form a group whose structure resists analysis. They are therefore treated as a
unit (represented by g in the stemma).128
In contrast, in the Mahābhārata, only a minority of manuscripts (Ś1, V1 and, for
the Sabhāparvan, Ñ1) had clearly identiiable relationships.129 More often, the editors
found that the relationship of the manuscripts within a group to each other could not be
stemmatized. They therefore proceeded as West does in this stemma and treated them
as members of a class. This fact should not mislead us into thinking that the evidence for
these versions is, for this reason, stronger. The manuscript groups B, D, T, G, M and so on
are analogous to the group g in West’s stemma. The fact that the individual manuscripts
comprising these groups (B1–6 , D1– 14, T1– 3, G1– 7 and M1–8 ) are treated as a unit for
purposes of stemmatization represents a limitation in our powers of analysis and is not
an argument for preferring the reading of one or more of these groups to that of the
individual witnesses.
In claiming that there is less reason to assume the existence of a Ś āradā version than
for B, D, T, G, M and so on, because in the former case we possess only a single man-
uscript, Grünendahl has mistaken an exceptional state of afairs for the normal state.
His argument is analogous to claiming that in the stemma on the next page, we ought
to take the evidence of G, H, K, I and L more seriously than that of the individual
manuscripts A, D and M or the hyparchetype b because the former form a group.130 In
198
198 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
α
β γ
δ
ζ ε
η
θ
M
D g b
O
B
N G H K C F
λ
E
I L A
Figure 38 Groups versus individual witnesses
Source: Modiied from West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique, 44.
contrast, he would argue that as no further evidence for A exists than A itself in West’s
stemma, we should be skeptical about whether A really exists. In reality, A is an invalu-
able aid for reconstructing the reading of the archetype because of its access to λ, so for
us to deprive ourselves of A on the grounds that it is the sole example of a manuscript
descended from MBλ is to needlessly handicap ourselves.
Grünendahl’s argument against taking Ś1’s evidence seriously thus does not work. He
confuses the exception with the rule. Manuscripts of a version must be taken as representatives
of that version even when there are no other representatives of that version. In contrast, the case
where we have multiple representatives of a version represents a limit case of this prin-
ciple, where we treat multiple manuscripts as imperfect instantiations of their archetype.
A look at S. K. Belvalkar’s stemma of the Bhīṣmaparvan (to our knowledge the sole
attempt to map the relationship of the manuscripts within the various groups to each
other) clariies this (Figure 39).
Belvalkar’s stemma illustrates that there is no diference between treating the Malayālam
manuscripts as representatives of an ideal archetype— their hypothetical ancestor M— or
as individual witnesses. Although he undertakes to analyze the manuscripts’ relationship
199
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 199
Figure 39 Mapping the relationship of manuscripts within a group to each other
Source: Reproduced from Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Bhīṣmaparvan],” cxv.
to each other more closely (for instance, he hypothesizes that the Malayālam tradition
would have split up into two branches: a purer tradition represented by M3 and M1
and a Ś āradā- inluenced tradition he calls MŚ,131 and that the latter would in turn have
given rise to two branches: M2 and M4 and the lone manuscript M5132), his conclusions
are no diferent than if he treated all the Malayālam manuscripts as descendants of
a hypothetical ancestor M (and therefore as more or less perfect representatives of its
reading).133 For our purpose, what is important is that when Sukthankar and the other
editors entered the sigla B, D, T, G, M and so on into their respective stemmata, they
were using them as shorthand for groups, the relationships of whose members could not
be further analyzed. Like Belvalkar, the editors could have expanded on the relationship
between the members of a group but, as this stemma shows, M is in the inal analysis only
an abbreviation for several individual manuscripts and not itself a (super)manuscript.
When Grünendahl now alleges that “because there is no further representative of
this supposed ‘old version of Kashmir,’ the existence of such a version, based on the
material of one manuscript of the Ādiparvan, cannot initially be considered demon-
strated,” this is tantamount to claiming that because Ś1 (but no other manuscript) gives
testimony for itself in quiet and precise terms, we should reject its testimony for the
cacophony of voices represented by B, D, T, G or M. His other arguments against the
existence of a Ś āradā version are no better. He writes that “the inding in other parvans
shows rather the opposite [of Sukthankar’s assumption that the Ś āradā codex represented
200
200 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
the old version of Kaśmīr]: in Mahābhārata 4, two of the three Ś āradā manuscripts
available were not included, because they proved to be ‘recent copies of Nīlakaṇṭha’s
text and therefore as Ś āradā codices without value’ (Raghu Vira, Mahābhārata 4,
Introduction, p. ix f.)—a case that manifestly was not anticipated by the spiritual fathers of
the Schriftartprämisse.”134
Sukthankar’s “Prolegomena” shows that, far from not anticipating this case, Sukthankar
explicitly mentioned two paper manuscripts written in “modern S ́āradā characters” and
containing the text of Nīlakanṭ̣ha’s commentary.135 In fact, they are the same manuscripts
Raghu Vira later mentions: Grünendahl has overlooked the citation.136 Sukthankar was
thus aware that the existence of multiple copies written in S ́āradā script neither added
to nor detracted from the evidence for a S ́āradā version, especially since this version was
identiied not on the basis of its script but its text and since the justiication for a version
neither increases nor decreases with the number of (promiscuous) copies of that version.
The confusion is Grünendahl’s. On one hand, he thinks that an editor ought not take a
manuscript into consideration unless he has multiple copies in the same script and, on
the other, he thinks that if an editor has multiple copies in the same script but they are
not identical he ought not take any of them into consideration. The editor ought to: only
he ought to irst assign them under their correct archetypes—t he S ́āradā text under the
S ́āradā recension and the Devanāgarī text under the Devanāgarī recension.
It is not so easy to forgive Grünendahl’s next argument against Sukthankar’s assumption
of a S ́āradā version, for the intent to mislead is deliberate. Grünendahl writes that “inter-
esting in this context [the lack of—f rom his perspective—s uicient Ś āradā exemplars
to justify the assumption of a Kaśmīrī version] is the following remark by F. Edgerton,”
and he then quotes Franklin Edgerton: “Genuine old śāradā writings are now not so easy
to ind; what are ofered as such often turn out to be worthless modern copies of works
imported into Kashmir from the south.”137 Grünendahl does not inform the reader that
Edgerton agrees with Sukthankar about the existence of a Kaśmīrī version:
One of the most valuable of Sukthankar’s results is his establishment for the irst time of a
“Kaśmīrī” recension of the epic, represented, to be sure, among the manuscripts here col-
lated, only by devanāgarı ̄transcripts; no manuscripts in the native Kashmirian śāradā alphabet
are included. [There follows the comment about genuine old Ś āradā writings being rare.
Then Edgerton continues:] It is to be hoped that in some way the materials for the Kaśmīrī
recension may be augmented by some original śāradā texts.138
Edgerton penned these lines in a review of the irst fascicule of the Ādiparvan— that is,
at a time when the Sá r̄ada ̄codex was not yet discovered. He thus underscores the correctness of
identifying a Kasḿ īrī version even without a S ́āradā exemplar for comparison—t he exact
opposite of what Grünendahl’s quotation suggests. Moreover, rather than expressing a
reservation regarding Sukthankar’s use of the S ́āradā codex as Grünendahl implies, the
passage expresses Edgerton’s hope that the constitution of the Kasḿ īrī version (of which
he notes: “For it seems that Sukthankar is quite right in regarding this as on the whole the
oldest and best recension now known”139) would be conirmed by the discovery of a gen-
uine old S ́āradā manuscript—a s it indeed was from the second fascicule onward (1928).
201
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 201
The passage beginning “Genuine old sá r̄ada ̄writings” is thus a justiication and defense of
Sukthankar’s constitution of a Kasḿ īrī recension in the absence of a Sá ̄radā manuscript.
It is not a criticism, raised after the fact, of his use and identiication as such of a S ́āradā
manuscript even though “what are ofered as such [‘genuine old S ́āradā writings’] often
turn out to be worthless modern copies of works imported into Kashmir from the south.”
Yet this is how Grünendahl, by citing Edgerton’s comment out of context, presents it.
Edgerton held Sukthankar’s work in the highest regard.140 In several reviews he
expressed his agreement with his approach,141 highlighting especially his acumen in iden-
tifying the Ś āradā (Kámīrī) version as the best.142 In his review of the second and third
fascicules of the Ādiparvan he noted:
Fortunately there is a complete Devanāgarī ms. of Ādi (K1) which Sukthankar shows to
have been a copy of a codex very closely allied to S1́ ; and there are also several other mss. in
Devanāgarī (the “K” group), which likewise belong to the Kashmirian recension. Probably the
most brilliant result of Sukthankar’s work is his convincing demonstration that this Kashmirian
recension, of which virtually nothing was previously known, is the oldest and best version of
the epic now extant. No one who studies the critical apparatus will doubt this fact.143
The next review further buttressed this judgment: “The ever- increasing number of cases
in which passages suspicious on other grounds are omitted in K conirms the growing con-
viction that K is, on the whole, probably the best recension we have, and that Sukthankar
is well justiied in giving it exceptional weight.”144
Grünendahl does not cite this background. On the contrary, he remarks on the
passage from Edgerton he quotes as follows: “This too was a case that Sukthankar ought
to have brought into accord with his premises,” and he follows it up with the observa-
tion, “Among the manuscripts of the Ādiparvan K4 can serve in some respects here as an
example.”145 The reference to K4 is footnoted with the words: “see Sukthankar’s remark
regarding this, Prolegomena, p. xii.” Grünendahl has in mind the fact that in Sukthankar’s
“Detailed Account of the Manuscripts” K4 is listed as probably a southern exemplar of
a northern manuscript. The relevant passage reads as follows:
A carelessly written complete MS., with ळ for ल, throughout, which is a Southern trait […]
Supplementary folios at 2, 114, 150, 151, 205 include certain long passages (some from
Southern sources), copied by the same hand; notable among them being the Brahmā- Gaṇeśa
interpolation, whose point of insertion is indicated by a small mark made in the body of the
text, and the marginal remark atra śodhapatramekaṃ (cf. v. 1. 1. 1. 53).146
Grünendahl seizes upon this admission (namely, that the K manuscript appears to have been
written in the south) as evidence against Sukthankar’s assumption of the Kasḿ īrī origins of
the Ś-K version. He writes that “The indicated connection with the south is also of some
interest for aspects to be dealt with later.”147 Among the criticisms he advances against
Sukthankar’s constitution of a Kasḿ īrī version is the objection that “although Sukthankar’s
choice of the siglum ‘K’ manifestly aims at the association with Kashmir, he does not, to my
knowledge, call the ‘K- version’ explicitly ‘Kashmiri’ in his Prolegomena. Only in his edition
of the Āranỵ akaparvan does he irst risk a more deinitive statement regarding this topic,
202
202 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
setting out from a similar situation (Mbh 3, Introduction, p. xxi).”148 He then cites Sukthankar’s
observation from the introduction to the Āranỵ akaparvan that “The manuscripts com-
prising this version [K] must in part be merely Devanāgarī copies of Ś āradā originals and
may in part represent the version of a province or a region adjoining the Ś āradā zone,
which it has not been possible to localize more precisely.”149 “However,” Grünendahl notes,
“as regards the K manuscripts of the Ādiparvan, Sukthankar only mentions the geographic
origin in the case of one manuscript, namely, K3, and this originates from Gujarat!” and he
adds an exclamation for emphasis. “Other than this,” he continues, “the description of the
K manuscripts, when measured against the signiicance accruing to them in his assessment,
[is] rather scanty.”150 Grünendahl concludes:
As was the case with the arrangement of the versions […], here too the striving for a geo-
graphic arrangement was manifestly in the foreground [of Sukthankar’s concerns], without
indications for a special relationship of the K manuscripts to Kashmir being recognizable.
Generally, one must note that the editors of the individual parvans constituted the “K” version independently
of the geographic origin of the respective manuscripts. This is evident, among other things, from the fact that in
other parvans the “K” manuscripts could also be from Bengal or the Telugu region.151
But as with Grünendahl’s irst argument—h is criticisms of the assumption of a Ś āradā
version— the confusion here is also his own. Sukthankar does not label the K manuscripts
“K” because he thinks they originated from Kaśmīr. Rather, the siglum K denotes the
proximity of their text to the version he calls “the Sāradā (or Kaśmīrī) Version (Ś).”152
In other words, the attribution of the group of Devanāgarī manuscripts labeled K to a
version allied to Ś occurs not on the basis of their geographic origin, but their text.
Grünendahl misses the passage, but Sukthankar explicitly calls this group of
manuscripts a “Devanāgarī Group allied to the (Ś āradā or) Kámīrī Version (K),”153 and
he later underscores the diference between identifying their text with the Kámīrī version
and their physical origin with Kámīr: “K is a speciic Devanāgarī version allied to the
Ś āradā (or Kámīrī) version (sharply distinguished from other Devanāgarī versions) […]
[whose] [e]xact provenance […] is unknown.”154 The reason he adopts the siglum K is not, as
Grünendahl claims, that he wishes to evoke “the association with Kashmir,” as though
these manuscripts would all be from Kámīr (Sukthankar is aware that K4 was probably
written in the south and that K3 originated from Gujarat: he explicitly points these facts
out and Grünendahl merely repeats him), but that the siglum K is an appropriate marker
of their proximity to the two manuscripts whose origins could be localized to Kámīr:
1. The Ś āradā codex, written in “clear Ś āradā characters (of perhaps the 16th or
17th century) [on] [b]i rchb ark (bhūrjapatra),” with which the K manuscripts are
evidently related,155 and
2. K1, a manuscript found the closest in terms of its text to Ś1.
Regarding this second manuscript, Sukthankar writes: “Even the outward form and
get up of this MS. are suggestive of Kaśmīrī origin. The lines of writing, as in Ś āradā
(bhūrjapatra) MSS. run parallel to the narrow side of the folio. The signatures in the
203
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 203
margin are like those found in Kaśmīrī books.”156 The manifestly Kaśmīrī origins of
these two manuscripts, which are his main witnesses for a distinctively Kaśmīrī recen-
sion of the text, is suicient reason for Sukthankar to hereafter designate the Devanāgarī
manuscripts most closely related to them the “K” manuscripts (the second manuscript
itself acquires the siglum K1). Note that the attribution of the siglum K1 to the latter
does not refer to its Kaśmīrī origins, for in that case the siglum K would have one meaning
in the case of K0.2– 6 and another in the case of K1.
Grünendahl also errs when he claims that Sukthankar “irst risk[s] a more deini-
tive statement regarding this topic [the Kaśmīrī origins of the K manuscripts]” in the
Āraṇyakaparvan for when Sukthankar says that the K manuscripts “must in part be
merely Devanāgarī copies of Ś āradā originals and may in part represent the version of
a province or a region adjoining the Ś āradā zone, which it has not been possible to
localize more precisely,”157 he is not saying that the manuscripts arose in a region near
the Ś āradā zone (which is how Grünendahl interprets him) but that their text or their version
must have emerged in a region adjoining the Ś āradā zone. Thereafter it is possible that
over the long centuries of manuscript copying, this “K” version migrated from its place
of origin across India, especially if it was written in Devanāgarī, which would have made
it easy for its text to be disseminated across India. We would now have the situation that
southern and Gujarati copies of a text exist, whose similarity nonetheless indicates a
common origin and whose resemblance to the Ś āradā version suggests an origin some-
where close to the Ś āradā region (logically, since their production presupposes suicient
Ś āradā sources and this is likeliest in the region where the Ś āradā script was in use).
Grünendahl’s objection to Sukthankar’s use of K is thus based on a similar misun-
derstanding as his objection to Sukthankar’s use of sigla deriving from the irst letters of
the other scripts. He thinks the choice of siglum has an innate bearing on the reconstruc-
tion and hence raises objections against the use of particular sigla for particular groups,
not realizing that this is largely a pragmatic decision. The reconstruction would not be
afected if we were to call the K manuscripts D manuscripts with a superscript K (DK),
as Edgerton in fact suggested.158 Sukthankar’s identiication of the K manuscripts with
Kaśmīr is based on their text being of the Kaśmīrī type. The latter identiication is made
on the basis of the Kaśmīrī origins of Ś1.159
In the event, the origins of some of the manuscripts (and not just the texts) proved
Kaśmīrī, conirming Sukthankar’s conjecture that the version’s origins should be sought
near the Ś āradā region.160 When Grünendahl charges that a “striving for a geographic
arrangement was manifestly in the foreground [of Sukthankar’s concerns], without
indications for a special relationship of the K manuscripts to Kashmir being recogniz-
able,” he confuses two things: a special relationship of the K manuscripts to the Kaśmīrī
version and a special relationship of the K manuscripts to the province of Kaśmīr. In
disregarding this distinction he goes astray. He accuses Sukthankar of selecting the siglum
K in order to suggest an association with Kaśmīr, not realizing that this is true— and
explicitly so—o nly of the association with a Kaśmīr version. Sukthankar does not at any
point identify Kaśmīr as these manuscripts’ place of origin or production, and with good
reason. He is aware that the fact that their text is of the Kaśmīrī type means little for their
Kaśmīrī origin, since Devanāgarī copies can be from any part of India.161 And while he
204
204 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
did not have access to K manuscripts in a script other than Devanāgarī, his principles
allow for this possibility, as transpired in the Bhīṣmaparvan when Belvalkar discovered a
Bengālī manuscript containing a Kaśmīrī text.162
Grünendahl cites the precise passage, yet overlooks its signiicance: if “the editors
of the individual parvans constituted the ‘K’ version independently of the geographic
origin of the respective manuscripts,” then this was because geographic origin played
no role in identifying the version! Every one of Sukthankar’s successors followed him in
distinguishing between the text and the physical reality of a manuscript, so the confu-
sion is Grünendahl’s alone.163 As with the Schriftartprämisse, where he advocated a solution
(not to classify manuscripts on the basis of script) to a problem (manuscripts cannot be
classiied on the basis of script) that occurred to no one else before him, here also his
solution (do not identify the siglum K with Kaśmīr) is applicable to a problem (the K
manuscripts are not all from Kaśmīr) only he experiences.
Possibly, Grünendahl has been misled by Sukthankar’s use of sigla deriving from the
initial letters of the script (or, in Lüders’s case, by the use of the titles in the Kaśmīr
version, Bengālī version, Nāgarī version by Arjunamiśra and so on) to designate the
Mahābhārata’s versions. To the novice who encounters Lüders’s or Sukthankar’s editions
for the irst time it must seem self-e vident that titles are essentially determined by the
script. Grünendahl takes these sigla or titles as evidence that Sukthankar and Lüders
classiied the manuscripts according to their script, not realizing that their real reason for
using these sigla or titles was that the script of a manuscript was the most accurate indi-
cator of its contents and, if in practice a manuscript deviated from our expectation of it,
this would not be a problem for we would simply reassign it under its correct archetype.164
Likewise, if a group of manuscripts assumed to belong under a version because
of their common script proved unlike the other members of that group (for example,
the Devanāgarī version of Arjunamiśra, which difered from the other Devanāgarī
versions), we would simply move it into its own group and assign it its own name.165 In
all of these cases, what is decisive is not the system of nomenclature used, which as we
saw in the preceding subsection is a matter of convention, but the way a manuscript
behaves, which can only be established in the recensio. Whether a Grantha manuscript
is actually a Grantha manuscript— that is to say, whether it demonstrates the speciic
features of the Grantha version— is a function if its text.166 It cannot be deduced from
external characteristics such as its script and this can be seen from the circumstance that
some Ś āradā manuscripts proved to contain the Devanāgarī text or a Devanāgarī man-
uscript proved to contain the Grantha text. In contrast, had either Lüders or Sukthankar
attempted to classify the manuscripts according to an extrinsic and artiicial criterion
such as script, the textual evidence would have contradicted them at every turn.167
Table 5 gives a partial overview (further examples may be found by looking at the
remaining parvans) of the manuscripts in the irst six parvans classiied— against the
expectations their script evoked—w ith their true agnates.168 In each case, the editor’s
comments, even if cited earlier, are provided in full in the footnote to the manuscript.
If there is nonetheless congruity between the script and the version, this
must be sought in the way— as Lüders and Sukthankar both hypothesized—
manuscripts descended from their sources and underwent diferentiation over time.
205
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 205
Table 5 The text as the true basis of classiication
Parvan Manuscript(s) Sigla Script Expected True
employed classiication classiication
Ādiparvan Raghunath Temple Not collated Śāradā Ś D
Library, nos. for the (text of the
3712– 32 and critical vulgate)
nos. 3951– 79 edition1
Sabhāparvan Melkote, Yadugiri T2– 42 Telugu T BD
Yatiraj Math, (text of the E
no. 155; type)
Madras, Govt.
MSS. Library,
no. 1922;
Madras, Govt.
MSS. Library,
no. 1923
Nepal Darbar V23 Newārī Ñ V
Library, no. 1
947
Adyar Library, DG1 and Devanāgarī D G
XI C 42 and DG24
XXXVI G 13
Virāṭaparvan Raghunath Temple Not collated Śāradā Ś D
Library, nos. for the (text of the
3712– 32 and critical vulgate)
nos. 3951– 79 edition5
Udyogaparvan Tanjore, Not collated Devanāgarī D G
Saraswathi for the
Mahal Library critical
no. 1250 and edition6
no. 1297
Pudukottah State Not collated Devanāgarī D S8
Collection, for the
Devanāgarī MS. critical
(without number) edition7
Bhīṣmaparvan Dacca, University K49 Bengālī B K
Library, no. 669
Madras, Adyar K710 Devanāgarī D K and S
Library, No.
Xc7
Harivaṃśa Unnamed Not collated Nandināgari Nandināgari T
for the group
critical (no siglum
edition11 established)
Scindia Institute, Not collated neo- Śāradā Ś? D
Ujjain for the (text of the
critical vulgate)
edition12
Notes:
1. Ādiparvan: “[P] aper manuscripts, written in modern Śāradā characters, with Nīlakaṇṭha’s commen-
tary […] They represent probably the Nīlakaṇṭha version.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” v, n. 1.
206
206 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Table 5 (Cont.)
2. Sabhāparvan: T2: “Fundamentally the text belongs to the ‘E’ (B and D) version, with all that
version’s insertions, but it has been extensively contaminated by the insertion of many additional
passages from a Southern source. […] Yet contaminatory inluence of the S version in original
stanzas is rare.”
T3: “The basic text agrees in general quite closely with T2. This MS. also contains some Southern
insertions, but far fewer than T2.”
T4: “Also fundamentally an ‘E’ (B and D) text, with all the insertions characteristic of that version,
and with readings of detail agreeing even more regularly therewith than is the case with T2 and T3.”
Edgerton, “Introduction,” xx– xxi.
3. V2: “Despite the alphabet [Newārī], it obviously belongs to the Maithilī, not the Nepalese, recension
and goes quite closely in general with V1.” Ibid., xviii.
4. DG1: “Devanāgarī, but text of the Grantha recension; clearly a recent copy of a Grantha original.”
5. DG2: “Devanāgarī, but text of the Grantha recension, like the preceding. […] This and the pre-
ceding were fully collated, but they are not included in the Critical Apparatus. They are normal
MSS. of the G recension, despite the use of the Devanāgarī alphabet.” Ibid., xxii.
6. Virāṭaparvan: “These [manuscripts] unfortunately turned out to be recent copies of Nīlakaṇṭha’s
text, and hence of no value as Śāradā codices.” Vira, “Introduction,” x.
7. Udyogaparvan: Sigla not speciied: “[These manuscripts are] merely copies of Grantha MSS. in
Devanāgarī, no. 6 [in De’s list = no. 1297] being, in addition, a composite paper MS. written by
more than one hand.”
8. Siglum not speciied: “[This manuscript is] a typical Devanāgarī misch- codex which, being copied
probably in the South, contains such a large number of Southern passages that it may be regarded
almost as a Southern MS.” De, “Introduction,” xii.
9. Bhīsṃ aparvan: K4: “This is the irst time that a MS. written in Bengali characters has been classiied
with K, which normally designates Devanāgarī copies from a Śāradā original. But, à priori, there is
no reason why direct copies from a Śāradā original should not be made in Bengali characters. The
text would in course of transmission be contaminated with the Bengali version, just as, in the other
case, it would be with the Devanāgarī version. But the MS. must certainly be classiied as K if it
possesses suicient and distinctive characteristics of that group.” Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the
Bhīsṃ aparvan],” xxix.
10. K7: Not part of the regular critical apparatus, but readings from it are occasionally mentioned and
commented on in the Critical Notes to this parvan. Note that the siglum (K7) refers “only to the irst
part of the MS., the second part being altogether ignored.” Ibid., lv. This manuscript presents a
curious example: it is written in Devanāgarī characters, but it is “a composite MS. consisting of two
parts, separately paged, giving folios 43 +164. […] The handwriting of both parts appears similar,
but the texts given by them difer, the irst part being distinctly Kashmirian, while the second, mainly
Southern.” Ibid. This manuscript perfectly illustrates that the true basis of classiication must be the
text contained in it.
11. Harivaṃśa: Siglum not speciied: “One manuscript in Nandināgari script was collated, but it was
found to give an identical text with that in Telugu script and was, therefore, not taken into account.”
Vaidya, “Introduction [to the Harivaṃśa],” x.
12. S iglum not speciied: “It [the manuscript] is written in neo- Śāradā script on paper. The copyist
was no doubt a Kashmir Brāhmaṇa, probably on a visit to Banaras, and seems to have prepared
this Ms. there as a pastime. The text of the Harivaṃśa in it is the inlated text almost identical
with the Vulgate, and what is important to note is that there is a commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha
Caturdhara on the top as well as at the bottom of the page. It requires no argument to say that this
Ms. was prepared much later than 1690 CE, that is, after Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary on the whole
of the Mahābhārata was completed. As this Ms. in neo- Śāradā script was prepared so late, and
as it contained Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary, its value as a Ms. of Śāradā version is nil.” Ibid., xvii.
207
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 207
Northern Branch
3rd BCE Bra¯hm¯ı
Northern Bra¯hm¯ı Southern Bra¯hm¯ı
2-1 BCE
4th CE
(Gupta alphabet, 4th CE) (Dra¯vid.i alphabet, 4th CE)
Western Gupta Eastern Gupta
5th CE
S´a¯rada¯ Na¯gar¯ı
7–8
(8th CE) (7th CE)
Devana¯gar¯ı Proto-Southern-Na¯gar¯ı Proto-Eastern-Na¯gar¯ı
10–11
Newa¯ri Proto-Bengali
(11th CE)
(11th CE)
13 Southern-Na¯gar¯ı
14–15 (13th–15th CE)
Bengali Maithili Oriya
16 Nandina¯gar¯ı
Figure 40 The evolution of northern Brāhmī
Source: Reproduced from Rath, “The Oriya Script,” 55.
Southern Scripts, 250 BCE – 1600 CE
500BCE BRĀHMĪ
250BCE
1st CE Gupta (N) Cave
350 Cera¯ Ca¯lukya Ven¯gi
650 Proto – Gra¯ntha Vat ·t ·eluttu W. Ca¯lukya E. Ca¯lukya Old Javanese (Kawi)
1000 Transitional
1300 Old Tulu-Mal. Middle Gr. Hala-Kannada Old Telugu
·
1600 Tulu Malaya¯I ·am Grantha Tamil Kannad ·a Telugu Modern Javanese
Figure 41 The evolution of southern Brāhmī
Source: Modiied from Rath, “Varieties of Grantha Script,” 189.
208
208 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Two charts (Figures 40 and 41)— one of the evolution of northern Brāhmī and the other
of the evolution of southern Brāhmī— make this clear.169
In the irst chart, we see how the Brāhmī script developed into two agnates,
northern Brāhmī and southern Brāhmī. Assuming that the archetypal Mahābhārata
manuscript was Sanskrit written in Brāhmī script, when this manuscript was copied
around the irst century BCE, it would likely have been copied into either northern
Brāhmī or southern Brāhmī. If multiple examples existed and they were copied sev-
eral times, they would likely have given rise to northern and southern copies of the
text. Assuming further that the southern exemplars then underwent extensive revision
(as they in fact did), the southern Brāhmī manuscripts would now constitute an inde-
pendent branch of the tradition. If scribes preferentially copied manuscripts from
ancestor scripts to descendant scripts (for example, from Proto- Bengālī into Bengālī
or from Proto- Grantha into Grantha and so on), these inherited diferences would
be consistently transmitted. We would now ind that the texts in the successor scripts
of northern Brāhmī were distinct from the texts in the successor scripts of southern
Brāhmī, though we would not for this reason diferentiate the manuscripts on the
basis of script. Rather, the text remains the basis of classiication, but we now ind a
relation between the script of a manuscript and its text.
This relation would not be perfect, of course. Paralleling the formation of
regional recensions of the text, some contamination would occur between versions,
blurring the diferences between them. Nonetheless, over time the practice of copying
manuscripts in the same script (or from an ancestral script) would reinforce regional
variations in the text, and over time we might expect distinct recensions to emerge,
each corresponding to the script in use in its local area. Ignoring the occasional oddity
such as a Ś āradā copy of a Devanāgarī text (which would not be a problem since we
would recognize the manuscript’s true descent upon examination), we could now use
script as a shorthand or a substitute for the text of a version.
This is not to say that we would follow the script blindly. In the inal analysis, the text
alone is a guide to a manuscript’s provenance. The script of a manuscript gives us a good
idea of its version and we would use this information to conduct an initial survey of the
manuscripts. It is of course possible that during the recensio we might ind signiicant var-
iation between the manuscripts. This would imply that our third assumption—n amely,
that scribes tended preferentially to copy manuscripts from ancestor scripts to descendant
scripts— was false.170 In practice, Sukthankar did ind several such manuscripts, which
he called “misch- codices of small trustworthiness and of no special value for critical
purposes” and therefore eliminated after a preliminary recensio.171 However, as long as we
can clearly trace the relationship of the better manuscripts, we shall still be able to infer
the reading of their archetype.172 Manuscripts will difer across their lengths, shifting in
the direction of one or the other more or less proximate neighbor. Thus, a K manuscript
may concur with Ś for most of its length, but in some chapter or book might suddenly
resemble the D group. Its classiication as K is independent of this variation (the sigla are
only heuristic markers), so the fact that it is inconsistent for some part of its length is not
a major objection. No one claims that individual manuscripts perfectly incarnate their
ancestors; the only decisive consideration is whether they approximate their ideal types
209
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 209
suiciently to justify treating them as members of a class. Some variation from the norm
is inevitable. Where this variation is of signiicance—t hat is, in the recensio— the editor
can be expected to note it in his critical apparatus.173 The stemma’s function, after all, is
only to formalize and illustrate the central relationships. It cannot record every exception
to the rule. Grünendahl’s confusion arises from contemplating the stemma in isolation—
that is, from a failure to realize that a stemma is always presented along with a critical
apparatus and must be read in conjunction with the latter: the stemma gives the rule; the
critical apparatus notes all the exceptions to the rule.
The argument from a misapprehension of classiication does not work. Grünendahl
confuses the script as a principle of nomenclature with the script as a principle of
classiication and both again with the script as a principle of reconstruction. The error
he attributes to Lüders and Sukthankar (they only considered the script in classifying
manuscripts) is his own: he is the only one who thinks that knowing the scripts of diferent
manuscripts is suicient information not only to classify them but also to draw up a
stemma. At most, the argument may imply a strong skepticism about the possibility of
drawing up stemma in light of extensive contamination. But, as we see in what follows,
this argument is also based on a misapprehension.
The Argument from Extensive Contamination
The widespread presence of contamination between Mahābhārata manuscripts (evinced by the existence of
interpolated passages across recensions) makes a satisfactory classiication impossible.
Refutation of the argument: in practice, no editor found contamination such a problem that he could not
establish the manuscripts’ true iliation. Though present, contamination was restricted largely to the existence
of the additional passages, which, indeed, were often transmitted horizontally. The manuscripts’ true ili-
ation almost always became obvious in terms of the signiicant errors in the text. Grünendahl errs because
he considers only the interpolated passages rather than readings. His understanding of contamination is also
peculiar: according to him, the absence of interpolation is also a kind of “contamination” (namely, non-
contamination), for how (he reasons) could two manuscripts agree in featuring the same text if not for the fact
that one of them “contaminated” the other? The answer is simple: the manuscripts contain the identical text,
because the same text was handed down to them and no inluence of the one upon the other needs to be presumed
to explain the circumstance that they lack the same interpolations. Interpolations, except when interpolated, tend
not to be present, so that no special circumstance is required to explain their absence in a manuscript.
In the preceding section, we saw that if the so-c alled Schriftartprämisse has any meaning it
is that of a generalized skepticism about the value of dividing up the manuscript material
into groups, given the presence of contamination. In contrast, Grünendahl’s wider claim,
namely, that the critical edition is based on lawed theoretical premises since it uses script
as the criterion of classiication, proved untrue since neither Lüders nor Sukthankar
classiied the manuscripts by script.
A closer look at Grünendahl’s article reveals that this is in fact what he means. In
spite of the misleading term Schriftartprämisse and the equally misguided discussion of
the untenability of this premise, Grünendahl’s discussion comes down to the fact that
he thinks an assignment of manuscripts to diferent groups on the basis of their text
is impossible because their text overlaps in many instances. Thus, immediately after
210
210 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
introducing Lüders’s description of the rationale for classiication (which he misleadingly
introduces with the words: “Regarding the script as a criterion for the classiication of
Mahābhārata manuscripts, Lüders already expressed himself in his study on the so-
called Grantha recension”174), he states: “Lüders’s thesis proved not true insofar as none
of the numerous variants in his Druckprobe actually proved to correspond to one of his
versions distinguished on the basis of the script.”175 Thereafter he returns to the theme
after several pages in which he discusses his understanding of Sukthankar’s application
of the principle. He writes:
Sukthankar’s application of these barely comprehensible theoretical presuppositions will be
clariied using the example of his recensio of the hyparchetype ν. Precisely because of the
exemplary value that is granted his Prolegomena for textual criticism it is worthwhile to look at
his comments regarding this branch of the tradition in more detail, and this all the more as
he grants central signiicance to the two versions derived from ν (Ś āradā and K) for his con-
stitution of the text.176
Before we look at Grünendahl’s criticisms of Sukthankar’s ν recension, let us irst under-
stand contamination. As we saw in the preceding section, at heart Grünendahl’s objections
to the critical edition concern an anxiety about contamination. The main issue, after all,
is not whether K1 is really the manuscript K1 (as we noted, the system of nomencla-
ture employed is a matter of convention, and we could also call our K manuscripts Z
manuscripts with no change in our edition),177 but whether it really behaves like a K
manuscript over its length. It is possible that after initially behaving like a K manuscript it
could later switch to behaving like a D manuscript for the remainder of its length. Here
there really would be a problem, because we would continue to assign weight to K1’s
agreement with Ś1 (or M or any other an independent version) when in fact it is now
behaving like a D manuscript and thus is no longer an independent witness. It has been
contaminated or conlated and these sections of the text are no longer descended from
a K or a Ś āradā archetype (that is, ultimately from ν) but from a Devanāgarī source. We
would now be comparing not the branches of the tradition we think we are comparing
but two other branches, and since we cannot know what source a scribe really transcribed
for given sections of the text, we would be deceived in our inferences. The stemma in
Figure 42 clariies the problem.
This stemma indicates the reading of the diferent versions for verse 1.29.5 in the crit-
ical edition. In the constituted text, the verse reads: adhaś cakrasya caivātra dıp̄ tānalasamadyutı ̄
| vidyujjihvau mahāghorau dıp̄ tāsyau dıp̄ talocanau ||.178 The word ghorau in the inal pada (verse
half) is marked uncertain, because the witnesses contain diferent readings: Ś and K
read ghorau (as in the constituted text); Ñ, V, B and D with the exception of D2 and D5
read vır̄yau; while the Malayālam recension breaks up into two groups of manuscripts,
M2– 4 reading mahākāyau whereas M1.5 reads mahāghorau. The Telugu and Grantha
recensions are split: T1 features the central recension’s reading, while T2 features that of
the Malayālam group M2–4 ; likewise, G2 features the central recension’s reading, while
G1.4– 6 features that of the Malyālam group M2– 4. The one exception is G3, which
concurs with the smaller Malayālam group M1.5 and Ś-K. The constituted text is based
211
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 211
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
M1.5
mah ghorau mah vryau
(as in constituted text) (except D2.5; T2 mah k yau) mah ghorau
(as in constituted text)
mah k yau
(G2 mah vryau; G3 mah ghorau)
Figure 42 Agreement between independent versions
on the agreement of Ś and K with M1.5, additionally supported by D2.5 and G3. The
editor’s reasoning is easy to reconstruct: the central recension is highly contaminated as
are the Telugu and Grantha manuscripts, albeit Grantha to a lesser degree than Telugu.
In contrast, Ś and K are relatively pure, and their reading is conirmed by the Malayālam
manuscripts M1.5. Thus, against the possibility that the γ recension retained the correct
reading (mahāvır̄yau) and it was corrupted in S-́K and in M1.5 to mahāghorau, the editor
must weigh the possibility that the correct reading (mahāghorau) was retained in S-́K with
M1.5, whereas it was lost in the γ recension, either in γ itself or in one of its descendants
and thence transmitted via contamination to the other manuscripts in this group.179 Since
Ś— M contamination is less likely,180 Sukthankar considers the agreement of S-́K with M
the strongest argument for this being the reading of the archetype,181 which is addition-
ally supported by the fact that the reading mahāghorau is also found in the manuscripts D2,
D5 and G3. Our stemma lectionum would look like Figure 43.
Mahāghorau was probably corrupted to mahāvır̄yau; inding mahāviryau (“greatly vig-
orous,” “greatly energetic” or “greatly valorous”) not to make much sense, another
copyist emended it to mahākāyau (“large bodied”). Alternately, an original mahāghorau in
the source could have given rise to both mahāvır̄yau and mahākāyau by emendation. Our
stemma lectionum would look like Figure 44.
If contamination was present, these inferences would not hold. In that case, it is
possible that the central recension in fact retained the correct reading, mahāvır̄yau being
transmitted from the archetype via N and S to Ñ, V, B, D, T1 and G2, while mahāghorau
212
212 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
adhas´ cakrasya caiva¯tra d¯ıpta¯nalasamadyut¯ı | vidyujjihvau maha¯ghorau d¯ıpta¯syau d¯ıptalocanau || S´K M1.5 D2.5 G3
v¯ıryau N˜ V B D1.3–4.6.7 T1 G2
ka¯yau T2 G1.4–6 M2–4
Figure 43 Stemma lectionum of verse 1.29.5
adhas´ cakrasya caiva¯tra d¯ıpta¯nalasamadyut¯ı | vidyujjihvau maha¯ghorau d¯ıpta¯syau d¯ıptalocanau || S´K M1.5 D2.5 G3
N˜ V B D1.3–4.6.7 T1 G2 v¯ıryau ka¯yau T2 G1.4–6 M2–4
Figure 44 Alternative stemma lectionum of verse 1.29.5
is a corruption originating in the ν recension, transmitted via contamination to the M
group (either to M as a whole, with M2–4 later emending this to mahākāyau, or only to
M1.5). The stemma in Figure 45 clariies the situation.
We would now be deceived in our inferences, because we would assume that Ś, K and
M are independent versions (and therefore take their agreement as an argument for the
reading of the archetype) when, in fact, M has ceased to be an independent witness for
Ś and K. The stemma in Figure 46 illustrates the true state of relationships (in respect of
this one verse).
Mahāghorau is inherited (via contamination) from ν so that in respect of this one verse,
M1.5 are actually apographs of ν. Consequently, when we try to reconstruct the reading
of the archetype and rely on the evidence of Ś, K and M, we are in fact only relying on
the evidence of the ν recension and the reading we reconstruct as the reading of the
archetype is only that of the ν hyparchetype. It is in this sense that contamination, if
present to more than a minor degree, can mislead us about the true relationship of the
manuscripts. A manuscript classiied as M1 and so on, and therefore as a descendant of
the hyparchetype M, could be a descendant of ν. This is not to say that its classiication
by its script is wrong (script, as we observed, plays no role in the classiication) but that its
classiication as a descendant of M (and ultimately of S) is wrong: its text is not inherited
from the sources it is assumed to be inherited from, and consequently its speciic features
are not features of its presumed source (M) but rather of its true source (ν). Note that
renaming the manuscript with a diferent designation does not solve the problem: the real
problem concerns not its name but its place in the stemma.182 In this case, our stemma
would only relect the real nature of the relationships between the manuscripts if we
reassigned M1.5 under the ν recension.
Although potentially a problem, this type of contamination is easier to control for
in practice. As Reeve notes, “It strikes me as unlikely […] that scribes would be so
consistent in incorporating or ignoring variants as to disguise the nature of the arche-
type completely. My general impression of contamination, and I believe Alberti’s too,
213
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 213
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada K Nepl Maithil Bengali Devangar Telugu Grantha Malaylam
1 V1 T1.2
M1.5
mahghorau mahvryau
(as in constituted text) (except D2.5; T2 mahkyau) mahghorau
(as in constituted text)
mahkyau
(G2 mahvryau; G3 mahghorau)
Figure 45 Contamination, undermining the assumption of independence
is that it has the efect not of falsifying stemma but of frustrating attempts at drawing
them up.”183 For instance, if a scribe followed one source for a certain length, but then
changed sources, we would notice this, provided we had other copies of his source.184
Thus, Sukthankar notes of the Grantha version that “for the beginning of the Ādi, we
get temporarily, the sub-g roups G1–3 and G4– 6, but soon the coniguration changes
to G1.2.4.5 versus G3.6. The latter group (G3.6) represents the purer Southern tradi-
tion, agreeing with M against the other Southern manuscripts, whereas the four MSS.
G1.2.4.5 are not merely heavily interpolated but stand palpably under Northern inlu-
ence.”185 Over the length of a manuscript, then, it would be very diicult for a man-
uscript to conceal its true lineage. Thus, while there are the “misch-c odices”— that
is, manuscripts in whose copying the scribe has combined two sources— these are of
little value for the reconstruction.186 They can be identiied as such and the editor will
likely not assign their evidence weight in his reconstruction, if he chooses to note their
variants at all.187
In contrast, contamination of the less promiscuous manuscripts, if present, is likely
to be restricted to the insertion of passages or occasional comparisons, leading to the
recording of variants as marginal glosses. It is unlikely that a scribe would have followed
his source throughout and in just one instance incorporated the reading of a diferent
recension, undermining our assumption of independent corroboration in just this one
instance. Applied to the present case, this means, since M1.5 consistently follow M, we
are justiied in thinking that their agreement with Ś and K is evidence of an original
inheritance and taking this reading to be the reading of the archetype.
214
214 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
M1.5 ra 1da K Nepl Ma Vit 1hil Bengali Devangar T Tel 1u .g 2u Grantha Malaylam
mahghorau
(as in constituted text)
mahghorau mahvryau
(as in constituted text) (except D2.5; T2 mahkyau)
mahkyau
(G2 mahvryau; G3 mahghorau)
Figure 46 Contamination, the real nature of the relationships in our stemma
Contamination is thus less of a problem in practice than it appears in the abstract.
An editor can for the most part account for it, the more so as contamination in the
Mahābhārata tradition was restricted rather to the tendency to inlation than to com-
bination of readings.188 Even highly inlated versions such as the Grantha demonstrate
their true iliation in terms of their minor readings. The real problem arises from the
fact that Grünendahl and the other German critics do not look at the readings of
manuscripts but try to establish iliation on the basis of insertions (or their absence). This
leads to a distorted view of the tradition, because iliation, as we saw at the beginning of
this chapter, is established on the basis of the unique errors a scribe introduces into his
manuscript and not on agreement in truth or the addition of passages, which represents
another kind of agreement in truth.189
Sukthankar is very clear that the real basis for iliation is, as he puts it, the agreement
in “petty verbal details.” He writes:
One notable feature of ν to which I must now draw attention is its frequent agreement with
S against γ, especially in the matter of isolated and even unimportant readings, scattered
throughout this parvan. I shall cite a few (out of the hundreds of possible) instances to exem-
plify this interesting and important characteristic of ν. The readings of inlated manuscripts,
which serve only to confuse the issue, have been ignored; the references are, as usual, to the
adhyāya and śloka. [A list of 30 readings follows that shows ν and S agree against γ, and
Sukthankar then concludes:] Such extensive agreements in petty verbal details must necessarily
be, in the main, an original inheritance, and could never be, in their totality, the result of contam-
ination or conlation, as one may vaguely imagine they are; because to achieve them would
215
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 215
necessitate more expenditure of energy than an ancient Indian redactor or reciter or com-
mentator of the epic would bargain for.190
Because the stemma is based on the comparison of thousands of such minor variants, in
practice we are unlikely to be deceived about the true relationship between manuscripts.
If a scribe occasionally incorporated the readings of a diferent recension, we could
probably still identify his true source and merely note that there is occasional contam-
ination from another recension, though if we did not suspect contamination we would
continue assigning signiicance to their agreement.191 The true stemma would then be
as in Figure 47.192
Such occasional contamination is doubtless present, transmitted mainly via the com-
parison of manuscripts, but it is largely restricted to the central manuscript groups and
T and G.193 It ought not deceive us as to the real nature of the relationships in our
stemma. Neither ought it to prevent us from relying on those manuscripts whose evi-
dence is relatively clear to reconstruct the reaching of the archetype.194 We shall call this
irst type of contamination corruption, because it originates when the true reading is lost
due to corruption in one or more manuscripts and the new reading is transmitted to
other manuscripts via comparison.
We must now consider a second type of contamination, which concerns not contam-
ination of readings but transmission of interpolations. Since this form of contamination
concerns additions to the archetype, we refer to it as inlation rather than contamination. The
stemma in Figure 48 makes clear the relationships.
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
Figure 47 Contamination from and into the central subrecension
216
216 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
θ
N S
ν γ 321*
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
except except except
D2.5 T2
Figure 48 The interpolated passage 321*
The passage 321* is present in all manuscripts of the central subrecension (with
the exception of D2.5) and in T1. It is not present in the manuscripts of the S and ν
recensions (with the exception of T1). It thus marks out this group of manuscripts against
the latter two recensions. Since it is an insertion, the passage does not serve to establish il-
iation, either between the manuscripts of this group or between those of the other group
(that is, those that do not feature it). The passage could have arisen in one of the witnesses
of the γ recension and then been transmitted to the others (horizontal transmission).
Alternatively, it could have arisen in γ itself and then been transmitted to its descendants
(vertical transmission). Since we are speaking of an additional passage, which is a kind of
agreement in truth, we cannot determine the true state of afairs. The passage could also
have arisen in the lone manuscript T1 and thence been passed along to the groups Ñ, V,
B and D. It would be incorrect for us to assume, on the basis of this passage, a relation-
ship of descent either between one of the witness texts (say, D) and the others or between
γ and its hyparchetypes and versions if we had no other evidence to establish this. The
two stemmata in Figures 49 and 50 clarify the situation.
The reason we may not assume either of these relationships is not simply that we
do not know which of them depicts the true state of afairs. We may not assume them
because agreement in truth is not a suicient basis on which to assume iliation. If two
manuscripts had an insertion, either could have gotten it from the other or they both
could have gotten it from a third source. We could never determine their iliation unless
217
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 217
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
321*
rada K D Grantha Malay lam
1
Nep l Maithil Bengali Telugu
V1 T1.2
except except except
D2.5 T2
Figure 49 D as the source of the interpolated passage 321*
there were errors in transcription that revealed the true relationship, and we would need
several such errors over the length of a text to draw reliable conclusions.195 Thus, while
interpolation may let us distinguish between the two groups of manuscripts—t he inlated
and the non- inlated—i t does not permit us to conclude a closer relationship between the
members of either group of manuscripts. We could neither determine that Ñ, V, B and D,
having the same interpolation, are genetically related nor that Ś, K, G and M, not having
this interpolation, are genetically related. We could also not conclude that Ś, K and M,
having a relatively pure text (one free of this particular interpolation), have a common
source.196
If iliation cannot be established on the basis of the presence of insertions, it can be
established even less on the basis of the absence of insertions, yet this is precisely what
Grünendahl attempts.197 To understand his logic, we must irst understand a third type
of “contamination.” We call it non- contamination since it concerns not so much the con-
tamination of one manuscript by another but the absence of contamination of one
manuscript by another (which Grünendahl thinks is evidence that the non- contaminated
manuscript was under the inluence of a third—n on- inlated—m anuscript). To under-
stand what he means, let us consider an example. Grünendahl argues that as the
manuscripts D2.5 and Ñ4 are missing certain interpolations otherwise characteristic of
their respective groups D and Ñ, this means these manuscripts were under the inluence
218
218 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
θ
N S
ν γ 321*
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
except except except
D2.5 T2
Figure 50 γ as the source of the interpolated passage 321*
of the K group (which also lacks these interpolations). According to him, the absence
of interpolations is evidence of D2.5 and Ñ4’s relative purity, and they must therefore
constitute a separate group from the inlated manuscripts. Further, he reasons that as
they do not feature certain interpolations against the practice of their presumed groups
or archetypes albeit in agreement with the practice of the K group, this is evidence for a
genetic relationship between them and the K group. Consequently, he argues that D2.5
and Ñ4 not only resemble K in respect of not featuring these interpolations but that
they should also be entered into the stemma along with or under K.
The starting point for his argument is the observation that “Sukthankar thereafter
presents 25 readings (‘also selected at random’; Prolegomena, p. l) that Ś1 is supposed to
have in common with the K version as a whole in contrast to ‘all other manuscripts.’ ”198
Grünendahl claims that the fact that “these manuscripts [the K group] do not after all
distinguish themselves from all other manuscripts is shown by the exceptions, D2.5,
which he himself [Sukthankar] repeatedly lists.”199 According to him, this shows D2.5
are related to K, and he attempts to bolster this claim with their non- contamination
(against their archetype D).200 Speciically, he notes that “to be sure, Sukthankar concedes
that D2.5 could have ‘with advantage’ also been classiied with the K manuscripts
(Prolegomena, p. li, lxxi), but why he ultimately decides against doing so is not quite com-
prehensible in light of the repeated and conspicuous correspondence of D2 and espe-
cially D5— against all manuscripts!— with the hyparchetype ν.”201 Grünendahl argues
219
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 219
that is “all the more the case [all the more incomprehensible] as the inding of the
readings [that is, that D2.5 share some of K’s] is explicitly conirmed by the textual
additions.”202 He does not mean D2.5 might share some of the K group’s additions. As
we saw, iliation cannot be established on the basis of insertions, since insertions are a
form of agreement in truth. Further, since additional passages were often transmitted
horizontally via a comparison of manuscripts, they are worthless for determining ver-
tical transmission or descent. Grünendahl does not seek to establish iliation on the
basis of insertions. Rather, he thinks he can establish it on the basis of the absence of
insertions. Thus, after asserting that this is “all the more the case [all the more incompre-
hensible] as the inding of the readings [that is, that D2.5 share some of K’s readings]
is explicitly conirmed by the textual additions,”203 he notes:
If, for instance, one considers the total number of textual additions in the manuscripts of the
northern recension on p. 108f., it is striking that the number [of additions] in D2.5 lies below
that of K4, which however Sukthankar nonetheless included in his K group.204
As before, when he attempted to classify manuscripts on the basis of their length, here
also he thinks that D2.5’s length (more precisely, the fact that the two manuscripts contain
fewer insertions than K4, since the number of insertions is a poor indicator of length) is
an argument for including them in the K version. He goes even further:
Only, the quantity of textual additions cannot be the criterion; I consider the kind of
commonalities that the D2.5 and K manuscripts manifest in this respect more important.
Here [are] some examples.205
Grünendahl cites three examples to demonstrate the relationship of D2.5 to K. He notes
that the passages 321*, 317* and 1861* are all, as he says, “not present in D2.5 K.”206
He further notes that these passages are also not found in some Nepālī manuscripts and
in the southern recension. As the entire argument turns on this claim, let us look at his
presentation of the evidence:
321* not present in D2.5 K [and Ñ4; southern recension]
317* not present in D2.5 K [and Ñ3.4; southern recension]
1861* not present in D2.5, K, Ś1 [and Ñ1.4, D1; southern recension]
Source: Reproduced verbatim from Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 117.
Note that the argument is not based on insertions in the text of D2.5 and K, but rather
on their absence from D2.5 and K. Grünendahl himself underscores this fact:
Here the proximity of D2.5 to the K group manifests precisely not in terms of shared textual
additions that are present but in terms of textual additions that are not present, which in my
opinion lends especial weight to the passages mentioned.207
We have seen that iliation cannot be established on the basis of the absence of speciic
markers, but this is exactly what Grünendahl attempts. According to him, the absence
of certain passages in manuscripts, especially when it occurs against their archetypes, is
220
220 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
θ
N S
321*
ν γ 317*
1861*
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
D2.5
Figure 51 (Non)contamination of Ñ4 and D2.5 with K
a positive argument for reclassifying them— precisely under the manuscripts that also do
not feature these passages. The stemma in Figure 51 illustrates his reasoning.
Θ— K represents the pure line of descent; θ— γ and θ— D the contaminated line of
descent; 321*, 317* and 1861* are a trio of passages found in the contaminated central
subrecension; Ñ4 and D2.5 agree with K against their archetypes and hence (argues
Grünendahl) must have stood under the K group’s inluence.
Evidently, Grünendahl thinks non-c ontamination is also a kind of contamination: if
Ñ4 and D2.5 do not include the passages 321*, 317* and 1861*, they can only have
followed K’s example in not doing so. Consequently, he reasons, their true archetypes
cannot be Ñ and D (or ε and γ) but instead must be K. Ñ4 and D2.5 are “contami-
nated” in a negative sense, that is to say, where their archetypes feature the three interpo-
lated passages, their scribes kept an eye on the text of K, saw that it did not feature the
passages, and accordingly adopted its reading. This, he concludes, proves that Ñ4 and
D2.5 were “contaminated” with K.208
Although the argument is lawed—t here are many ways in which these manuscripts
may have chosen not to feature the passages, the simplest being that they followed
the reading of their presumed archetype and the presence of these passages in the
other exemplars is due to later contamination—w e shall continue with Grünendahl’s
arguments and only later consider the problems with his view of contamination (namely,
221
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 221
that the absence of contamination can also be thought of as a kind of “contamina-
tion”). Grünendahl’s next argument concerns the relationship of D2.5 to a subgroup of
K manuscripts, speciically K0– 3. He writes:
If one excludes K4 because of its previously indicated special position among the K
manuscripts and concentrates on the relationship between D2.5 and K0– 3, then this inding
is conirmed by the following evidence.209
As with his argument for a close relationship between D2.5 and K, here also he focuses
on absent passages. Speciically, he introduces two passages, 1214* and 221*, which he
thinks demonstrate the closer relationship of D2.5 to K0– 3.
1214* not present in D2.5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
221* not present in D2.5, K0– 3 [and Ñ3.4; southern recension]
Source: Reproduced verbatim from Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,”
117.
Additionally, he notes that “the close relationship of the group K0–3 specially with D5
is clear from numerous other passages: (1) not present in D5, K0–3 , Ś1 [and Ñ4]: 1346*,
1444*, 1517*; (2) not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4, southern recension (!)]: 424*,
1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*, 1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821*.”210 Once again, the
argument is based not on insertions in D2.5 and K0–3 , but, rather, on the absence of
these insertions.
We have already noted that the absence of a certain characteristic cannot be the basis for
asserting a relationship between two species or two things. If iliation cannot be established
on the basis of insertions, it can be established even less on the basis of the absence of
insertions.211 It thus seems that Grünendahl is simply confused about the diference between
insertion and the absence of insertion. However, his next comment reveals that he intends
his readers to take the distinction literally. He writes: “As above, it is textual additions not pre-
sent that indicate at the extensive commonalities between D5 and K0–3 ”212 and follows this
up with the comment: “On the other hand, it should not be left unmentioned that D5 also
has commonalities with K4, however with the diference that these show themselves in pre-
sent textual additions, for example, 435*, 687*, 1715*, 1745*, 1781*, 1863* and 2090*.”213
Grünendahl is thus aware of the distinction between insertion and the absence of inser-
tion.214 Yet he insists that the latter justiies him in grouping certain manuscripts together.
According to him, the true nature of our stemma should be as seen in Figure 52.
We already saw that neither of Grünendahl’s arguments concerning contamination
works. First, contamination of D2.5 with ν is not an argument for including D2.5 under
ν. The fact that conlated manuscripts contaminated with ν exist is not an argument
against taking the evidence of the K manuscripts, especially those that reproduce the
reading of their archetype with greater idelity, seriously. The existence of conlated
specimens does not and cannot afect our ability to reconstruct the reading of the arche-
type, as though we should not take the evidence of good old manuscripts seriously
because late and inferior copies of them also exist. Grünendahl’s argument is a non
sequitur. The only reason for not taking a manuscript’s evidence seriously is if it is an
222
222 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
N
Characterized by inclusion
of 321*, 317*, 1861*
Characterized by noninclusion
of 321*, 317*, 1861*
ν γ
ε
rada Expanded K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar
1 group V1
Figure 52 Constituting groups on the basis of additional passages missing from manuscripts
inferior or composite copy, not because other copyists produced inferior or composite
copies of its source. Indeed, by Grünendahl’s logic, we could not even rely on extant
archetypes, since copyists have produced degenerate copies of them! Further, even if
we were to classify D2.5 with K, this would not have a substantial bearing on the con-
stituted text. It would change the critical apparatus because, in all instances where the
editor noted that the K manuscripts gave a consistent reading, he would now have to
note that K, except K7 and K8 (our old D2 and D5), gave this reading. Likewise, in all
instances where he noted that the D manuscripts featured a unique reading, he would
now have to note that D, as well as the two K manuscripts K7 and K8, feature this
reading. But other than this nothing is gained by this change. The editor would still rely
on the K group as the better and less conlated group and he would permit himself only
to be irritated very slightly by K7 and K8’s recidivism. How to classify manuscripts,
then, is as much a function of pragmatic considerations as it is of substantive ones and
we could well imagine a situation where an editor labeled a southern manuscript K but
then kept noting that it was the exception to the group.
Grünendahl’s second argument for reconsidering the relationship of K to D2.5,
namely, on the basis of shared absences rather than shared contaminated readings, is no
better. He argues that the fact that D2.5, like K, maintained the purer reading (though in
respect of three interpolated passages and only these interpolated passages!) is evidence of
their close relationship. But the only valid inference from the absence of an interpolated
passage in a manuscript is that it is not related either by descent or by contamination to a
manuscript in which this interpolation appears and not, for instance, that the manuscript
in which the interpolation is absent is related to another manuscript in which this passage
is also absent.215 We cannot infer a relationship between two manuscripts from the fact
223
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 223
that they both lack the same insertion.216 But this is precisely Grünendahl’s argument.
He underscores that he is arguing not from insertions but from their absence: “Here
the proximity of D2.5 to the K group manifests not in common passages that are present
but in textual passages that are not present, which in my opinion lends especial weight to
the passages mentioned.”217 By this logic, we could also posit a relationship between the
manuscripts of any two unrelated works, since they by deinition lack the text of some
third composition.
Let us return to our stemma (Figure 46). The correct way to read this stemma is that
321* is an interpolation conined to the γ recension. It is found in all Bengālī manuscripts,
all Devanāgarī manuscripts, Maithilī and all Nepālī manuscripts with the exception of
Ñ4. This does not mean that the manuscripts that lack this interpolation are more closely
related, just as if two individuals caught a rare virus we might suspect that they had
been associating but from the fact that two other individuals did not have this rare virus,
we could never conclude that they had been associating. Grünendahl misconstrues the
evidence of the stemma and concludes that since D2.5, like K, contain a text of the
purer type, this means they are related (Figures 49 and 50). Having used the absence of
three interpolations to posit a closer relationship between D2.5 and K, he now extends
this logic to demonstrate a closer relationship between D2.5 and K0–3 using two more
interpolations (1214* and 221*). As before, he notes that these passages are absent in
these groups (D2.5 and K0– 3). He claims that as there are even more absences in common
between D2.5 and the narrower K group K0–3 , they must be especially closely related.218
The argument is like this (see Figure 53).
K is a noninlationary group comprised of the manuscripts K0–4 , D2.5 and Ñ4,
whose speciic characteristic is that none features the interpolated passages 321*, 317* and
N
Characterized by inclusion of
321*, 317*, 1861*
Characterized by noninclusion
of 321*, 317*, 1861*
rada Expanded K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar
1 group V1
Characterized by noninclusion Characterized by inclusion of
of 1214* and 221* 1214* and 221*
K4
Figure 53 Identifying a core K group on the basis of missing additional passages
224
224 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
1861*. K itself breaks up into two subgroups: a core K group comprised of K0– 3, which
are the purer branch of the K version, and the lone manuscript K4, which represents the
inlationary branch of the K version. The two groups (according to Grünendahl) are dis-
tinguished in respect of the two interpolations 1214* and 221*. Thus, while K0–3 do not
feature these interpolations, K4 resembles the inlationary γ recension in including them.
As before, Ñ4 and D2.5 distinguish themselves from their archetypes in not featuring
the interpolations 1214* and 221* but in this case they agree only with K0–3 — against
K4— in doing so.
It is clear what Grünendahl hopes to demonstrate with this argument. According to
him, these passages show that the manuscripts Ñ4 and D2.5 are not just closer to the K
version than to their supposed archetypes; they stand in the closest proximity to the pure K
group, K0– 3. And since the script is anyway not a legitimate basis for classiication (he
thinks), the assignment of the manuscripts to the versions must be reconsidered. As he
puts it, “A greater signiicance accrues to the indicated commonalities between D5 and
K0– 3. These stand in a manifest contradiction to Sukthankar’s argument, which aims
at displacing D2.5 into proximity with the conlated manuscripts K3–6 and thus to keep the
‘pure form’ of the K version, represented by K0.1, from every taint of contamination.”219
Why exactly Grünendahl thinks that by demonstrating that other manuscripts also
do not feature the insertions that K0.1 do not feature, this introduces the “taint of con-
tamination” into them is unclear: K0.1 would indeed possess the “taint of contamina-
tion” as he so vividly describes it, if they had been contaminated, but in this case he has at
most shown that D2.5 are also free from the “taint of contamination” (at least in respect
of these two passages). It takes an unusual intellect to conclude that because K0.1 and
D2.5 are simultaneously free of the “taint of contamination,” they must nonetheless, for
being identical in this respect, possess the “taint of contamination.” One might as well
conclude that because two individuals are virgins at the same time, they are nonetheless
soiled, for how else could they be identical in this respect if not through intercourse with
each other.
As evidence that Ñ4 and D5 are closer to K0–3 than even K4 (which at least nom-
inally is part of the K group), Grünendahl next lists 13 passages. He introduces them
with the words: “The close relationship of the group K0–3 to D5 in particular is clear
from numerous other passages: (1) not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4]: 1346*, 1444*,
1517*; (2) not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4, southern recension (!)]: 424*, 1202*,
1344*, 1345*, 1363*, 1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821*.”220 Once again Grünendahl
emphasizes that he is building a stemma, not on the basis of errors in transcription or
insertions, but rather on the absence of insertions. He notes: “As above it is the additions
that are absent that hint at far reaching commonalities between D5 and K0–3 .”221 He
thus uses the absence of common features to continuously reine his classiication. In the
irst stage, he noted that the K group and Ñ4 and D2.5 were linked by the fact of not
containing the interpolations 321*, 317* and 1861*. Thereafter he noted that this rela-
tionship is reinforced in the case of K0–3 by the fact that neither this core K group nor
the aforementioned manuscripts from the Nepālī and Devanāgarī groups contained the
interpolated passages 1214* and 221*. In the third stage, he now shows that Ñ4 and
D5 constitute the innermost core of this group in that they most closely approach the
225
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 225
N
Characterized by inclusion of
321*, 317*, 1861*
Characterized by noninclusion
of 321*, 317*, 1861*
ν γ
ε
rada Expanded K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar
1 group V1
Characterized by noninclusion Characterized by inclusion of
of 1214* and 221* 1214* and 221*
Characterized by noninclusion of 1346*,
K4
1444*, 1517*, 424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*,
Characterized by inclusion of 1346*, 1444*,
1363*, 1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821*
1517*, 424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*,
D2 1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821*
Figure 54 Using the absence of interpolations to reine the classiication of manuscripts
noninlationary tradition represented by Ś1 and K0– 3. The argument would be some-
thing like that presented in Figure 54.
This stemma ofers the clearest indication yet of Grünendahl’s approach. As before,
he uses a selection of interpolations to separate the Mahābhārata manuscripts into purer
and less pure groups. Via continuously discarding the inlated manuscripts, he thinks
he can arrive at the purest group of manuscripts, which he interprets to mean not the
general correctness and antiquity of their readings, but the absence of interpolations. In
the process, he breaks up the original groups Sukthankar established on the basis of the
manuscripts’ true iliation and redistributes their members into new groups. Thus, his
“K” group is no longer comprised of the manuscripts descended from Ś āradā sources
(ultimately, ν), but of manuscripts all of whose text approaches a certain norm in terms
of not containing certain passages.
How can this establish iliation? The short answer is that it cannot, because there are
many ways in which two manuscripts might not have a certain interpolation. They might
not have this interpolation because they are both descended from separate lines of the
tradition neither of which featured the interpolation, or they might not have the inter-
polation because they both did not come into contact with the source of the interpola-
tion, or they might not have the interpolation because, although their respective scribes
were aware that certain manuscripts contained the additional verse, they nonetheless
chose not to include it. In fact, Grünendahl’s own list of passages that are, as he puts
it, “not present in” D2.5 shows this: the passages 321*, 317*, 1861*, 1214*, 221*, 424*,
1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*, 1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821* are also absent from
the southern recension, yet no one is suggesting that the southern recension should be
226
226 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
included in the K group! For convenience, the following table lists all the passages that
Grünendahl cites as evidence that D2.5 is related with K.
321* not present in D2.5 K [and Ñ4; southern recension]
317* not present in D2.5 K [and Ñ3.4; southern recension]
1861* not present in D2.5, K, Ś1 [and Ñ1.4, D1; southern recension]
1214* not present in D2.5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
221* not present in D2.5, K0– 3 [and Ñ3.4; southern recension]
1346* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4]
1444* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4]
1517* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4]
424* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4, southern recension (!)]
1202* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4, southern recension (!)]
1344* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4, southern recension (!)]
1345* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4, southern recension (!)]
1363* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4, southern recension (!)]
1450* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4, southern recension (!)]
1458* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4, southern recension (!)]
1494* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4, southern recension (!)]
1546* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4, southern recension (!)]
1821* not present in D5, K0– 3, Ś1 [and Ñ4, southern recension (!)]
Source: Reproduced verbatim from Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,”
117 (all italics Grünendahl's; square brackets and exclamation marks in the original).
Grünendahl inserts an exclamation mark after “southern recension” in the last 10
examples as though this is remarkable, but there is nothing surprising about the cir-
cumstance that the interpolations are absent in the southern recension: it shows that
interpolations, unless added, will be absent from the text. This will be true even of distant
versions. Only someone who thinks the absence of interpolation is evidence for an orig-
inal relationship between manuscripts will be surprised to ind that the southern recen-
sion also lacks interpolations absent from Ś and K.222 Grünendahl cannot distinguish
between an agreement in truth that indicates iliation through the archetype— that is to
say, that Ś, K and S contain the same basic text if we ignore corruptions and inlation—
and an agreement in truth that is evidence of a later and more speciic inluence, for
instance, if two manuscripts do not feature the same interpolation, they can only do so if
one was under the other’s “contaminating” inluence.223 If he was consistent, his stemma
would look like Figure 55.
N breaks up into two groups: the noninlationary recensions ν and S characterized by
the absence of 321*, 317* and 1861*; and the inlationary γ recension characterized by
the presence of these interpolations. Against their archetypes, Ñ4 and D2.5 do not fea-
ture these interpolations and therefore are removed from their archetypes and reassigned
under the ν recension, which they approximate in this respect. ν again breaks up into
two groups: the noninlationary recensions S, Ś1 and K (the latter expanded to include
Ñ4 and D2.5) characterized by the absence of 1214* and 221* and the inlationary
K4 recension— comprised of a single manuscript—c haracterized by the presence of
227
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 227
N
Characterized by inclusion of
321*, 317*, 1861*
Characterized by noninclusion
of 321*, 317*, 1861*
ν γ
ε
rada Expanded K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar
1 group V1
Characterized by noninclusion Characterized by inclusion of
of 1214* and 221* 1214* and 221*
K4
Characterized by noninclusion of Characterized by inclusion of
424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*, 424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*,
1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821* 1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821*
Characterized by noninclusion Characterized by inclusion of
of 1346*, 1444*, 1517* 1346*, 1444*, 1517*
D2
S
Telugu Grantha Malay lam
T1.2
Figure 55 The descent of S in Grünendahl’s classiication
these interpolations. S, Ś1, Ñ4 and D2.5 represent a noninlationary tradition that now
contrasts with the inlationary central recension γ and the lone K manuscript, K4,
standing under the former’s inluence in respect of featuring 1214* and 221*. In the
next step, this noninlationary tradition again breaks up into two groups: the noninla-
tionary recensions S (the southern recension), Ś1, and a shrinking K characterized by the
absence of 424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*, 1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546* and 1821*
and the inlationary D2 recension—c omprised of a single manuscript—c haracterized by
the presence of these interpolations. In the inal step, S turns around and comes to stand
under D2’s inluence in that both groups are characterized by the inclusion of 1346*,
1444* and 1517*.
228
228 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Clearly, this stemma does not represent the true relationships among the manuscripts,
because S is manifestly not a descendant of N. But this is something that we could only
establish on the basis of the manuscripts’ readings. Since Grünendahl does not consider the
readings but builds his stemma using the absence or presence of speciic interpolations,
nothing in his stemma would tell us that S represents a separate branch of the tradition
from ν or Ś āradā. We might construct the stemma as in Figure 56.
S agrees with Ś and K throughout in not featuring the interpolations that these groups
do not feature. Only at the end does it show traces of “contamination” with D2 in the
peculiar sense that Grünendahl understands it, that is to say, when two manuscripts either
feature or do not feature an interpolation, one of them must have been contaminated by
the other to feature or not to feature the interpolation. Against its archetype, it features
N
Characterized by inclusion of
321*, 317*, 1861*
Characterized by noninclusion
of 321*, 317*, 1861*
ν γ
ε
rada Expanded K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar
1 group V1
Characterized by noninclusion Characterized by inclusion of
of 1214* and 221* 1214* and 221*
K4
Characterized by noninclusion of Characterized by inclusion of
424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*, 424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*,
1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821* 1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821*
Characterized by noninclusion Characterized by inclusion of
of 1346*, 1444*, 1517* 1346*, 1444*, 1517*
D2
S
Telugu Grantha Malay lam
T1.2
Figure 56 The true position of S in Grünendahl’s classiication
229
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 229
the three interpolations 1346*, 1444* and 1517* and therefore is removed from it and
reassigned under the D2 recension, which it approximates in this respect.
Grünendahl’s argument is palpably false, but it has a further law: the position of the
groups in the stemma is dependent on the order in which we take the interpolations.
If we irst took the interpolations 1346*, 1444* and 1517* that S has in common with
D2, we would move S under D2, but then on inding that, against its archetype D2,
S agrees with Ś and K in not featuring the interpolations 424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*,
1363*, 1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546* and 1821*, we would now bring it back under Ś and
K. Our stemma would look like Figure 57.
N
Characterized by inclusion of
321*, 317*, 1861*
Characterized by noninclusion
of 321*, 317*, 1861*
ν γ
ε
rada Expanded K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar
1 group V1
Characterized by noninclusion Characterized by inclusion of
of 1214* and 221* 1214* and 221*
K4
Characterized by noninclusion Characterized by inclusion of
of 1346*, 1444*, 1517* 1346*, 1444*, 1517*
Characterized by noninclusion of
424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*,
1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821*
D2
Characterized by inclusion of
424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*,
1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821*
S
Telugu Grantha Malay lam
T1.2
Figure 57 The order of interpolations
230
230 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
We have already discussed why the absence or presence of interpolations cannot be
a guide to iliation, so these stemmata are purely theoretical exercises. The simplest and
truest relation between the manuscripts is represented by the stemma in Figure 46: the
reason both N and S do not contain the three passages 321*, 317* and 1868* (and so on
for the other groups and S) is that these passages are insertions that arose later in one of
the subrecensions that broke of from N. Nonetheless, these theoretical exercises serve a
valuable function, because they let us intuit something about Grünendahl’s understanding
of textual criticism. Grünendahl imagines contamination as a kind of abstract power
exercised over the manuscripts. Thus, when two manuscripts A and B do not feature an
interpolation, he does not realize that this reveals nothing about their relationship. Rather,
he thinks that the only way B could not feature an interpolation is if A, which also does not
have the interpolation, exercised some kind of inluence on it. Hence, he concludes that
B should now be grouped with A, if not as an apograph of A, at least as belonging with
an expanded version called “A.” From his perspective, the fact that Ñ4 and D2.5 do not
feature 321*, 317* and 1861* is not simply evidence that they retained the original text or
sequence at this point and that their similarity to K in this respect is evidence of an orig-
inal inheritance. No, it must be evidence of the manuscripts coming under K’s inluence,
for how else (he reasons) could they have avoided including the interpolations against
the practice of their archetypes. Thus, he concludes, Ñ4 and D2.5 should be separated
out from the Ñ and D groups (ultimately the recension γ) and placed with S ́and K (the ν
recension) and because of contamination Sukthankar’s groups no longer hold.
We already saw that Grünendahl’s argument regarding classiication was not really
about classiication, because the real issue is not whether the sigla for the various groups
(whether derived from the initial letters of the scripts or something else) are correct, but
whether manuscripts can be expected to correspond to the expectations of their groups and
that means whether they can be expected to be independent witnesses in the cases in which
they are assumed to be independent.224 Since the one factor that will cause manuscripts not
to be independent witnesses is if their readings are inherited not from the branch of the
tradition they are assumed to represent but from a neighboring branch, this is equivalent to
saying that the real problem concerns contamination. Grünendahl’s inlated claims about
the untenability of the so-c alled Schriftartprämisse thus amount to the anxiety that vertical
transmission plays a lesser role in the tradition than horizontal.225
Yet his way of exploring this question is peculiar. Rather than examine contamination
of manuscript readings, he focuses on interpolated passages. Here also his procedure is
peculiar— he looks at instances when manuscripts agree in not featuring interpolations
and from this concludes that they must be related. This is not an argument for the rela-
tionship of two manuscripts, as a simple experiment demonstrates. The simplest way two
manuscripts will agree in not featuring a given interpolation is if one of them is not a
Mahābhārata manuscript (Figure 58). For any given interpolation not found in Ś and K,
the Rāmāyaṇa will not contain that interpolation. Using Grünendahl’s logic, we would
establish a relationship between Ś and K and the hypothetical Rāmāyaṇa manuscript
through the archetype even though the text of the Rāmāyaṇa is not descended from
the archetype θ. Grünendahl’s argument for the relationship of manuscripts would only
work if we were to assume that the text of the archetype is handed down unchanged from
231
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 231
θ
N S
Characterized by noninclusion of 321*, Characterized by inclusion of 321*, 317*,
317*, 1861*, 1214*, 221*, 1346*, 1444*, 1861*, 1214*, 221*, 1346*, 1444*, 1517*,
1517*, 424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*, 424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*, 1450*,
1450*, 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821* 1458*, 1494*, 1546*, 1821*
ν γ
σ
ε
R m ya a rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
Figure 58 Unrelated manuscripts on the same stemma
manuscript to manuscript, that is to say, if every apograph were to perfectly incarnate its
source. In that case, the only diference between manuscripts would be the presence or
absence of interpolations, and hence “iliation” of a kind could be established through
this criterion.226
This is in fact how Grünendahl understands the process of manuscript copying. For
him, manuscript transmission is comprised of two processes and two processes only. On
one hand, he thinks that the text of the archetype is handed down fully formed, like Athena
emerging from the head of Zeus. On the other, he thinks that additional passages are
then added to this core text, producing the regional recensions and individual witnesses.
Further, since manuscript copying in his view is not just mechanical but produces facsimile
copies of the sources, the only way interpolations could supervene on the core text is
through contamination. In contrast, the absence of interpolations becomes an argument
for “contamination” of another kind, namely, non- contamination, for if one branch of
the tradition has ceased producing facsimile copies or, rather, produces facsimile copies
of an inlated text, the only way individual manuscripts of that tradition could escape
the tendency to produce facsimile copies of this inlated version is if they came under the
inluence of another branch of the tradition, that is to say, if they started producing fac-
simile copies of the text handed down in this other branch of the tradition. The stemma in Figure 59
clariies Grünendahl’s understanding of the Mahābhārata tradition.
The text of θ descends to N, where it undergoes expansion. It then descends to ν,
where it again undergoes expansion. It then descends to Ś and K relatively unchanged,
since Grünendahl thinks these recensions are really but the text of ν. The text of N also
descends to γ, where it undergoes signiicant expansion. It thence descends to the witness
manuscripts of the central recension, except Ñ4 and D2.5, which do not feature this
expanded text and whose text therefore must be that of the noninlationary K recension.
Accordingly, we may posit K “contamination.” Conversely, when we wish to reconstruct
232
232 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
except except
D2.5
Figure 59 The expansion of the text according to Grünendahl
the archetype, all we must do is proceed in reverse order, following the least inlated line
of the tradition. First we start with the shortest text of the Mahābhārata (Ñ4 not Ś1, as
Grünendahl reminds us), then we proceed up the stemma, progressively discarding the
additional passages of this version as well. How exactly we are to recognize the additional
passages as additions, Grünendahl does not explain. Finally, we take this text, puriied of
its additions, as the text of the archetype. This process, of course, only works because, in
Grünendahl’s mind, the tradition itself provides a guide to the correct line of descent.
Each time a manuscript is copied, it is either copied pure, in which case it sets forth the
archetype and continues the tradition, or it is copied impure, in which case it does not
set forth the archetype and dead- ends the tradition. The Mahābhārata tradition is thus
composed of open and closed branches, and all the editor must do is follow the longest
open branch available to him and he will reach the archetype. The stemma in Figure 60
clariies the transmission process as Grünendahl understands it.
Manuscript θ is copied at N and also at S, where it undergoes inlation, dead-e nding
the tradition. N is copied at ν and γ, where it undergoes inlation, both times dead-e nding
the tradition, but its text is transmitted to Ñ4. ν and γ are again copied (at Ś and K and
233
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 233
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
Figure 60 Open and closed branches of the tradition
ε and D, respectively) but each time it is not the archetype that is set forth but the new
inlated traditions. Likewise, S is copied at σ and M, but these are also not apographs
of the archetype but of the inlated tradition S represents. Hence only Ñ4 preserves the
original tradition. The tradition is composed of open and closed branches and Ñ4— N—
θ as the longest open line will yield the text of the archetype. Of course, Ñ4 itself has
undergone some expansion but these expansions can be imagined as closed branches of
the tradition branching of from Ñ4 so that all we need to do is brush aside these branches
and hold on to the core Ñ4 and we can recover the text of the archetype (Figure 61).
Grünendahl thus has not understood the simplest and most elementary principle of
textual criticism, one that is the basis of all of the editor’s further operations: how to
determine iliation. He thinks that all he must do is select the shortest manuscript and
discard its obvious interpolations, and he will obtain the text of the archetype. He does
not realize that this procedure will not give him a critical text or even a critical text of
the Nepālī version, for the latter too would require a comparison of manuscripts and,
above all, not of their interpolations, as he thinks, but of their readings. As we saw, ilia-
tion is determined on the basis of the signiicant errors scribes commit in transcribing
their sources. It cannot be determined using extrinsic characteristics such as the presence
or absence of interpolations. Yet, as Grünendahl uses the terms “relationship,” “trans-
mission,” “inluence,” “line of the tradition” and so on, it is clear that he views tex-
tual transmission in terms of an original correspondence (that manifests always in the
234
234 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
Figure 61 Brushing aside the dead ends
shared absence of certain interpolations and is a sign of relationship through the source
and, ultimately, through the archetype) and a secondary one (that is evidence of one—
inlated— manuscript coming under the inluence of another). He explicitly declares:
I think one will probably have to distinguish the relationships between K0 and K1.2 which
reach far back into the transmission history from the textual form in which K0 presents itself
today. It seems to me that just as inluential as the text tradition of K1, etc. for the contempo-
rary form was the inluence of another line of the tradition, which is linked to the “contami-
nated” K manuscript par excellence K4.227
On one hand, there is the handing down of the text, which, according to Grünendahl,
occurs like a perfect incarnation. Every apograph reproduces its source perfectly: there
is no corruption. This fact is responsible for the relationships between K0 and K1.2,
which Grünendahl ascribes to an earlier stage of “the transmission history” and which,
to remind ourselves, consist in the shared absence of certain interpolations. On the
other, there is contamination, which Grünendahl always interprets as the addition of
materials to the manuscript from an external source. That is why he asserts that the
“relationships between K0 and K1.2” that “reach far back into the transmission history”
must be distinguished from the textual form in which K0 presents itself today.228 This
235
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 235
form is not determined by the textual tradition of K1, but by “the inluence of another
line of the tradition […] K4.”229 In contrast to the relationships between K0 and K1.2,
which, Grünendahl argues, manifest in the shared absence of interpolations, K4’s inlu-
ence on K0 manifests in the shared presence of interpolations.230
Grünendahl evidently does not realize that even without K4’s inluence, and even if
K0 and K1 were apographs of the same source, they would still be distinct manuscripts.
Even if the same scribe produced K0 and K1, they would still not be identical. Manuscript
copying is a manual process and hence subject to human error. Grünendahl seems to
think that scribes were not copying manuscripts by hand and thus introducing hundreds
of minute errors, but that they were producing facsimile copies and adding passages to
them. Consequently, he posits an identity between K0 and K1 (they are facsimile copies)
and attributes their diferentiation to K4. How else could facsimile copies difer if not
through an external inluence? Moreover, he declares: “The link between K0 and K4
manifests clearly in a signiicant number of shared textual additions. […] I consider the
hypothesis that these present additions are text-h istorically a more recent characteristic
of K0 than the previously mentioned characteristics which are not present in K1 as well
more than likely.”231 The supposition that “present additions” must be more recent than
additions that are “not present” only makes sense if we assume that the latter—w hich
manifest in the fact that two manuscripts share the same text—a re evidence of an original
inheritance, whereas the former are a sign of later contamination.232 It is on this model
and this model of textual criticism alone that Grünendahl’s further assertions hold.
Once we grasp Grünendahl’s model of textual criticism, we can also understand the
reasons for his remaining errors. As in the irst part of his article, where he attempted to ana-
lyze the textual form of K0 into two traditions or two layers, the errors in the second part
also arise from his belief that iliation can be established not on the basis of shared errors,
but on the basis of agreements in truth. In fact, his errors are a direct consequence of his
aversion to looking at readings. We focus on two of Grünendahl’s claims: (1) that Sukthankar
erred in identifying his K group as a separate class on the basis of their common readings
and, (2) that Sukthankar should have assimilated his K1 manuscript to the S ́āradā codex S1́ .
According to Grünendahl, Sukthankar’s decision to identify his K group as a sepa-
rate class was false insofar as their readings proved later not to be supported by the other
manuscripts. By implication, Sukthankar should have based his constitution of the K
version on readings that were accepted in the constituted text as well. The K manuscripts,
we have noted, are a group of Devanāgarī manuscripts, whose text demonstrates features
in common with the Ś āradā codex, leading Sukthankar to conclude that they were
copies of a Ś āradā source. Sukthankar separated these manuscripts from the remaining
Devanāgarī manuscripts (which were mainly either misch-c odices or highly contami-
nated manuscripts of the vulgate) and assigned them their own group (K). These two
groups (Ś and K) were the grounds for his assumption of a ν hyparchetype, “the lost
archetype of the NorthW estern group.”233 As the Ś and K manuscripts were observed
not to have the D manuscripts’ defects and their text was frequently purer than that of
the other groups, in cases where the northern manuscripts were opposed to the southern
or no pattern of agreement could be discerned, Sukthankar relied on their evidence to
reconstruct the reading of the archetype.
236
236 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Grünendahl is aware of this. He notes that Sukthankar grants “central signiicance
to the two versions derived from ν (S ́āradā and K) for his constitution of the text”234 and
hence elects to target this premise. He does so in two stages, irst questioning Sukthankar’s
basis for constituting a K version on the grounds that he lacked a S ́āradā exemplar for
many stretches of the text that would justify constituting such a version, and then arguing
that the K version might anyway have been assimilated to the Śāradā version.235 The
starting point for his criticism is his observation that Sukthankar justiies his identiica-
tion of the K version, albeit only in part,236 with 35 readings, “ ‘selected at random.’ ”237
Grünendahl rejects this argument. Noting that it is “striking that the Śāradā manuscript S1́ ,
which is fragmentary but nonetheless very signiicant for the evaluation of the ‘K version’
[Grünendahl’s quotation marks], was only available for 3 of these 35 passages,” he argues
that “with respect to his [Sukthankar’s] further argument, it would have been preferable
had the editor’s ‘random’ selection alighted on passages that were also present in S1́ .”238
Grünendahl’s skepticism regarding this choice of readings is understandable given
that he thinks the editor is only justiied in identifying a K version if he possesses a Śāradā
exemplar.239 However, the argument is misguided. Sukthankar’s aim in this section is
not to demonstrate the K manuscripts’ ainity to the Śāradā version. Rather, he is only
interested in showing their relationship to each other. From his perspective, it is irrelevant
whether he can demonstrate that their readings are also the readings of Ś1. Even if his
choice alighted on sections for which the Śāradā codex was available, this would not have
afected his general conclusion. It would only have reinforced his impression that the K
manuscripts are closely allied with the Śāradā version, which he demonstrates next.
Thus, following his list of 35 readings demonstrating that the K manuscripts con-
stitute a distinct group, he presents 15 readings that “document” “the ainity between
Ś1 and K1”240 and thereafter 25 readings that show that “Ś1 and K stand […] together
against all other manuscripts (barring, of course, conlated specimens).”241 Grünendahl
ignores the evidence of the irst list and dismisses the second. According to him, the list
does not prove the K manuscripts’ close relationship since their readings are frequently
shared with D2 and D5.242 We have already seen the problems with this latter argument,
which constitutes the crux of Grünendahl’s argument from extensive contamination. We
therefore focus on a second criticism he raises of Sukthankar’s list of 35 readings illus-
trating the close relationship between the K group manuscripts. He writes: “[Even] if one
ignores smaller inconsistencies in the list, one must note that none of the 35 readings of
the K manuscripts has been included in the constituted text.” He further argues, “It can
hardly have been reconcilable with Sukthankar’s editorial principles to grant such poorly
attested readings such signiicance, unless it be that a greater authenticity could be claimed
for them than for the others,” but this “was clearly not the case here.”243 Had Grünendahl
relected on this statement, he would have realized the absurdity of expecting the editor
to use readings attested in the archetype to identify his versions. At this stage, the editor
is only interested in identifying the relationships between manuscripts and he will use all
available information to this end. The question of which readings will be included in the
constituted text is irrelevant at this stage—i ndeed, it cannot even arise. For instance, if we
seek to identify the southern manuscripts as a group, we will make a list of their shared
readings, even if it later turns out that none of them belongs in our constituted text (for
237
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 237
we have chosen to give preference to the reading of the northern recension whenever
the two recensions conlict). The latter question is irrelevant for the identiication and
evaluation of manuscripts as members of a group. By Grünendahl’s logic, we could not
use these southern readings. In fact, we could not identify a southern group except for
readings of the southern group that also enter into the constituted text.244
Grünendahl is efectively asking Sukthankar to identify a set of readings that identify
the K manuscripts as a unique group (readings not shared with the other groups), but
these readings should also be accepted into the constituted text as the readings of the
archetype. This would only be possible if our constituted text was based exclusively on the
K group’s readings. Then, every time the other groups difered from K in their reading,
we would assume that these readings are either not derived from K or are corruptions of
the reading of K, but in no case would we undertake a comparison between the groups
to determine the reading of their presumed archetype. This is equivalent to treating K
itself as the archetype (or, rather, treating the reading shared by the largest number of
K manuscripts as that of the archetype and the idiosyncratic readings of individual K
manuscripts as variants) and the other manuscripts either as descendants of K or, where
their readings cannot be derived from K, as a diferent tradition altogether. Since the
only thing these latter manuscripts share with each other is the readings inherited from
K and since in most cases we can reconstruct K’s reading without their assistance (its
reading is the one shared by the largest number of K manuscripts or the one that best
explains those of the remaining manuscripts of this group), this means these manuscripts
are worthless for reconstructing the archetype. We would have the stemma as indicated
in Figure 62.
θ (= K)
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
Figure 62 Hypothetical stemma with K as the archetype
238
238 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Table 6 K contamination and the fragmentation of the Mahābhārata tradition
K Ñ V B D T G M
archetype archetype archetype archetype archetype archetype archetype archetype
(that is, θ)
K0– 6 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1– 6 Da1.2, T1– 2 G1– 6 M1– 5
Dn1– 3,
D1– 7
In this stemma, the text of the archetype descends unchanged to K (this is the sole
condition under which all the readings of K can also be the readings of the archetype). In
contrast, all the other manuscripts are treated as composites of K and a diferent tradition
altogether (speciically, the expansion the text underwent in this branch of the tradition).
We could also have included dotted lines into each of these hyparchetypes or witnesses,
but as it makes no diference whether the source of contamination is external or is gen-
erated within the respective manuscript, this plays no role. Since these manuscripts are
no longer useful for reconstructing the archetype (they are at most useful as testimonia,
whose agreement with K will provide additional conirmation for the reading of the
archetype), Grünendahl has efectively reduced Sukthankar’s stemma to just one branch
of the tradition, the line θ— K. The task of reconstructing the reading of the K archetype
(θ) is now a separate task from reconstructing the reading of the archetype of the other
groups, presuming they even had a common archetype. Since their common features can
now be explained in terms of contamination with K, we would not even include them
in the same stemma. There would be no need to assume a common ancestor, since con-
tamination with K would account for the majority of their shared readings.245 We would
have the situation outlined in Table 6.
Although in the preceding diagram, we included all the other manuscripts in the
same stemma, treating them as descendants of the archetype θ and using lines with a
small bar at their base in place of dotted lines to indicate contamination,246 actually
each manuscript group now has its own archetype and since the expansion in that
archetype is as important for its text as the common inheritance from θ/ K, there is no
reason to treat them as descendants of the archetype of K. In fact every manuscript
group can now be entered as a distinct line on our stemma, connected to the K arche-
type only through a dotted line. Conversely, if we wanted to reconstruct the archetype
of these manuscripts, we would proceed up this line, discard obvious interpolations
and end up with the (expanded) text of this version. In fact, since the fragmentation
of the tradition is attributed in this model not to corruption but to expansion of the
text, to arrive at the archetype of all these versions (θ), we could take any archetype,
discard its speciic readings (they can be treated as expansions of the archetype θ,
just as the diferent manuscripts were treated as expansions of their respective arche-
type), and we would arrive at the common archetype of all these manuscripts.247 The
stemma in Figure 63 clariies how reconstruction would proceed on this model of
textual criticism.
239
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 239
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
Figure 63 Understanding Grünendahl’s model for reconstructing archetypes
K is on this scenario the shortest text and thus incarnates the readings of the arche-
type in pure form. To reconstruct the archetype, we would simply follow the longest
unbroken line K—N —θ . As all the other branches of the tradition are also linked to
the archetype (since the pure text also descends unchanged to them, though it then
undergoes expansion), theoretically we could also begin from any other manuscript
group. For instance, beginning from D, we would discard its expansions and reach the
text of γ. We would then discard γ’s expansions and reach the text of N and hence θ.
Any manuscript on this model of textual criticism, not just Ñ4 or K, would lead to the
archetype.
The source of the error is clearly Grünendahl’s peculiar model of textual criticism.
Earlier we saw that he imagines the evolution of the tradition in terms of two processes
and two processes only—d escent of the text like a perfect incarnation and expansion—
and now we see that only on this understanding of textual criticism would K’s readings
also be the readings of the archetype. In fact, the readings of every branch of the tradi-
tion will be the readings of its speciic archetype—t he expanded text handed down in this
branch of the tradition. From Grünendahl’s perspective, the fact that K’s readings are
not included in the constituted text is a serious failing because, except for the expansions,
his model presumes the doubling of the text of K (and of every other version) and the
archetype. He thereby overlooks that by asking that K’s readings be doubly attested (once
240
240 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
as K’s readings and once as the constituted text’s readings), he has rendered the other
manuscripts’ readings superluous. If K’s readings are the readings of the archetype, why
do we need the other manuscripts? And if K’s readings are the readings of the arche-
type, how can K be a version of the archetype, given that the tradition’s fragmentation
into versions is due to the fact that each scribe introduces unique errors (errores signiicativi)
while producing his apograph? Since a version distinguishes itself from the archetype
(and from all other versions descended from it) in respect of the unique errors introduced
and transmitted in that branch of the tradition, the demand that the unique readings
that identify a version as a version also be attested in the archetype is doubly mistaken.
They can either have been introduced in the other versions via contamination (in which
case they will not serve to distinguish versions) or they can be unique to K (in which case
they will likely not be the readings of the archetype). There is only one situation in which
Grünendahl’s demand can be met, namely, if all other versions underwent changes and
the true reading was transmitted in this branch of the tradition alone. In this case, this
branch would distinguish itself from all others and preserve the reading of the archetype,
but this is an exceptional case, which arose in the critical edition only due to the peculiar
conditions of the Mahābhārata tradition.248
In any case, it has become clear that even if this model of textual criticism supports
Grünendahl’s claim that K’s readings should also be attested in the archetype, it does not
strengthen the evidence for them. As the preceding stemma demonstrates, the text of K
is identical with that of θ. Grünendahl’s demand that K’s readings also be the readings
of the constituted text is not only impossible in practice but also self-d efeating. If the
constituted text is by deinition based on K’s readings, the demand adds nothing to the
original demand that K have a unique reading against the other manuscript groups. We
lomahars·an·aputra ugras´rava¯h· su¯tah· paura¯n·iko naimis·a¯ran·ye s´aunakasya kulapater dva¯das´ava¯rs·ika satre K V1 B D
lomahars·an·apada D10 lomahars·an·aputrastu naimis·a¯ran·yava¯sinah· K3
romahars·an·aputra ugras´rava¯h· S
·
sama¯s¯ına¯n abhyagacchad brahmars·¯ın samsitavrata¯n vinaya¯vanato bhu¯tva¯ kada¯ cit su¯tanandanah· K S
om· sukha¯s¯ınan¯ K1 mahars·¯ın K (exe. K1) brahmars·¯ın […] vinaya¯vanato D6–8
mahars·i D14
sukha¯s¯ına¯n V 1 B D (D 13 mss.)
abhyagamat D6 s´am· sita° K0.3.5
°nandat D8 s´am· s´ita° K4
·
s´amsita° Dr3 .r4 D1.14
·
s´ams´ita° D2.4 (marg.)
Figure 64 Stemma lectionum of verses 1.1.1A and 1.1.2
241
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 241
can illustrate this with a simple example— the stemma lectionum for verses 1.1.1A and 1.1.2
of the Mahābhārata is as shown in Figure 64.
In the irst verse, the K manuscripts (except K3) give a unanimous reading
(lomaharṣan ̣aputra ugraśravāḥ). This reading has been accepted into the constituted text,
but it cannot demonstrate that the K manuscripts form a distinct group since it is
also attested in V1, B and D (except D10). In the second verse, irst hemistich, the K
manuscripts (except K1) again give us a unanimous reading (samāsın̄ ān abhyagacchad).
Once again, this reading has been accepted into the constituted text, but it cannot dem-
onstrate the K manuscripts as a distinct group since its inclusion in the constituted text
is based on cross- recensional agreement (K and S having one reading against K1, V1,
B and D). In the second verse, second hemistich, the K manuscripts (except K1) give a
unanimous reading (maharṣın̄ ), and this time the reading is indeed unique to this group,
but it has not been included in the constituted text (the editor giving preference to the
agreement of K1 with S and, additionally, V1, B and D). If we assume that in the last of
these cases (second verse, second hemistich), the reading of the K group was accepted
as the reading of the constituted text, it is clear that Grünendahl’s demand does not
strengthen the evidence for these readings. K’s readings remain K’s readings. Contrary to
Grünendahl’s expectation, their inclusion in the constituted text is no longer evidence
of greater attestation, since this inclusion is based solely on their occurrence in the K
manuscripts.
Grünendahl is misled by his suspicion that everything in the constituted text possesses
greater authority. He thinks that the editor ought to have only used readings included in
the latter when drawing up a list of readings unique to K but overlooks that this condi-
tion can only be fulilled if the two are identical. But in that case, the condition is super-
luous: if the K readings are included in the constituted text on the authority of the K
manuscripts, then it adds nothing to their authority to say that they are also the readings
of the constituted text. The situation remains the same in both the actual case and our
hypothetical case: K and ~K give distinct readings. The only change is that whereas
in the irst instance we ruled that we prefer the readings of ~K, in this case we have
opted to adopt the reading of K for the constituted text. The attestation for K remains
the same: K. There is no diference between identifying a K group based only on the
readings unique to K that also made their way into the constituted text and constituting a
K group based only on the readings unique to K irrespective of whether they made their
way into the constituted text or not.249
Grünendahl’s second claim— namely, that Sukthankar should have assimilated his
K1 manuscript to the Ś āradā codex—i s also a direct consequence of this peculiar
model of textual criticism. As we saw, he does not establish iliation on the basis of
descent but on the basis of length. For him, it is not the inherited errors of transcrip-
tion that are decisive but the convergence in extent between manuscripts.250 The latter
holds the key to their “real” relationship, which, for Grünendahl, cannot be one of
iliation (as we have seen, there is strictly speaking no distinction between sources and
their descendants in his model of textual criticism), but only one of duplication. Thus,
if two manuscripts approximate each other in their extent, Grünendahl thinks that they
should be classiied together, since (he reasons) they must reproduce a text of a similar
242
242 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
type (that is, of the non-e xpansive rather than expansive type). From his perspective,
it is thus inexplicable that Sukthankar entered K1 into his stemma as an independent
witness rather than assimilating it to Ś1. He notes that “for Sukthankar, it is beyond
doubt that the source of K1 must have been a Ś āradā manuscript. Via reference to
pronounced distinctions (loc. cit.) he shows that Ś1 however does not enter into question
[as the source].”251 Grünendahl challenges Sukthankar’s decision to list K1 separately
because, as he puts it, “it must be emphasized that K1 approximated Ś1 more in terms
of extent and textual form than any other K manuscript. In those textual sections for
which Ś1 is not available owing to its poor state of preservation, K1 distinguishes itself
from the other K manuscripts through noticeably many unique readings.”252 As earlier,
he invokes the convergence in length between the two manuscripts, which he thinks is a
decisive argument for their relationship. That he simultaneously criticizes Sukthankar
for arguing “less in terms of its quality than in terms of its textual extent”253 is typical
of his tendency to attribute his confusions to others. Noting that K1 is “closer to the
Śāradā manuscript Ś1 than the rest of the Devanāgarī manuscripts comprised in the K
version,” he rhetorically raises the question:
What could then have prevented Sukthankar from including Ś1 and K1 in one “version”
or group? I believe this must be attributed less to the diferences that are doubtless present
between the two manuscripts than to the Schriftartprämisse, which he grants absolute priority
here, even though he, as was said, has no doubt that K1 is directly descended from a Śāradā
manuscript.254
From Grünendahl’s perspective, of course, there are no arguments against including Ś1
and K1 in one group. He explicitly asserts:
Even if one wants to hold on to the deinition of the versions in terms of the script, one can,
without surrendering one’s principles, in the case of such a clear state of afairs assign the
Devanāgarī manuscript K1 to that “version” to which the source in all probability belongs
(here: Śāradā). That he [Sukthankar] precisely does not do this has the advantage for his
argumentation that he gains an independent— at least at irst sight— witness for the textus
simplicior (Prolegomena, p. l).255
We already saw that neither Lüders nor Sukthankar classiied manuscripts by their script
so there can be no question of “grant[ing] absolute priority” “to the Schriftartprämisse
here.” Since the versions are deined in terms of their text and not their script, there
can also be no question of “hold[ing] on to the deinition of the versions in terms of
the script.”
If Grünendahl nevertheless insists that Sukthankar tried to hold on to his principle
by classifying K1 with the other Devanāgarī manuscripts of its K group even though,
in terms of extent, it is closer to Ś1 to “gain” “an independent […] witness for the textus
simplicior,” it is because he does not understand how iliation is established. That he can
simultaneously impute intellectual dishonesty to Sukthankar for claiming two—i nde-
pendent— versions where he had only one is a further enticement for someone who
cannot forgive Sukthankar for succeeding as a textual critic where he failed.256 The
243
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 243
Śāradā and K manuscripts are related, but they are related through the hyparchetype ν. In
fact, ν was deined as “the lost archetype of the NorthW estern group,”257 meaning: the
latest ancestor Ś1 and K1 have in common. Thus, K1, though a Devanāgarī copy of
a Śāradā original, cannot be assimilated with Ś1 under a hypothetical Śāradā arche-
type. If we look at these two groups or versions in isolation, it is clear why K1 cannot
be treated as a member of a hypothetical Śāradā group. In Sukthankar’s stemma,
Ś1 and K are related through a hypothetical ancestor ν. K is an abbreviation for a
group of manuscripts K0 through K6 whose relationship cannot be further analyzed
and that are therefore treated as more or less perfect representatives of a hypothetical
ancestor K. Sukthankar thought that the manuscripts of the K group were copies of
Śāradā sources but they were not directly descended from the Śāradā codex Ś1 and
hence entered them into his stemma as a separate branch of the tradition.258 Since
these manuscripts were probably copied from Śāradā sources, it is likely that ν, their
common source with Ś1, was a Śāradā manuscript. We could replace the siglum ν with
the name “Ś āradā,” but the meaning of this term has changed: it no longer refers to the
version of the text contained in the Śāradā codex Ś1 but to the hypothetical ancestor
of Ś1 and the K group. The relationship of Ś1 to K remains the same: they are distinct
branches of the tradition, whose latest common ancestor is the hyparchetype “Ś āradā”
(our former ν). Our change has merely emphasized the fact that both branches transmit
a text of the “Ś āradā” type, though in two slightly diferent versions, which we can label
Ś1 and Ś2 (= K).
Grünendahl’s argument is more complex: he seeks to subsume the K manuscripts
not under a Śāradā archetype (our former ν, albeit now relabeled “Ś āradā” to
reflect its probable script) but under the Śāradā version itself. This means he must
either treat Ś1 (by definition the Śāradā version) as K1’s ancestor, which Sukthankar
found was not the case, or he must redefine “Ś āradā” such that it refers neither to
Ś1 nor to the hypothetical archetype of all Śāradā manuscripts (Sukthankar’s ν)
but to a group of manuscripts that contain a similar text but whose relationship
to each other cannot be further analyzed. Grünendahl does not realize this for, in
his model of textual criticism, no difference between a group and a version exists.
As his comment “What could then have prevented Sukthankar from including Ś1
and K1 in one ‘version’ or group?” shows, he treats the terms as synonymous and
this is because in his model of textual criticism there is no individuation between
manuscripts during copying. The apographs of a source reproduce its text perfectly
in all respects (provided there is no contamination), so that, whereas we speak of
the manuscripts of a group, which approximate the text of their version to various
degrees and the text of which must be inferred from their features, this distinction
(between a group and a version) no longer has any meaning for him. The version is
no longer an ideal that must be inferred from the group characteristics: it is present
in each of the manuscripts of the group. Manuscripts no longer need to be grouped
because their relationship cannot be further analyzed. Rather, the term group now
refers to a set of manuscripts all of which contain the identical text and are there-
fore superimposed on each other. This text is the text of the version so that the
concept of a group and the concept of a version coincide.259 To understand what
244
244 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
except except
D2.5
Figure 65 The expansion of the text according to Grünendahl
Grünendahl means, let us look again at Figure 53. We reproduce the stemma in
Figure 65 for convenience.
We restricted ourselves earlier to the descent of the archetype to the individual
groups, but this model of textual criticism has a further consequence. If the text descends
unchanged from ν to Ś and K, every manuscript in the K group will contain the exact
same text (recall that for Grünendahl no corruption occurs during copying: every
apograph reproduces its source perfectly). Not only will every manuscript within the
K group coincide; they will also coincide as a group with the K version, abolishing the
distinction between the group and the version. The stemma will look like the one in
Figure 66.
The manuscripts within the K group will coincide not only with each other and
with the K version. Since the text ν descends unchanged to Ś1 as well as to K,
they will also coincide with Ś1. This explains why Grünendahl considers it inexpli-
cable that Sukthankar entered K1 into his stemma as an independent witness. He
insinuates that Sukthankar’s aim was to gain, as he puts it, “an independent— at
245
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 245
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 V1 T1.2
K0 K1 K2 K3 K4 K5 K6
Figure 66 Abolishing the distinction between group and version
Note: Ñ4 and D2.5 are not shown on this stemma as irrelevant to this stage of the argument.
least at irst sight—w itness for the textus simplicior,” but this is because he does not see
that K1 is an independent witness. It is so not only or not primarily in the sense that
Grünendahl takes it— that is, a witness capable of corroborating Ś1— but in the sense
that, as a manuscript whose relationship to Ś1 though not to the other K manuscripts
can be stemmatized, it must be entered individually into the stemma. The stemma
presented earlier is only hypothetical, since Grünendahl distinguishes between K1
and the other K manuscripts, but it illustrates the point. His model of textual criti-
cism does not allow for the individuation that occurs when manuscripts are copied
so that all copies of a source (provided no contamination occurred) are facsimile
copies of it and duplicates of each other. If we wish to really grasp his argument for
assimilating K1 to Ś1 we can replace this stemma with the two stemmata shown in
Figures 67 and 68.
In the irst step, Grünendahl breaks up the K group into two: a non- expansive
tradition, whose text is inherited from ν (and is thus identical with that of Ś1) and
an expansive tradition, whose text is inherited from the central subrecension γ.
246
246 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
1 K V1 T1.2
K1 K0 K2 K3 K4 K5 K6
Figure 67 The fragmentation of the K group into K1 and K0.2–6 according to Grünendahl
The manuscripts K0 and K2–6 are distributed into various subgroups, with D2.5
among them, but Grünendahl’s criterion remains the number of insertions— that is,
whether a manuscript belongs to an expansive or a non-e xpansive tradition. K2– 6 are
“grouped” not because their internal relationships are unclear, but because they are
all of the same type.260 In a second step, noting that the texts of Ś1 and K1 coincide,
he replaces them with a pair of coincident manuscripts as shown on the stemma in
Figure 68.
Finally, as there is no longer any distinction between Ś1 and K1 in his scheme, he
collapses the two branches into one and replaces the overlapping manuscripts with a
single one (not shown on this diagram). Grünendahl is therefore right when he plain-
tively inquires, “What could then have prevented Sukthankar from including Ś1 and K1
in one ‘version’ or group?” There is nothing in this model of textual criticism to prevent
Sukthankar from including Ś1 and K1 in one version, only it is not the model Sukthankar
used. It is also not the model any intelligent critic would use. Only Grünendahl, with
his peculiar aversion to studying readings, thinks that insertions are a criterion either
for selecting the manuscript to edit or for classifying manuscripts or for constituting
versions.
247
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 247
θ
N S
ν γ
σ
ε
rada Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
K1
1 V1 T1.2
1K1
K0 K2 K3 K4 K5 K6
Figure 68 Collapsing Ś1 and K1 into a single version
Note: The manuscripts are partially overlapped and not coincident to illustrate that they are overlaid.
The overlapping circles should be imagined as a three-d imensional representation: K1 is placed directly
behind Ś1, and the whole viewed at an angle.
The Argument from Independent Recensions
Since widespread contamination between Mahābhārata manuscripts makes it impossible to draw up a stemma,
the editors should have concentrated on a regional recension and produced an edition using one manuscript,
preferably the shortest, as the base.
Refutation of the argument: The argument overlooks the fact that, even if the editors had chosen to pro-
duce a critical edition of one of the regional recensions, they could not have done so without considering its
place in the overall tradition. Further, if contamination makes it impossible to produce a critical edition of the
Mahābhārata tradition as a whole, this is especially true of a critical edition of a regional recension, since con-
tamination was most pronounced between the manuscripts of a recension. Grünendahl’s proposed edition (based
on the Nepālı̄ manuscript NAK 5/ 356) would be not a critical edition but a pseudo- Bédierist edition. He could
neither draw up a satisfactory stemma nor proceed in cases of crux or where the Nepālı̄ manuscripts contained
inconsistent readings. His edition opens the loodgates for conjectural criticism, which is all he really seeks to do.
Grünendahl’s fourth and inal argument against Sukthankar’s stemma is one we call the
argument from independent recensions. In this part of his article, Grünendahl introduces no new
principles but concentrates on applying those already introduced to further undermine
248
248 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Sukthankar’s classiication of manuscripts. As these arguments also cast light on his pro-
cedure for building stemmata, we also consider them here.
The key contention Grünendahl raises in this second part is: as the Mahābhārata
never existed as a single text, the codex unicus that the critical edition seeks to recon-
struct, the search for such a text must be abandoned.261 Instead, attention must focus on
reconstructing one of the epic’s regional recensions— above all, the Nepālī recension,
which he advocates as the best recension. There are two problems with this claim:
1. It is counterfactual, since Sukthankar and all his successors had no doubt that all our
Mahābhārata manuscripts were descended from a single source—b y deinition, the
archetype of the tradition.262 Thus, whatever one thinks about the tradition prior to
the archetype—i t was oral, it was luid, it was manifold (and we have seen all these
claims in the work of Bigger, where they led him into needless confusions)—t he fact
remains that genealogical reconstruction demonstrates that there was an archetype
and that all our witnesses are copies, however distant, of this source.
2. Any reconstruction of a regional recension that did not consider the complete
Mahābhārata tradition would lead to arbitrary solutions as regards the choice of
the manuscript to edit, the readings to reprint and also the “improvements” intro-
duced into the text. Such an edition would be neither a Lachmannian edition nor a
Bédierist edition. At best,263 it would be a pseudo- Bédierist edition— that is, an edition
that consists in “the transcription of one of the manuscripts carrying the work, with
corrections [occurring] in variable measure.”264 This edition difers from the true
Bédierist edition, which is an edition “aspiring to absolute respect for the reality of
a single manuscript, after an exhaustive analysis of the varia lectio, and that [is] rig-
orously consistent with this principle,”265 in that it produces a text “that [is] neither
the faithful and synchronic reproduction of a single witness nor the reconstruction
of a former stage of the textual tradition.”266 From the perspective of someone with
no experience in dealing with a complex tradition, this return to a “pre-s cientiic
practice” (Leonardi) may appear appealing, but it is absolutely unacceptable to
those who understand editing in terms of the three requirements Leonardi speaks
of (scientiicity, an eye for diachrony and legibility).267
We later consider the problems with what has been termed “criticism of the base man-
uscript” (Leonardi). Before we do so, let us irst consider Grünendahl’s arguments for
the Newārī manuscript Ñ4. He makes two claims: irst, the Newārī group as a whole
is superior to the Kaśmīrī group; second, Ñ4 in particular is superior to K1, the best K
manuscript. We look at each of these in turn.
Grünendahl’s irst argument for the Nepālī group’s superiority is that K1, which
Sukthankar considered the best K manuscript and a copy of a Śāradā source, approximates
the Devanāgarī manuscript D5, as several common absences attest. His precise argument is
as follows: “The similarities between D5 and K1—i n Sukthankar’s assessment, the ‘purest’
representative of the ‘K-v ersion’— are also remarkable, especially as these manifest in
the not being present [that is, the absence] of textual additions attested in almost all other
manuscripts of the northern recension.”268 As evidence, he lists the following passages:
249
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 249
296* not present in D5, K1 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
564* not present in D5, K1, K2 [and Ñ1.4; southern recension]
396* not present in D5, K1, Ś1 [and Ñ2.4; G3.6, T2, M]
259* not present in D5, K1, K0 [and Ñ3.4; southern recension]
the sole example of a textual addition that is present:
2080* present in D5, K1, Ś1, D2 (!)
Source: Reproduced verbatim from Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata-
Handschriften,” 120.
We have already seen that this argument does not hold. The absence of interpola-
tion, even if the same interpolations are absent, in two manuscripts proves nothing for
their closer relationship, because this absence is a feature of the original. Yet Grünendahl
thinks that the circumstance that K1 and D5 both lack four passages found in most of the
northern manuscripts is a telling argument for their relationship. He claims:
Precisely because this is a case, above all, of not present textual additions, these similarities, in
my opinion, cannot be explained away, as Sukthankar attempts to do, with the fact that they
entered into the “composite manuscripts” D5 (and D2) due to contamination (conlation). This
may serve as an explanation for present textual additions but hardly for not present [textual
additions]. Hence, in my understanding, the above inding only permits the conclusion that
D5 (and probably also D2) were, in their core, very close to K0.1(4), even though this [core],
as is also the case for K0 and especially for K4, appears to have been overlaid by the later
inluences of other branches of the tradition.269
This passage reveals the extent of Grünendahl’s confusion. On one hand, he imagines
that if two manuscripts do not contain the same interpolation, they must be related;
on the other, he thinks that, in contrast to the presence of interpolations, which can be
attributed to contamination, the absence of interpolations cannot. Further, he reasons
that if the simultaneous absence of an interpolation in two manuscripts cannot be
attributed to contamination, it must mean that “in their core” these manuscripts were
very close to each other. In contrast, the diferences between them must be explained
as the result of later additions, for how else (he reasons) would they difer, if not due
to an external inluence? He thereby overlooks the fact that “secondary relationship,
that is[,] descent from a common source more recent than the ‘original’ (the original
of all our known MSS.) […] can only be made plausible on the ground of common
agreement in secondary features. Any amount of inter- agreement in features which are,
or may plausibly be argued to be, original features will prove nothing; for they may on
that assumption be directly inherited from the source of all our MSS.”270 The simul-
taneous absence of 296*, 564*, 396* and 259* from K1 and D5 only means these
passages were not contained in the archetype. It does not mean the two manuscripts are
related through a more recent ancestor. Grünendahl obviously imagines a situation as
shown in Table 7, where manuscripts are grouped depending on whether they contain
these passages.
The correct way to read the table is that the passages are characteristic of the central
recension manuscripts (though not all of them) and that they are interpolations into the
250
250 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Table 7 How Grünendahl imagines the classiication of manuscripts
Contain the passages Do not contain Also do not contain
the passages the passages
296* K0.2– 4, Ñ1– 3, B, Da, Dn, D1– 4.6– 7 K1, D5 Ñ4 and S
564* K0.3– 4, Ñ2.3, B, Da, Dn. D1– 4.6– 7 K1.2, D5 Ñ1.4 and S
396* K0.2– 4, Ñ1.3, B, Da, Dn. D1– 4.6– 7, Ś1, K1, D5 Ñ2.4, G3.6, T2, M
G1.2.4.5, T1
259* K2– 4, Ñ1.2, B, Da, Dn. D1– 4.6– 7 K0.1, D5 Ñ3.4 and S
manuscripts in which they are found. K1, D5 and the southern recension manuscripts in
this case preserve the correct text, while the presence of the passages in the manuscripts
of the ν recension that contain them must be attributed to contamination with the central
recension. Grünendahl’s interpretation difers: from the fact that the passages are missing
in K1 and D5, he argues that K1 and D5 must be closely related and that, as this is a case
of absence in both manuscripts, the similarity cannot be attributed to contamination as
Sukthankar thought.271 Further, he argues that the passages’ absence in K1 and D5 must be
attributed to an earlier stage of the textual transmission before the respective manuscripts
were “overlaid” with other interpolations and, from this, he concludes that D5 “and prob-
ably also D2” must, originally, “in their core” have been “very close to K0.1(4).”272
The argument is supericially appealing, but erroneous. As we have established in the
preceding section, the absence of speciic interpolations does not prove manuscripts related.
From the fact that K1 and D5 (as well as Ñ4) lack the same passages, we cannot conclude
that they are more closely related, because another manuscript not contaminated with the
central recension would also not contain the passages. That these passages are also missing
in the southern recension should have alerted Grünendahl to this fact. Moreover, the cat-
egorization into the interpolated manuscripts and the non- interpolated manuscripts is
merely typological, not genealogical. Grünendahl has only grouped his manuscripts into
two groups: the meliores and the deteriores (the better and the worse manuscripts). He has not
shown that the meliores S1́ , K0.1, D5 and Ñ4 constitute a family in the genealogical sense.
He obviously thinks that they do, but this is because he overestimates the role contami-
nation played. According to him, since the insertions common to K1 and D5 are a case
of “not present,” that is to say, absent textual additions, they cannot have entered into the
manuscripts via contamination. As contamination is ruled out as the source of the resem-
blance, he concludes that they must then have been original features of both manuscripts
and, from this, he posits a recent common ancestor. He is right, except that he overlooks
that there is a third way the passages could be absent from all three manuscripts without
being owed either to “contamination” (in the peculiar sense that he understands it, that is,
as “non- contamination”) or to a more recent ancestor—n amely, if they were absent from
the archetype. There is no reason to posit a more recent ancestor than either θ or N to
explain the passages’ simultaneous absence in K0.1 and D5.273
Grünendahl’s second argument for the “contamination” of the K group is no better.
He notes that Sukthankar separated out K0 and K1 from the remaining K manuscripts
K2– 6 as they represented a purer tradition than the latter, and argues that, contrary to
251
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 251
Sukthankar’s division, “K2 appears not as closely related with any other K manuscript as
with K1.” He further notes that “purely supericially, this was already clear from the list on
p. 108 [the reference is to his article; the table is reproduced as Table 1], where, among the
K manuscripts, the total number of textual additions in K2 came closest to the number [of
textual additions] in K1.”274 We have already seen that the total number of interpolations in
a manuscript is a poor guide to its iliation, so we ignore this part of the argument.275 Instead,
let us look at the second part of Grünendahl’s argument for the relationship of K2 and K1.
As evidence of K2’s proximity to K1, Grünendahl cites the fact that “if one now
considers those peculiarities in the textual additions that K2 has in common only with
one other K manuscript, then here also is its proximity to K1 evident. Of the 28 textual
additions of this nature, K2 has four in common with K0 (1800*, 1962*, 1418*, 1934*),
two with K3 (462*, 2135*), ive with K4 (1393*, App I, 20, 1673*, 905*, 1152*) and no
less than seventeen with K1,” and he thereafter lists the following passages:
1436* not present in K2, K1, Ś1 [and the southern recension]
304* not present in K2, K1 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
536* not present in K2, K1 [and Ñ1.4; southern recension]
1422* not present in K2, K1, Ś1 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
1142*.3 not present in K2, K1, Ś1 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
1266* not present in K2, K1, Ś1 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
523* not present in K2, K1, D5 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
324* not present in K2, K1, D5 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
327* not present in K2, K1, D5 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
295* not present in K2, K1, D2.5 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
518* not present in K2, K1 [and Ñ1.3.4; southern recension]
558* not present in K2, K1, Ś1, D5 [and Ñ1.4; southern recension]
274* not present in K2, K1, D5 [and Ñ1– 4; southern recension]
(see, further: 285*, 564* (see above), 1559*, 1561*, 1778*)
Source: Reproduced verbatim from Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata-
Handschriften,” 121.
Grünendahl glosses this list of passages with the observation that “in contrast to the
similarities with the other K manuscripts, in the case of those between K2 and K1 it is
a case of not present textual additions, which, in my opinion, permits us to once again
infer a relationship between these two manuscripts that reaches far back.”276 It is clear
what he thinks to demonstrate with this list. According to him, if we consider only the
interpolations that serve to unite K2 with one other K manuscript at a time, we have the
situation as outlined in Table 8.
In Grünendahl’s view, this list of paired interpolations not only demonstrates that
K2 has the largest number of interpolations in common with K1, but also that the
interpolations that unite these manuscripts are of a qualitatively diferent kind. In contrast
to the interpolations K2 shares with K0, K3 and K4, which are a case of “present”
interpolations (which he thinks can be attributed to contamination), the interpolations
common to K2 and K1 are a case of “not present” or absent interpolations (which he
thinks indicate an original ainity between the manuscripts going back to an earlier stage
of their transmission history).
252
252 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Table 8 Grünendahl establishes “iliation”
K2– K0 K2– K3 K2– K4 K2– K1
1800* 462* 1393* 1436* (missing)
1962* 2135* App. 1, 20 304* (missing)
1418* 1673* 536* (missing)
1934* 905* 1422* (missing)
1152* 1142*.3 (missing)
1266* (missing)
523* (missing)
324* (missing)
327* (missing)
295* (missing)
518* (missing)
558* (missing)
274* (missing)
285* (missing)
564* (missing)
1559* (missing)
1561* (missing)
1778* (missing)
Unfortunately, this argument is also lawed. First, the presence or absence of spe-
ciic interpolations is not an argument for the closer relationship of two manuscripts.
The absence of passages especially does not prove anything, since the manuscripts
could be from diferent branches of the tradition or even manuscripts of diferent
works. Second, the claim to relationship is not reinforced by citing large numbers of
such passages.277 Third, nothing is gained by specifying that the list of interpolations
should be restricted to those found between K2 and one other K manuscript at a time.
Grünendahl speciies this condition because he thinks that by considering only a pair
of manuscripts at a time he can better isolate the source of contamination. Thus,
he reasons that if the interpolation is present only in K2 and K0, then either K2 is
the source of the passage or K0 is the source of the passage or they had a common
ancestor, but in either case, an external source is ruled out. He thereby overlooks the
fact that both K2 and K0 could have gained the passage from a third manuscript no longer extant.
The restriction is hence pointless.278 Fourth, as we saw, the idea that as the similar-
ities between K2 and K1 “are a case of not present textual additions,” this permits
us to “infer a relationship between these two manuscripts that reaches far back”279 is
Grünendahl’s delusion, arising from his belief that manuscript copying produces fac-
simile copies of the text and that interpolations can supervene on the core text only
through contamination (in other words, contamination is responsible for the diferen-
tiation of manuscripts).280 We later look at this issue more closely, as it holds the key to
all of Grünendahl’s other errors. For now, let us consider his third and inal argument
for the Newārī group’s superiority over the Kaśmīrī.
Grünendahl transitions to this next argument with the words: “now to the discussion of
the ‘contaminated’ manuscripts K3–6 (Prolegomena, p. li).”281 He claims that “the standard
253
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 253
for contamination” of the remaining K manuscripts should be “Sukthankar’s ‘pure
K- version,’ primarily represented by K1,”282 and he then cites Sukthankar’s view that
K3– 6 appear contaminated with the γ recension. Grünendahl argues that Sukthankar’s
arguments for K3– 6’s contamination with γ are untenable for several reasons, which he
details.283 These objections are irrelevant for the main argument. We therefore ignore
them.284 Instead, we focus on his main objection, which he states as follows:
One might now expect the editor to preferentially demonstrate the contamination of K3– 6
in terms of textual editions whose not being present [Nichtvorhandensein] is characteristic of the
hyparchetype ν. This, however, is only true with caveats for the appendix passages listed by
him [Sukthankar] as the following overview demonstrates:
App. I:
14 not present in K0–3 , D5 [and Ñ4; T2, G3.6, M]
41 not present in K0–2 , D5 [and Ñ1.4; southern recension]
42 not present in K0–2 , D5 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
43 not present in K0–2 , D5 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
61 not present in K0–3 [and Ñ4; southern recension]
[Grünendahl concludes:] Since, as was noted, K5.6 are not available for these sections, with
these passages, one can at best make the contamination of K4 (and, with caveats, of K3)
plausible. However, I attach greater signiicance to the observation that the not being present
[Nichtvorhandensein] of these passages is manifestly not restricted to the “core group” of the K
manuscripts and hence is also not characteristic of it. Regarding App. I: 14, one could also
say that the presence of this passage is not even characteristic of γ, the hypothetical source of
contamination, unless one wanted to assume that the south Indian manuscripts, which also
feature the passages, are also contaminated.285
To understand why Grünendahl thinks this list demonstrates K3–6 are not contaminated
(or at least that the evidence for their contamination is inconclusive), we must irst under-
stand how he interprets contamination. A manuscript is usually called contaminated
when it inherits its readings not from its hypothetical ancestor but in some measure from
a second source. In that case, the assumption is that the scribe either kept an eye on a
second source while copying or that he compared his copy with another when inished
and entered some of the latter’s readings into his text. Grünendahl’s understanding of
contamination is more complicated. According to him, the contamination of manuscript
A is not demonstrated by listing the passages it shares with the manuscripts of another
recension. Rather, he argues that “the standard for contamination” should be the purest
representatives of the group that includes A. We might think that all Grünendahl means
thereby is that the editor must demonstrate that the passages under consideration must
be interpolations in A as they are not found in the better manuscripts of its group and
hence could not have been a feature of their common archetype. But this would be incor-
rect. Grünendahl interprets the demand that the editor should adopt, as his standard for
contamination, the purest representatives of the group that includes A, to mean that the
editor should demonstrate A’s contamination in terms of interpolations characteristically
absent from the hyparchetype as represented by the purest members of the group. If the
254
254 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Table 9 Grünendahl establishes that K3 is not contaminated with the passages with which it is
not contaminated (hence, the editor has failed to establish the contamination of K3)
Insertion Found in Also not found in Not found in
App. 1, no. 14 K4 (marg.) K3 K0– 2
App. 1, no. 41 K3.4 Ś1, K0– 2
App. 1, no. 42 K3.4 K0– 2
App. 1, no. 43 K4 K3 K0– 2
App. 1, no. 61 K4 K3 Ś1, K0– 2
interpolations absent from the latter are simultaneously not not absent from A, this means
their absence, or, as he puts it, the “not being present of these passages is […] not restricted
to the ‘core group’ […] and hence is also not characteristic of it.” Table 9 makes the
argument clearer.
The appendix passages 14, 41, 42, 43 and 61 are found in most northern recension
manuscripts, with the exception of the K group. App. 1, no. 14 is found in Ñ, V1, B
and D with the exception of D5 (D2 on a supplementary folio). It is also found in some
southern recension manuscripts, speciically the inferior representatives of their groups
T1 and G1.2.4.5.286 App. 1, no. 41 is found in Ñ2.3, V1, B and D, with the exception of
D5. App. 1, nos. 42 and 43 are found in Ñ, V1, B and D (again with the exception of D5),
while App. 1, no. 61 is found only in Ñ, B and D (V1 is missing for this section). Against
their group’s practice, the passages are also found in two K manuscripts, namely, K3 and
K4. K4 includes all ive interpolations (no. 14 as a marginal insertion), while K3 includes
two (nos. 41 and 42). The correct way to read this table thus would be that K3 and K4
contain several passages not found in the better members of their group and hence that
they were probably contaminated with the manuscripts containing these passages.
This is, in fact, Sukthankar’s reasoning: he observes that “the contamination of K3–6
with γ is illustrated by the following passages” and then lists App. 1, nos. 14, 41–4 3 and
61, and several smaller insertions that suggest contamination of K3–6 .287 Grünendahl’s
interpretation difers. He irst declares that the editor should have “preferentially
demonstrate[d] the contamination of K3– 6 in terms of textual editions whose not being
present is characteristic of the hyparchetype ν.” Thereafter, from the fact that, in three
cases, the passages’ absence is not restricted to the ifth column (K0–2 ) but also extends to
the third (K3), he concludes that, as “the not being present of these passages is manifestly not
restricted to the ‘core group’ of the K manuscripts,” the editor has failed to demonstrate
the contamination of K3– 6.288 This is an original interpretation, because, parsed carefully,
the statement does not say anything beyond that K3 is not contaminated with the passages
with which it is not contaminated. But no one claims this! Sukthankar lists App. 1, nos. 14,
41, 42, 43 and 61 as examples of passages from the central recension contaminated in K4,
and he lists App. 1, nos. 41 and 42 as examples of two passages additionally found in K3.
All that Grünendahl has done is taken the passages Sukthankar cites as evidence of K4’s
contamination with γ, cited the fact that K3 is not contaminated with these passages, and,
from this, concluded that, as their absence is not restricted to K0–2 but is also a feature of
K3, Sukthankar has “at best” (allenfalls) demonstrated the contamination of K4.289
255
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 255
As there is no great art in demonstrating that manuscripts are not contaminated with
the passages with which they are not contaminated, it is not clear what Grünendahl hopes
to demonstrate with this argument. Not only for K3 but also for any random manuscript,
he could identify passages with which the manuscript is not contaminated. For any con-
taminated manuscript A, which contains the interpolations abcdef due to horizontal trans-
mission, there will be at least one interpolation x that it does not contain. We could always
argue that the contamination of A must be demonstrated in terms of x and, from the fact
that A does not contain x, conclude that A is not contaminated. But this would be a bizarre
procedure! Contamination of manuscripts must be demonstrated in terms of the passages
with which they are contaminated. No one claims that contaminated manuscripts contain
all the readings with which they could possibly be contaminated. It suices to show that a
manuscript contains several readings it could not have inherited from its ancestor to demon-
strate contamination. The outrageousness of Grünendahl’s demand that the standard for
contamination should be the readings absent in the contaminated manuscript is not imme-
diately evident because he does not state it so clearly. Rather, he opts for the strange formu-
lation: the contamination of manuscripts should be “preferentially demonstrate[d] […] in
terms of textual additions whose not being present is characteristic of” the better members of
their group. According to him, if the absence of these passages is not restricted to the better
members, but is also a feature of the contaminated manuscript, this demonstrates that the
latter is not contaminated. In other words, what Grünendahl is really asking is that manu-
script A should contain all the interpolations its group α lacks, for if A also does not contain
just one of these, he will rule that the absence of these interpolations is not restricted to α
and, from this, conclude that A cannot be contaminated.
The absurdity of this demand becomes manifest when one realizes that for A to ful-
ill it, the scribe of A must know which interpolations are absent in α (and all of the
interpolations absent in α) so that he could be certain to include all of them in A, that is
to say, he must have a complete overview of α! But since he cannot know which interpolations
are absent in α without irst knowing which interpolations exist in general, this means he
must also have a complete overview of the entire Mahab̄ har̄ata tradition. In other words, he must
conduct a systematic recensio! This is an absurd expectation of any scribe, since he is only
interested in copying the best manuscript available to him or the one he was commis-
sioned to copy. He is not interested in undertaking a pan- Indian search for manuscripts on
the of chance that in the future a critic might deine “contamination” so as to ensure that
no manuscript will ever satisfy the conditions. We can set aside Grünendahl’s deinition of
“contamination.” On this deinition of contamination, if the entire tradition contained
100 interpolations numbered 1 through 100, and α contained interpolations 1–2 5, the
manuscript A, to be considered “contaminated,” must contain all of the 75 remaining
interpolations 26– 100. This would not be a contaminated manuscript but a hyperc on-
taminated manuscript!
Grünendahl might counter this criticism by pointing out that he only holds that
A should contain the interpolations whose absence is characteristic of α in the sense of being
a unique feature of this group, and not all interpolations in general. But this does not make
the argument stronger. Consider the following situation: suppose that the total number of
interpolations in the Mahābhārata tradition is 100 and these interpolations are numbered
256
256 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Kc
v γ S
1–25 26–50 76–100
51–75
Kc
51–75
Figure 69 Grünendahl explains “contamination”
1 through 100. Numbers 1– 25 represent the interpolations found in ν, 26–5 0 those found
in γ, 51– 75 those found in both γ and S and 76– 100 those found in S alone (Figure 69).
Grünendahl might now argue that his view is not that the contaminated K manuscript
Kc must contain all the interpolations not found in ν (26– 100), but only those whose absence
is characteristic of ν (51– 75).290 In his view, Kc represents a contaminated manuscript if
and only if it contains all the interpolations characteristically absent in ν. If even one of them
is not found in Kc, this would imply that this interpolation’s “not being present is […] not
restricted to the ‘core group’ […] and hence is also not characteristic of it,” with the con-
sequence that the contamination of Kc is not demonstrated. But this interpretation does
not help matters. The scribe could only know that he had to interpolate passages 51–7 5
into Kc if he knew these passages—a nd just these—w ere absent only in ν, which once
again means he would have had to undertake a complete recensio of the tradition.291 The
condition is thus absurd.
It is also absurd for a second reason: Kc could contain a large number of interpolations
from γ and S, whose absence is not a characteristic feature of ν alone (the interpolations
are also absent in either γ or S, represented on the diagram by the dotted lines), but, by
Grünendahl’s logic, we would ignore these passages. We would not consider Kc contam-
inated if it contained a large number or even all of these passages. This is an unjustiied
and illegitimate narrowing of the criteria for contamination, because Kc is no less con-
taminated for containing the interpolations 26– 50 or 76– 100. Efectively, Grünendahl
has narrowed the list of relevant instances for contamination to just the passages 51–7 5.
He further insists that Kc must not contain just some of these passages but it must con-
tain all of them to be considered contaminated. This is an absurd deinition, because a
manuscript’s contamination must be shown in terms of the readings with which it is con-
taminated and not in terms of readings with which it is not contaminated. Grünendahl’s
assertion that the editor should have “preferentially demonstrate[d] the contamina-
tion of K3– 6 in terms of textual editions whose not being present is characteristic of the
hyparchetype ν” efectively states that, even if K3 was contaminated with large numbers
of passages found only in γ or only in S and even if it was contaminated with 24 of the
25 passages found in both γ and S, he would still not accept it was contaminated, as long
as he could identify one passage (the 25th of our list) whose absence was not a unique
feature of ν.292 This interpretation is not only arbitrary; it also leads to the unacceptable
consequence that every manuscript would be simultaneously both contaminated and
non- contaminated.293
257
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 257
Over the next few pages, Grünendahl turns to demonstrating Ñ4’s superiority over
K1, though many of the arguments in favor of this manuscript must be gleaned from
his criticisms of other manuscripts or manuscript groups. His irst argument— actually, a
complex of arguments— is as follows:
Matters are the same with the remaining appendix passages listed by Sukthankar. The irst
25 of this list (116* to 119*) cannot be checked against any Ñ manuscript, which is why any
conclusions drawn from this inding once again cannot hold for the “Ñ version” assigned to
the hyparchetype γ. In addition, I wish to note that six of these passages at any rate are also
not found in D2, whereby its proximity to the K manuscripts is again conirmed. The inding
is even clearer for D14, a manuscript that Sukthankar— in spite of its general correctness
(see Prolegomena, p. xx, lxxi)—d oes not consider further: it contains only one of these irst
25 textual additions (132*) and hence could have, with justiication, been assigned to the K
manuscripts. Furthermore, the inclusion of 151* in the list is problematic, since two out of
the total of four verses of this passage are not present in an entire series of γ manuscripts.294
We already noted that Sukthankar’s list is a general tally. He does not claim every
interpolation is found in every manuscript in the list, so Grünendahl’s irst objection
is irrelevant. Sukthankar is in any case not interested in drawing any conclusions from
these passages for the Ñ manuscripts: his contention is that they prove contamination
in the inferior K manuscripts. The idea is Grünendahl’s delusion.295 The absence of
these passages from some of the γ recension manuscripts only means that, in these
cases, these manuscripts escaped contamination. It does not mean their “proximity
to the K manuscripts is again conirmed,” because— as we have seen— the fact that
two manuscripts lack the same passage is not an argument for their iliation. All we
can conclude from the fact that D2 lacks 6 of the 46 (and D14 2 of the irst 25296)
passages Sukthankar cites as evidence of K3–6 ’s contamination with γ is that D2 and
D14 escaped contamination with these passages, not that they escaped contamination in
general and certainly not that they are unrelated to the other D manuscripts.
If we look at Sukthankar’s statement concerning D14, we see Grünendahl is wrong
here also. Sukthankar does not not consider D14 “in spite of its general correctness”
further: he speciically mentions that D1–1 4 were discarded after the second adhyāya, as
“misch- codices of small trustworthiness and of no special value for critical purposes.”297
He also notes that “D8– 12.14 are palpably under Southern inluence, as is evidenced by
their containing one or the other of the following typical Southern insertions: 18*, 21*,
22*, 24*, 32*, 42*, 45*, 48*, 49*, 56*, 80*, 81*, 89*, 114* 117*, 138*, 149*, 170*” and
of D14 that its text “is a complex. It contains some old readings such as are preserved
only in the Kámīrī manuscripts, but also an extraordinarily large number of individual
readings not found elsewhere (cf. 1.1.50, 63; 2.101, etc.). At the same time, it is contam-
inated from some Southern source, perhaps the Malayālam version!”298 Grünendahl
has obviously been misled by Sukthankar’s comments in his “Detailed Account of the
Manuscripts,” where he notes that D14 is “carefully written, has very few corrections,
which are made by use of yellow pigment and a few marginal additions.”299 Grünendahl
glosses this remark with “general correctness” (generelle Korrektheit), but that a manuscript
is written correctly says nothing about the correctness of the text contained in it. An
258
258 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
excellent text can be contained in a poorly written manuscript, whereas many well-
written and beautifully illuminated codices from the more recent period exist, which
editors recognize as useless for reconstructing the archetype.300 Grünendahl’s error once
again arises from a failure to distinguish between a manuscript’s physical form and its
text. By now, this error has occurred so often that we must conclude that it is not a simple
oversight: the incoherence is in his mind.301
Grünendahl next focuses on the inal 21 passages of Sukthankar’s list:
With these passages, Sukthankar wishes to illustrate the contamination of K2– 4.6 with the
hypearchetype γ. However, his argument can hardly convince us, because K6 is not collated
for the last mentioned passages and, furthermore, K2 features only 8 of the total 46 textual
additions; what is more, nine of these additions are also not attested in K3. But the non-K
manuscripts also do not present a uniform picture. Once again, D5 manifests diverse similar-
ities with what are, in Sukthankar’s view, the non-contaminated manuscripts.302
We have already seen that these claims are not just false but deliberately misleading.303
We therefore move on to Grünendahl’s inal argument in this section:
However, I consider far more signiicant the inding in the case of the Ñ manuscripts: only
Ñ2 features all 21 of the above-m entioned textual passages, Ñ1 has 13, Ñ3 only 10 and Ñ4,
though not considered in the edition, none! Ñ4 also does not contain any of the “important
omissions, which distinguish ν (really only Ś1, K0– 3) from all other manuscripts” (App. I: 63,
75, 80, 81, 85) mentioned next. As these appendix passages are in fact present in all of the
other manuscripts examined by Sukthankar for the edition, they—a long with the smaller
additions in the preceding list—s hould have been the touchstone for evaluating the manu-
script Ñ4, which he only came to know of later; the status of this manuscript in Sukthankar’s
manuscript classiication should have, irst and foremost, been determined in terms of their
being present or not being present.304
Grünendahl argues that the criterion for evaluating Ñ4’s place in the stemma should
have been the 21 shorter insertions Sukthankar cited as evidence of K3– 6’s contami-
nation with γ and the ive longer passages that distinguish S1́ and K0– 3 from all other
manuscripts.305 In his view, as these passages collectively distinguish the ν recension
from γ, the editor should have adopted them as the standard for determining whether
Ñ4 belongs with the manuscripts of the latter. It is easy to see why he might favor this
interpretation. It provides him an easy means to determine “iliation.” Compared with
the alternative of poring over scores of manuscripts and determining their true iliation
reading by reading, the idea that iliation can be determined using a few passages—a nd
that too obvious interpolations such as these 26 insertions— is more attractive.
Yet for all its advantages (speed, lack of ambiguity and apparent eiciency), the
argument is nonsense: iliation must be determined in terms of shared corruptions;
it cannot be determined in terms of the “being present or not being present” (an
ihrem Vorhanden- bzw. Nichtvorhandensein) of speciic interpolations.306 Grünendahl
apparently thinks that as these passages are present in all manuscripts except Ś1 and
K0– 3, this provides him a decisive argument for claiming that Ñ4 belongs with the
former. He seems to think that as the passages are found in all the other Mahābhārata
259
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 259
manuscripts, their absence in Ñ4 cannot be attributed to some other branch of the
tradition. Rather, it suggests that Ñ4, Ś1 and K0– 3 had a common archetype and, as
this archetype can only be ν, he concludes that Ñ4 must be an apograph of a Śāradā
source. The argument is nonsense: Ñ4 does not contain the passages because they are
insertions in the manuscripts that contain them. Whereas these insertions spread by
contamination to all the manuscripts of the tradition except Ñ4, Ś1 and K0– 3, this
does not mean that these six manuscripts owe their absence either to each other or
to a more recent common archetype than N. If the passages were absent in θ and the
text descended to N, they will also be absent in N. If the text descended thereafter to
ν and γ, they will still be absent in ν and γ. In other words, Ś1, K0– 3 and Ñ4 owe their
absence to their respective archetypes and the fact that all six manuscripts simulta-
neously lack the passages is only coincidental.
Likewise, the fact that Ñ4 does not contain any of the 21 shorter insertions
Sukthankar cited as evidence of K3–6 ’s contamination with γ is not an argument for
the iliation of Ñ4 with S1́ and K0– 3. It is not even evidence of the absence of contam-
ination of Ñ4 with the remaining γ manuscripts, because to show this we must draw up
a list of all the interpolations common to Ñ4 and the remaining γ manuscripts and not
just a list of those characteristic of the γ manuscripts that also occur in some inferior
K manuscripts. In other words, the circumstance that Ñ4 does not contain any of the
passages illustrative of K3–6 ’s contamination with γ only means it was not contami-
nated with these passages, not that it was not contaminated with γ and least of all that,
because it approximates K0–2 in this respect, it should be classiied with them.307 The
circumstance that ν itself has “important additions” (the appendix passage no. 121),
to which Grünendahl refers next, does not mean that this recension’s evidence can be
discounted for Grünendahl’s hypothetical Nepālī subrecension.308 No one claims ν (or
even its best representatives S1́ and K0.1) are completely free of interpolations: were
this the case, the editor could simply have reprinted the text of one of these witnesses.309
The point of creating a critical edition is to arrive, through purifying the text of its
inferior or non-o riginal readings, at a text better than that contained in any extant
witness.310 If we were to expect perfect idelity to the original from our witnesses and
discarded one of them every time it failed to satisfy this expectation, we would not get
far. We could then not use Ñ4 either because, although Ñ4 lacks several passages found
in S1́ and K0.1,311 it is also not completely free of interpolations.312
Grünendahl’s inal argument concerns the way (he thinks) Sukthankar relied on the
agreement of ν and S to constitute the text, even though ν and S do not form a closed
group against γ. As this argument illustrates the extent of his confusion regarding manu-
script transmission, let us look at it here. He writes:
Now as regards the frequent agreement between ν and the southern recension against γ,
which, according to him [Sukthankar], also manifests in isolated and minor readings. The
list of 30 relevant readings (Prolegomena, p. liv) notes only a few agreements between ν and the
southern recension with other manuscripts of the northern recension, namely, three with Ñ1
and one with V1. Otherwise, the list gives the impression wished for by the editor [namely,]
that ν and the southern recension keep to themselves.313
260
260 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Grünendahl refers to Sukthankar’s list of 30 readings demonstrating the “frequent
agreement of ν with S against γ, especially in the matter of isolated and even unimpor-
tant readings.”314 But in his view, this list cannot be considered evidence of the agreement
of ν with S against γ, since the Ñ manuscripts not infrequently feature—o r, as he puts it,
“align themselves with” (sich anschließen)— the reading of ν and S. Let us irst look at his
arguments:
However, this does not in any way correspond to the real inding, as an examination of the
passages cited using the critical apparatus reveals. The Ñ manuscripts, which he [Sukthankar]
consistently assigns to γ, already demonstrate signiicant variation in the list. If one leaves the
irst three passages from the irst adhyāya out of consideration, initially seven passages with
incomplete references stand out: a part of the Ñ manuscripts is assigned to γ; for the rest, no
account is given. An examination of the critical apparatus reveals that in all cases one of the
Ñ manuscripts also features the allegedly exclusive reading of ν and the southern recension.
Additionally, there are nine passages where, according to the list all the Ñ manuscripts feature
the reading of γ, but, according to the critical apparatus, individual manuscripts align them-
selves with the reading of ν and the southern recension. In the case of four further passages,
both according to the list and according to the critical apparatus, all Ñ manuscripts feature
the reading of γ; however, an examination of Ñ3 revealed that this manuscript aligns itself
with ν and the southern recension here. An examination of Ñ4 additionally showed that this
manuscript features the reading of ν and the southern recension in all twenty of the above
mentioned cases and, over and above that, in 1.138a, 1.144c and 187.20a. Finally, in three
passages, Sukthankar notes similarities between ν and Ñ4.315
He adds:
Summing up, of the 27 passages listed (without those from adhyāya 1), there remain only three
where ν and the southern recension agree without at least one Ñ manuscript aligning with
them. Ñ4 in particular is not in any way deicient in this respect to the manuscripts favored by
Sukthankar and should have, if one will, have been assigned to the same group, unless it be that
what one judged an “original inheritance” in the case of ν, one wanted in the case of Ñ4 (and
the other Ñ manuscripts) to ascribe to contamination. This too was a point, regarding which
one might have expected a clariication in Sukthankar’s study of this manuscript!316
Before we evaluate Grünendahl’s speciic charges, let us irst understand his principal
objection to Sukthankar’s assessment of the three recensions’ relation. Sukthankar
presents a list of 30 passages to illustrate the fact that often when the manuscripts difer
in their reading, ν and S agree against γ, that is to say, ν and S feature one reading and
γ another. Given this divergence in reading, Sukthankar thought the reading attested
in ν and S was likely the reading of the archetype, given that contamination between ν
and S was less likely than between either ν and γ or γ and S. His aim was not to exclude
γ (what would he gain from doing so?), but to show that when the recensions presented
conlicting readings, the readings attested in γ were more likely corruptions, given that
the alternative that ν and S arrived at the same reading through independent innovation
was unlikely.317 Grünendahl misunderstands the passage. As he reads it, the emphasis is
placed on “against γ”— that is to say, he thinks that Sukthankar’s aim was to exclude γ.318 In
261
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 261
Table 10 Grünendahl demonstrates that ν and S cannot be against γ (for at least one γ manu-
script always agrees with them)
Sukthankar’s list Grünendahl’s list
Verse Mss. giving Mss. giving another Mss. of the γ recension that also feature the
one reading “allegedly exclusive reading” of ν with S
Grünendahl’s initial seven examples: Twenty examples looked up in Ñ4:
39.16 Ś1 K S Ñ1.2 V1 B D Ñ3 (slight Ñ4
variation)
41.17 Ś1 K S Ñ1.2 V1 B D Ñ3 Ñ4
100.6 Ś1 K S Ñ1.2 V1 B D (mostly) Ñ3 Ñ4
119.8 Ś1 K S Ñ1.2 B D Ñ3 Ñ4
138.17 K S Ñ2.3 V1 B D Ñ1 Ñ4
159.20 Ś1 K S Ñ2 V1 B D Ñ1.3 Ñ4
182.9 Ś1 K S Ñ2.3 V1 B D Ñ1 Ñ4
Grünendahl’s next nine examples:
20.2 K S others Ñ3 Ñ4
34.13 Ś1 K S Ñ V1 B D (mostly) Ñ3 Ñ4
37.5 Ś1 K S Ñ V1 B D (mostly) Ñ1.3 Ñ4
64.10 K S Ñ V1 B D (mostly) Ñ1.3 Ñ4
68.14 K S Ñ V1 B D (mostly) Ñ3 Ñ4
76.22 K S Ñ B D (mostly) Ñ3 Ñ4
77.4 K S Ñ B D (mostly) Ñ3 Ñ4
143.38 Ś1 K S Ñ V1 B D Ñ1.3 Ñ4
176.5 K S Ñ V1 B D (mostly) Ñ1.3 Ñ4
Four examples looked up in Ñ3
21.10 K S Ñ V1 B D (mostly) Ñ3 Ñ4
26.9 K S Ñ V1 B D (mostly) Ñ3 Ñ4
141.4 Ś1 K S Ñ V1 B D (mostly) Ñ3 Ñ4
142.18 Ś1 K S Ñ V1 B D (mostly) Ñ3 Ñ4
Additional examples looked up in Ñ4:
1.138 K V1 S BD Ñ4
1.144 K S BD Ñ4
1.208 K S V1 B D (missing)
187.20 K S Ñ V1 B D Ñ4
Three examples for which Sukthankar notes similarities between ν and Ñ1
196.4 Ś1 K Ñ1 S Ñ2.3 V1 B D Ñ1
199.12 Ś1 K Ñ1 S Ñ2.3 B D Ñ1
199.19 Ś1 K Ñ1 S Ñ2.3 V1 B D Ñ1
his view, the point of Sukthankar’s list is to show ν and S constitute a closed group— or, as
he puts it, “keep to themselves” (unter sich bleiben)— vis- à- vis γ. And since ν and S emphat-
ically do not “keep to themselves,” for at least one of the Ñ manuscripts also features
the identical reading in all but three examples, he thinks he has a devastating objection
to Sukthankar (besides demonstrating that Sukthankar cannot be trusted as an editor
for downplaying the Ñ manuscripts).319 As evidence, he constructs a list of 27 examples
where the reading of ν and S is also attested in at least one Ñ manuscript (Table 10).
262
262 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Grünendahl cites these 27 passages as examples that contradict Sukthankar’s
“assertion” that ν and S constitute a closed group vis- à- vis γ, yet he overlooks that it is
not surprising that at least some manuscripts of the γ recension preserved the correct
reading.320 In fact, we would be surprised if none of them did, for this would mean that
the γ recension was so completely overwritten that not a single original reading survived
in it—a n unbelievable state of afairs. In other words, all Grünendahl has done with this
list is to show that, in at least 27 cases, Sukthankar’s constitution of the text inds conir-
mation from γ! The list does not in any way advance our understanding of the relation
of the recensions, because all Grünendahl has done is take Sukthankar’s list and, in the
seven examples where Sukthankar noted Ñ1.2 (four times), Ñ2.3, Ñ2 and Ñ2.3 have
a corrupt reading, he has pointed out that Ñ3 (four times), Ñ1, Ñ1.3 and Ñ1 have the
correct reading! Likewise, in the eight examples where Sukthankar either noted “others”
or that the Ñ group “mostly” have a corrupt reading, he has pointed out that Ñ3 (twice),
Ñ1.3 (twice), Ñ3 (three times) and Ñ1.3 have the correct reading.321 In an additional
four, he has consulted Sukthankar’s collation of Ñ4 in “The Oldest Extant Ms. of the
Ādiparvan,” and, from the fact that Sukthankar lists no variants for these verses, con-
cluded that Ñ4’s reading must be identical with the constituted text.322 Finally, in three
examples where Sukthankar noted that Ñ2.3 has a corrupt reading, he has pointed out
that Ñ1 has the correct reading. As there is nothing spectacular in inferring, from the fact
that Sukthankar notes that two of the manuscripts of the group have a corrupt reading,
that the third, therefore, must have the correct one, the value of Grünendahl’s list is zero.
Grünendahl has not understood the problem the genealogical method was evolved
to solve. If all three recensions had the same reading, there would be no doubt about
the reading the editor had to reprint: there would be no variants and hence no scope
for interpretation. The problem arises when there is a divergence among the readings
and no one reading is obviously correct. In that case, which reading should the editor
reprint? Is it the one found in most of the γ manuscripts alone? Is it the one found in
most of the ν manuscripts alone? Is it the one found in most of the S manuscripts alone?
Is it the one found in most of the ν and γ manuscripts but without S? Is it the one found
in most of the γ and S manuscripts but without N? Or is it the reading found in most
of the ν and S manuscripts but without γ? Of these alternatives, the last one is the most
intuitive given the geographic separation between ν and S. The point is not to show that
ν and S have one reading and γ another or— as Grünendahl allusively puts it—t hat the
“allegedly exclusive reading” (angeblich exklusive Lesart) of ν and the southern recension is
really exclusive to ν and S, as though we gain something by excluding Ñ from the best
groups. Rather, the point is what should the editor do given that ν and S frequently agree
and that, when they do so, they often do so against γ. Further, as already noted, there is
nothing surprising about the fact that at least some γ manuscripts, against the practice of
their recension, preserve the correct reading: as the reading of the archetype, it will have
descended to them as well in addition to ν and S. The circumstance that they feature the
same reading as ν and S is not an argument against the latter’s reading being correct. If
anything, it is further support for their reading being the correct one.
If we examine Grünendahl’s list again, we see that, when he cites these 27 passages as
examples where one or more Ñ manuscripts also feature the reading of ν and S, he has at
263
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 263
most provided additional conirmation for the constituted text.323 He has not demonstrated
that Ñ1– 4 contain diferent readings from ν, and, least of all, that they contain better readings
than ν.324 In fact, since Ñ1–4 conirm ν’s readings in all of the examples he cites, he has not
shown how basing a critical edition on the former will alter the constituted text. This problem
resurfaces in his inal set of examples. In continuation of his argument that Ñ4 “is not in any
way deicient in this respect to the manuscripts favored by Sukthankar […],” he notes:
Following the presentation of the independence and original connection of ν and S, Sukthankar
inally arrives at the conclusion that the text of ν in general is such as to evoke conidence
(Prolegomena, p. lv). It preserves some archaisms and some lectio diicilior [sic], albeit in corrupted
form; in other manuscripts these have often been replaced by modern forms and paraphrases.
Here he thus no longer argues, as at irst, in terms of quantity (few textual additions, etc.) but in
terms of the quality of ν, even though none of the unique readings identiied by him earlier (see
earlier concerning Prolegomena, p. xlviii– l) could have contributed to the [text’s] constitution.325
The idea that an editor either argues or can argue “in terms of quantity” is Grünendahl’s
delusion. In contrast to Sukthankar, whose assessment is based on reading the manuscripts,
Grünendahl considers the number of interpolations a criterion for preferring certain
manuscripts. There is not one reference to readings in his article, even though it alleg-
edly draws on a careful examination of Ñ3 and Ñ4. Twenty-ive years later, he is yet to publish
his collations. All his arguments are based on data Sukthankar provided—o nly, where
Sukthankar arrived at one interpretation, he asserts the contrary. We also have seen that
the idea that Sukthankar was not justiied in identifying a K group because none of the
unique readings that distinguished this group “could have contributed to the [text’s]
constitution” is Grünendahl’s delusion: if an editor’s aim is to demonstrate the distinc-
tiveness of certain manuscripts for containing unique readings, he will do so irrespec-
tive of whether these readings also enter the constituted text. Since the critical edition
rejects readings unique to one branch of the tradition as, in all probability, corruptions,
it is almost certain that they will not enter the constituted text. If the readings “contrib-
uted to the [text’s] constitution,” they would do so precisely by virtue of the fact that
they are not unique to K, but also attested in a separate branch of the tradition.
Grünendahl’s next argument for Ñ4’s superiority underscores his confusion. He writes:
As evidence [of the fact that ν preserves the archaic readings, where other manuscripts have
replaced them by modern forms] he [Sukthankar] lists six passages. Here the evidence of the
critical apparatus for them, supplemented by the inding for Ñ4:
2.144b: abhibhoḥ in K3.5 [and M1.3.5]
2.177b: ślokāgraṃ in K0.2.3(corrupt).5 [and T2, M]
2.189c: ślokāgraṃ in K0– 3.5 [and D14, southern recension (except G2)]
10.6c: kāmayā in K0.2.3.5 [and Ñ3.4 B1.3.5, Da, D (except D4), southern
recension]
98.13a: kanyasa in Ś1 (corrupt), K0 [and Ñ1.3.4]
98.18c: samudge in Ś1 [and Ñ1.3.4]
Source: Reproduced verbatim from Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata-
Handschriften,” 127.
264
264 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Grünendahl inds it “remarkable,” on one hand, that “by no means all— and often not
even the most important— manuscripts assigned to ν feature the ‘archaic’ reading”; on
the other, that “for those [readings] that they [the better K manuscripts] feature no exclu-
sivity can be claimed; ν alone appears in general not to ofer a qualitatively suicient base
for the constitution of the text.”326 The irst argument is incoherent. If K3.5 or K0.2.3.5
contain the lectio diicilior, then that means that they are the best manuscripts here. The
editor will not reprint an inferior reading contained in K1, because he found it a good
manuscript in general. An editor who proceeded so rigidly would not produce a critical
edition, but an edition with one manuscript as base. Further, the fact that K1 is the best
K manuscript does not preclude it from having corruptions of its own—a s Sukthankar
explicitly noted.327
Grünendahl also overlooks the fact that the worse K manuscripts are considered infe-
rior because, in Sukthankar’s words, they are “misch- codices conlated either with γ or
with S,”328 but that they are nonetheless K manuscripts. In other words, in parts unafected
by contamination, they can preserve good readings. Only someone who has not under-
stood the principle that sometimes the inferior manuscripts can preserve the true reading
(and hence are invaluable for reconstructing the archetype) would discard the deteriores so
lightly. In four of the cases Sukthankar cites (1.2.144b, 1.2.177b, 1.98.13a and 1.98.18c),
the manuscripts have a mixture of readings.329 No clear pattern of agreement can be
discerned. Thus, the choice had to be for the diicult reading.330 The editor did not
mark any of these cases as uncertain, showing that he was conident that he restored the
original reading, which explained the corruptions. Only Grünendahl, lacking a knowl-
edge of Sanskrit, seeks to undermine the edition on the specious grounds that the best
manuscripts of the K group do not contain the readings.
The more serious problem concerns Grünendahl’s notion that he has raised an objec-
tion to Sukthankar by pointing out that “For those [readings] that they [the better K
manuscripts] feature no exclusivity can be claimed.” Why does Grünendahl think the
readings of the K manuscripts must be “exclusive” to them? As we saw, there is nothing
surprising about the circumstance that the reading of the K manuscripts are conirmed
by one or more manuscripts of one of the other groups: it only means that the reading
of the archetype was also transmitted in this branch of the tradition. The fact that the
Ñ manuscripts conirm some of the K manuscripts’ archaisms is an argument neither
against K nor for subsuming Ñ under K. Least of all is it an argument for a new edition
based on the Ñ manuscripts. As we observed, the agreement between the K and Ñ groups
undermines Grünendahl’s assumption of a signiicant diference between his proposed
edition based on the Ñ manuscripts and Sukthankar’s: for every reading that K and Ñ
concur, there will be no diference between an edition based on the former and one based
on the latter. Incidentally, it bears repeating that Sukthankar’s edition is not based on the K
manuscripts. It is based, as he puts it, on the “eclectic but cautious utilization of all manuscripts
classes.”331 Only Grünendahl, because he imagines the critical edition is “based” on a spe-
ciic manuscript, thinks it is an objection to the edition if he can show that the reading
of the manuscript selected as a “base” is not “exclusive” to it— that is to say, that other
manuscripts also have the same reading for, in his opinion, this means there were other
candidates for the “base” and hence Sukthankar’s choice was a partial one.
265
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 265
Thus, after presenting his list, he comments: “ν alone appears in general not to ofer
a qualitatively suicient base for the constitution of the text,” and he continues: “The exam-
ination of the readings of 166.23 contrasted by Sukthankar in columns (Prolegomena, p. lvi)
leads to the same result: the left column cites under the ‘vulgata’ manuscripts Ñ2 as the sole
Ñ manuscript. The remaining Ñ manuscripts are not listed in any of the three columns.
However, from the critical apparatus to 166.23 it is clear that Ñ1.3 (and Ñ4) also feature
the reading of ν.”332 Grünendahl refers to Sukthankar’s table for verse 1.166.23, which
lists three variants from the vulgate and the northern and southern recensions. Sukthankar
presents this table (Table 11) as evidence that often ν alone preserves the original reading.
His comment on this table is as follows:
Obviously, the stumbling block was antargataṃ of the constituted text, which is a lect. dif.; here
it means “forgotten,” a meaning cited in our dictionaries generally as an uncommon meaning
given only by Indian lexicographers! Unless one here assumes ν to be original, it is impossible
to explain this divergence of ν, γ and S, both of which give a possible though weak sense.333
Grünendahl does not dispute Sukthankar’s assessment of the lectio diicilior, as he lacks the
necessary linguistic skill, knowledge of the scribes’ conventions (usus scribendi) and famil-
iarity with the Mahābhārata tradition. Rather, he attacks the assumption that “only” ν
preserves the correct reading.334 From the fact that the apparatus notes that Ñ2 features
the reading of the vulgate (1782*, which replaces 1.166.23 in the vulgate manuscripts),
he infers that Ñ3 and Ñ4 feature the reading of ν.335 As this means that the reading
antargataṃ tu tadrājñaḥ, etc., is no longer “exclusive” to ν, he sees his suspicion that “ν alone
appears in general not to ofer a qualitatively suicient base for the constitution of the
text” conirmed.336
Contrary to Grünendahl’s view, however, the critical edition is not “based” on one
manuscript or recension, much less on it “alone.” Sukthankar’s argument is unafected
if the same reading also occurs in some other manuscripts, because he is arguing from
the lectio diicilior that the reading preserved in ν (antargataṃ) probably occasioned later
scribes’ emendations (some turned it into antah ̣puraṃ and others, unable to construe the
verse, replaced it entirely). The circumstance that some Ñ manuscripts also retain this
reading only makes this interpretation likelier. As he neither claims “exclusivity” for ν
nor makes the mistake of thinking that the correct readings must be “exclusive” to one
branch of the tradition for him to justify editing that branch of the tradition (which he
emphatically did not do), Ñ’s apparent “recidivism” does not pose a problem for him.
Table 11 Sukthankar considers the agreement of the versions
K2 Ñ2 V1 B D = Vulgate ν = Text Southern Recension
tato rāja parikramya antargataṃ tu tadrājñaḥ antaḥpuraṃ gato rājā
yathākāmaṃ yathāsukham | tadā brahman ̣abhāṣitam | śrutvā brāhman ̣abhāṣitam |
nivṛtto’ntaḥpuraṃ pārtha so’ntaḥpuraṃ praviśyātha so’ntaḥpuraṃ praviśyātha
praviveśa mahāmanāḥ || saṃviveśa narādhipaḥ | na sasmāra narādhipaḥ |
Source: Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lvi.
266
266 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
The reading antargataṃ tu tadrājñah ̣, etc., which originated with the archetype, could have
descended to Ś and K and to Ñ4 via their respective archetypes without positing either
that Ś and K got it from Ñ4 or Ñ4 got it from Ś and K or that both got it from a common
archetype (according to Grünendahl, ν).
Grünendahl thinks that the circumstance that Ñ3 and Ñ4 also feature the reading of
ν demonstrates the untenability of an edition “based” on the Ś-K manuscripts, and more
speciically, on Ś1. Because he is unclear about the distinction between a critical edition
and an edition with one manuscript as base, and because this is what he would have done
in Sukthankar’s place, he thinks the editor does no more than identify one manuscript as
the base and reprint its readings with random “improvements.”337 From his perspective,
the circumstance that Ñ3 and Ñ4 also share the readings of Ś1, the manuscript allegedly
selected as the base, constitutes a major objection to Sukthankar’s edition, since it shows
that Ñ3 and Ñ4 could just as well have served as a base. Ñ4 in particular not only features Ś1’s
“good” readings but also resembles the K manuscripts in not featuring the interpolations
that the latter do not feature. It is, moreover, shorter than Ś1. Hence he concludes that
Ñ4 should have replaced Ś1 in the edition, since Sukthankar’s “own ‘inductive and prag-
matic veriication’ is […] not only saddled by weaknesses in diverse details but he him-
self also later corrected his main argument for the preeminent status of the ‘Kashmiri
version,’ namely, that it is the shortest, in favor of Ñ4— without, however, drawing the
consequences resulting therefrom for his edition.”338 “For,” Grünendahl adds, “when this
claim cannot be upheld, his entire demonstration based on it is redundant.”339 Citing
“abstract” considerations,340 he argues that, as the Mahābhārata never existed as a single
text but only as several independent recensions where a constant exchange of mate-
rial between recensions occurred until a tradition stabilized in each script,341 the focus
must shift from reconstructing an archetype (which never existed) to editing one of the
Mahābhārata’s regional recensions.342 In this connection, he again emphasizes that Ñ4
ofers a superior “base”: it is not only the shortest manuscript; it also preserves the most
archaisms, is free of contamination, unrelated to the other Ñ manuscripts (!) and manifests
independent agreement with other recensions that indicate a connection through the
archetype.343 These reasons, coupled with his access to Ñ4 (and his brilliance in proving,
he thinks, Sukthankar’s erroneous choice of base), lead him to propose a new critical
edition of the Mahābhārata under his leadership.
Grünendahl has clearly not grasped the concept of a critical edition. He thinks all an
editor need do for a critical edition is identify the manuscript that will serve as the “base”
(namely, the shortest manuscript, which preserves archaisms and is free of contamina-
tion and yet exhibits agreement with other recensions) and then reprint its text. In his
opinion, a systematic recensio is superluous because once the editor identiies his “base,”
he will consistently defer to it (as the shortest, it preserves the most original text). At most,
he may occasionally consult other manuscripts, especially those in the same script, since
agreement with members of its own “family,” according to Grünendahl, is a conclu-
sive argument for their common reading being the reading of their source. Where the
manuscripts diverge, he chooses the reading attested in the majority or, possibly, the one
found in the best manuscript (which Grünendahl equates with the shortest). If the editor
considers the other manuscripts at all, he does so only to note that the other branches
267
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 267
are more inlated or that the reading he has identiied as the original is also attested in
them. As his primary goal is to reduce the complexity of the tradition, he will neglect
most variants and report only the most interesting ones in the critical apparatus but,
on the whole, he will exclude as many manuscript groups from consideration as pos-
sible. Since Grünendahl is not interested in genealogical reconstruction of the arche-
type— he considers it superluous, since, in his view, the shortest manuscript unfailingly
preserves the reading of the archetype— he thinks the editor can forego a stemma.344 At
most, he may draw up tabular columns such as those in Tables 1, 2 and 3, grouping the
manuscripts into two groups— the contaminated and the non- contaminated— and using
this classiication in place of the stemma.345
The problem with this approach is evident. Even though Grünendahl thinks his
edition would be superior to Sukthankar’s, especially as it would avoid false inferences
due to contamination, in truth he will be unable to identify the correct reading in most
cases. Every time the Ñ manuscripts diverge, he will be unable to identify the correct
variant. He might print the reading attested in the majority or the reading corroborated
in one of the other recensions, but neither will ensure it is the correct one.346 Even if all
four Ñ manuscripts were unanimous in their reading, he could still be misled, since all
four could be corrupt. Nor could he rely on certain Nepālī manuscripts always agreeing,
because the groups constantly change. Even if he found two Ñ manuscripts consistently
agreed against the other two, how would he know this was due to independent agreement
rather than contamination? In cases of crux, he could not forgo the evidence of the other
manuscript groups, but to correctly evaluate this, he would need to know how they relate
to the Nepālī group, which means he once again could not avoid a systematic recensio.
Grünendahl might argue—a s he, indeed, does—t hat he can abjure the require-
ment of recensio because, as the shortest Nepālī manuscript, Ñ4 serves as a “base” and
he merely needs to list Ñ1–3 ’s variants in the critical apparatus. But this does not solve
the problem. Although his proposed edition of the Nepālī tradition would not be a true
critical edition (not even of this one recension), it is also not a true Bédierist edition, that is,
an edition “aspiring to absolute respect for the reality of a single manuscript, after an
exhaustive analysis of the varia lectio, and that [is] rigorously consistent with this prin-
ciple.”347 Rather, what it aspires to is more correctly classiied under the category of “base
manuscript criticism,” that is, an edition in which “the manuscript one preaches loyalty
to is exactly that, the ‘base,’ to which corrections and modiications are added, often on
no other criterion than the presumed evidence of their necessity, and without trying to
account for the tradition’s development.”348 There are two problems with this approach,
as Leonardi notes:
1. On the ontological plane, the text thus produced is not deined even roughly on the
diachronic axis running from the original to the witness. The material attractiveness
of the base ms. leads to a conservative edition, but the possibility of correcting it
more or less freely produces a text that stands in an ambiguous and heterogeneous
position, in an indistinct hinterland of the base ms., outside the two hypothetical
alternatives, the two “truths” outlined above [viz., that of philology oriented to the
text and that of philology oriented to the witness].
268
268 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
2. On the phenomenological plane, too, the fact that the choice of the base ms. and the
control mss. and the procedures for correcting the base ms. are not illuminated by
recensio often leads to contradictory solutions, and even misleading ones as regards com-
prehension of the base ms. itself, which does not ind its proper place in the tradition.349
Grünendahl’s proposed edition thus cannot serve as a guide even to the Nepālī tradi-
tion. It can explain neither the Nepālī manuscripts’ position in the wider Mahābhārata
tradition nor their development. It cannot tell us what stage of the (Nepālī) tradition it
reconstructs. It is unclear that the other manuscripts’ readings, where they difer, can be
derived from Ñ4’s reading, since Sukthankar and the other editors found that extensive
contamination between manuscripts of the regional recensions made it impossible to
reduce their readings to one.350 Although it claims to provide an edition of this one man-
uscript (Ñ4), in practice, unless Grünendahl reprinted its readings consistently (that is,
even in cases of obvious corruption and nonsense), it cannot avoid mixing readings from
heterogeneous sources, often on no other principle than that the manuscripts containing them are
in the same script! The sole alternative, namely, that the editor makes emendations as they
occur to him, represents a step behind the methodological advances of the nineteenth
century— the introduction of a systematic recensio and the principle of emendatio ope codicum.
From the perspective of someone with no experience in dealing with a complex tradition,
this return to a “pre-s cientiic practice” (Leonardi) may appear appealing, but it is abso-
lutely unacceptable to those who understand editing in terms of the three requirements
Leonardi speaks of (scientiicity, an eye for diachrony and legibility).351
Grünendahl’s decision to “abjure all interpretive requirements of the edited text”352
may seem appealing in an age in which, as Leonardi puts it, “the authentic Bédierist
inheritance has […] exhausted its momentum.”353 But it poses serious challenges. As
Leonardi notes, “The fact that the choice of the base ms. and the control mss. and the
procedures for correcting the base ms. are not illuminated by recensio often leads to con-
tradictory solutions, and even misleading ones as regards comprehension of the base
ms. itself, which does not ind its proper place in the tradition.”354 Grünendahl’s advo-
cacy of the base manuscript, coupled with his partisan and misleading criticisms of the
Mahābhārata critical edition, actually obscures what we know about the Mahābhārata tra-
dition. It has led to the erroneous perception that an encompassing Mahābhārata tradi-
tion never existed; that we can only speak of regional traditions of the Mahābhārata in
isolation and that studying witnesses from other recensions or the relations between these
recensions cannot shed light on the speciic one currently under consideration. Going
beyond Leonardi, we can say that the real danger of the pseudo-B édierist movement is
that, if left unchecked, it leads to the loss of the information that the application of the
genealogical- reconstructive method to a tradition provides.355 It is not only the base man-
uscript that “does not ind its proper place in the tradition.” Rather, the tradition itself, in
a manner of speaking, does not ind its proper place in the tradition once skepticism about
the genealogical- reconstructive method is admitted.356 Once the pseudo- Bédierist critic—
on the pretext of providing an edition more faithful to a single manuscript— succeeds
in fragmenting the tradition, the single-m anuscript edition appears not only plausible
but preferable. Indeed, it appears the sole possible solution. This is likely why German
269
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 269
Indologists, most of whom, like Grünendahl, have only a weak grasp of textual criticism,
favor it.357 Not only does it airm their prejudice that a coherent textual tradition never
existed; it also conceals their deicits in undertaking a true critical edition.
The Argument from Expertise
The argument from expertise refers to the replacement of argument with expert testimony. The mere fact of
citation, without an attempt at paraphrase much less clariication, serves to validate an author’s views. Rightly
speaking, the argument from expertise is not an argument at all. It merely relects the institutionalized prejudice
in favor of certain authors and positions. It reveals the broken system of preferment at Mahābhārata studies’
core. The scholars entrusted with discriminating between correct and incorrect scholarship have proven incapable
of distinguishing objective research from ideological views.
In three chapters now, we have seen how, although they consistently belabored the language
of criticism and critical methods, the German Indologists did not grasp the concept of tex-
tual criticism.358 Rather, what they classiied under that name was the attempt to separate
a hypothetical Ksạ triya text from Brahmanic interpolations, allegedly inserted into the text
during the Mahābhārata’s “redaction.” This method, insofar as it is subjective, a priori
and circular, does not deserve the name “critical.” It merely evinces the German scholars’
anti- Brahmanism or anti-S emitism, which they thought justiied them in intervening in the
textual traditions of other cultures, be they “corrupted” by midrashim or mım̄ am̄ ṣa.̄359
The larger issue at stake concerns how these erroneous ideas could be transmitted
and admitted into the canon of legitimate scholarship. Grünendahl’s errors were so la-
grant that no one with the slightest acquaintance with textual criticism would have found
his arguments convincing. Anyone familiar with the basics of textual criticism knows
that agreement in correct readings (that is, those considered most likely the reading of
the source) does not establish iliation and agreement in the absence of readings even
less so.360 Yet several Mahābhārata scholars, Indologists and critical philologists found
Grünendahl’s arguments not only compelling but also worth endorsing. This section
reviews some of their comments before drawing some conclusions about how the argu-
ment from expertise has replaced legitimate research and discovery in Mahābhārata
studies with the mere appearance of critical scholarship.
We begin with Michael Witzel, who commends Grünendahl for “going beyond the
facile division into various script traditions.”361 Witzel judges the Mahābhārata critical
edition a “failure,” due to the “ultimately futile” nature of the attempt at “establishing a
stemma.”362 He criticizes, via a reference to Grünendahl, “the currently—s till— fashion-
able ‘critical’ approach to philology as ‘the cultural technology of colonial rule,’ ”363 but
does not see that his account of the Mahābhārata’s “history” is a priori and philologi-
cally indefensible, and would make a critical edition, such as he claims to defend, impos-
sible.364 In fact, where it claims a “crystallization” of the epic, it is nothing but a revival of
Bigger’s “normative redaction” hypothesis, albeit using a diferent metaphor.
Witzel is not alone in this regard. His colleagues Georg von Simson, Johannes
Bronkhorst and Walter Slaje likewise cite Grünendahl approvingly. Von Simson notes that
“Within these main recensions [of the Mahābhārata], versions that can be categorized
according to the diferent Indian scripts were formed. However, the criterion of script is
270
270 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
by no means reliable; one can observe manifold reciprocal inluences between the regional
transmissions.”365 The passage is footnoted with a reference to Grünendahl.366 Slaje
argues, “Though I agree with Grünendahl’s (1993) criticism of the ‘Schriftartprämisse,’
I hesitate to accept its general application to all sorts of texts. Grünendahl developed
his arguments by textual criticism of the epics, targeting on the principles Sukthankar
adhered to as an editor of the Poona Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata in particular.
His results, however, should be limited to those texts that evolved in more than only
one region, as it was normally the case with the so- called epic- purāṇic ‘literatures.’ ”367
Bronkhorst endorses Grünendahl’s other criticisms of Sukthankar: “It is true that
Sukthankar subsequently obtained and described (1938) a manuscript from Nepal cov-
ering (only) the Ādiparvan that presents an even shorter version of that portion of the
Mahābhārata. It is equally true that Grünendahl (1993) has criticized Sukthankar’s edi-
torial principles, most notably his attempt to associate a number of manuscripts (those
covered by the letter K) with the Śāradā manuscripts.”368
We have already noted Bigger’s views of Grünendahl at length, so we do not repeat
them here.369 But the work of Oskar von Hinüber deserves mention, both because of
his claims regarding Grünendahl’s contribution and because of his extreme skepticism
about the Mahābhārata critical edition. In von Hinüber’s view, the “synchronous diver-
sity of scripts did not lead to the formation of recensions of the Mahābhārata, which
were restricted to or concentrated in speciic script areas. Important new investigations
by Reinhold Grünendahl suggest this and evidence from other domains of Sanskrit liter-
ature conirm his indings.” Like Grünendahl and Bigger, von Hinüber cites “the inlu-
ence of the oral tradition” as leading “to a similar dissolution of the text as is known
was the case for the Homeric papyri” and claims “textual criticism ought to actually sur-
render before the Mahābhārata.”370 He refers to both Grünendahl’s “Zur Klassiizierung
von Mahābhārata- Handschriften” and his “Zur Textkritik des Nārāyaṇīya.”371 In the
attached note, von Hinüber erroneously repeats Grünendahl’s view that the Mahābhārata
critical edition “is based […] on the idea, developed by H. Lüders, of the coincidence
of the script and the recension, something that, as R. Grünendahl has shown, cannot
be upheld [n. 14]” and adds: “V. S. Sukthankar (1887– 1943), the irst general editor
of the Mahābhārata, already expressed his doubts about the coincidence of the script
and the recension in the Prolegomena, p. vii, which are also reprinted in Sukthankar
[n. 16], p. 17.”372 Continuing to propound the erroneous view that the critical edition
reconstructs the Mahābhārata’s “normative recension,” Von Hinüber argues: “What has
arisen is not the Ur- text, which could not have arisen at all, but a completely new nor-
malized recension.” In his view, “The editors of the Mahābhārata are so to speak the
late descendants of Aristarchus or Nīlakaṇṭha,” a manifestly false claim since, whereas
Aristarchus attempts to reconstruct Homer’s text on the basis of distinguishing his
language from that of the poets he terms the neot̄eroi (“the newer ones”) and Nīlakaṇṭha’s
edition is a compendium following the principles of comprehensivity and Vedāntic con-
sistency, the Mahābhārata critical edition is a neo-L achmannian edition that aims to
reconstruct the archetype of the tradition.373
Von Hinüber’s claims reveal a surprising lack of familiarity with the Mahābhārata tra-
dition. More important, they appear grounded neither in his knowledge of the tradition
271
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 271
nor even in a general proiciency in textual criticism. Rather, they appear motivated
solely by an interest in delegitimizing the critical edition, of which he claims “its goals
and methods were determined by the state of knowledge of the previous [that is, the
nineteenth] century.”374 Von Hinüber’s comments reveal a discipline that has no other
purpose than to reproduce its own often erroneous scholarship through asserting its can-
onicity, as when he directs John Brockington’s attention to “the important contribution
by R. Grünendahl, Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften [...], who with
good reasons disputes the correlation of script and recension in the Mahābhārata trans-
mission already questioned by V. S. Sukthankar.”375
James L. Fitzgerald, the general editor of the Chicago translation of the Mahābhārata,
exhibits the same reliance on Grünendahl. He presents Grünendahl’s views thus:
V. S. Sukthankar conducted his basic survey and classiication of available manuscripts
on the basis of a general (not absolute) “script-p remise” (the term is R. Grünendahl’s
[Grünendahl, 1993a]), that H. Lüders had earlier articulated (Grünendahl, 1993a, 101–1 02;
Sukthankar, 1933, vi– vii). This premise posited that the several regional scripts of India con-
stituted relatively isolated manuscript traditions with relatively little contamination between
or among them. The Sanskrit Mah bh rata critical-edition project made use of manuscripts in
ā ā
eight distinct Indian scripts, ive of the North— Sharada, Devanagari, Bengali, Nepali, and
Maithili— and three of the South— Grantha, Telugu, and Malayalam.376
Fitzgerald adds:
The most searching and particular criticisms of V. S. Sukthankar’s editorial eforts came from F.
Edgerton (1944) and R. Grünendahl (1993a). These two scholars examined closely Sukthankar’s
segmentation and classiication of the manuscript tradition, and some of Sukthankar’s basic
commitments have been refuted as a result. There are three major criticisms of V. S. Sukthankar’s
thinking that emerge from their work. First, the script-p remise is, as a general description of
the working of the manuscript tradition, not warranted. Then R. Grünendahl (1993a) showed
further that V. S. Sukthankar’s arguments regarding ν were shaky and inconsistent. But while
ofering valuable judgments about the manuscripts used by V. S. Sukthankar for his edition
of the Ādiparvan and for the formulation of his principles, neither of these critiques of V.
S. Sukthankar’s judgments vitiate the practical result of V. S. Sukthankar’s reconstructed text.
The efect would be quite diferent had V. S. Sukthankar argued that ν was in fact the arche-
type behind the entire extant written tradition and based his reconstruction on that assumption.
A third important criticism made by R. Grünendahl was to point out that a Nepali manuscript
one or two hundred years older than any previously available to V. S. Sukthankar was shorter
than even the Kashmiri texts of ν. V. S. Sukthankar became aware of this manuscript too late to
make practical use of it (Sukthankar, 1938), but, as R. Grünendahl correctly points out, he failed
to consider the full implications of this fact for his overall theory of the tradition.377
This view is repeated in the “General Introduction” to the Chicago translation, thus
transmitting the error to a younger generation of scholars:
For a recent discussion of some of the limitations and problems of Sukthankar’s editorial
practices, see Reinhold Grünendahl’s “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften.”
272
272 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Grünendahl’s study identiied a number of problems and inconsistencies in Sukthankar’s edi-
torial approach, but it does not bring any telling argument against the remarkable results—
primarily in terms of excellent “diicult readings”—y ielded by Sukthankar’s policy of using
the Śāradā tradition, and especially the coincidence of the Śāradā and Malayāli traditions,
as a touchstone.378
Sheldon Pollock likewise repeats Grünendahl’s reservation about using scripts as a clas-
siicatory principle. He writes:
Most scholars assume that writing styles and manuscript traditions formed closed
systems: Given the regional exclusivity of scripts—o r what is taken to be their exclusivity—
Sanskrit literary texts are said to have developed versions peculiar to writing traditions,
and hence recensions tended to become regionalized. […] There is some truth to this
conventional view, but it needs important qualiication. Scripts in precolonial South Asia
seem to have represented as little a barrier to supralocal communication as regional
languages.379
Pollock repeats this assessment in The Language of the Gods in the World of Men:
Moreover, although manuscripts are classiiable into regional traditions, regionalism here
pertains entirely to diferences in local writing systems. No regionalization of any conse-
quence, in point of dialect or in the particulars of material or social or even religious life,
can be detected in any recension or version. To the degree that regional versions can be
said to exist at all […] they mark distinctions without diferences. That is, while the text was
undoubtedly expanded or contracted in one recension or another, this was unaccompanied
by the least hint of localization. In short, the unmistakable impression given by hundreds of
medieval manuscripts copied time and again for centuries on end is that the Mahābhārata, just
like Sanskrit itself, existed in a quasi-u niversal transregional space and spoke across this space
in a truly homogenous voice.380
Notably, both passages refer to Grünendahl’s work: “Further doubts about the ‘writing-
system premise’ that underlies epic text- criticism and the reality of regional recensions
have been raised by Grünendahl 1993”381 and “Grünendahl 1993 importantly reconsiders
the logic and reality of ‘regional recensions’ of the MBh.”382 These citations are problem-
atic inasmuch as Pollock proclaims himself the exponent of a new “critical philology.”383
If we accept Pollock’s equation of philology with biography, they raise grave doubts
about Pollock’s qualiications as a philologist.384 Albeit “critical philology” “with its global
history, its conceptual pluralism, and the massive, kaleidoscopic archive of methods and
interpretations in the making sense of texts to which it gives access” is supposed to be
“the premier site for its exposition and demonstration [sc. of the ‘foundational principles
of the twenty-i rst century human sciences’],”385 it cannot function without a familiarity
with the traditional tools of the editor and critic.386 Pollock adds: “if the rich materials
from traditional India are ever to be included in this new philological discipline, we
Indologists have our work cut out for us,” but this promised induction will only succeed
to the extent that the Indologists master the basic philological skills.387
273
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 273
Finally, two other scholars do not cite Grünendahl’s 1993 article, but feature the same
mistake. The irst is Alf Hiltebeitel, who relies on Grünendahl’s summary of his 1993
article in the volume Nārāyan ̣ıȳa- Studien:
Now in considering these manuscripts, it is necessary to bear in mind Grünendahl’s impor-
tant reservations about V. S. Sukthankar’s Schriftartprämisse: the latter’s grounding premise
as the irst Critical Edition General Editor “that a kind of script constitutes a ‘version’ ”
(Grünendahl 1997: 30). Grünendahl shows that versions often overlaps scripts, and that an
“M version” in particular could not simply be characterized by its “purity” relative to other
(Telugu and Grantha) Southern Recension scripts (33) akin to the again-a lleged purity that
Sukthankar attributed to the “Ś āradā version” of the Northern recension (31).388
The second is Brockington, who explains the Mahābhārata critical edition thus:
In his Prolegomena to the irst volume Sukthankar declared that the aim of the Critical
Edition was to reconstruct “the oldest form of the text which it is possible to establish on
the basis of the manuscript material available” (p. lxxxvi). To this end, a large number of
manuscripts were collated (using Nīlakaṇṭha’s texts as the vulgate), as well as several printed
editions, and the result has been the collecting of a far more complete record of the variant
readings and the regional traditions of the epic than was in practice available to any scholar
previously. The manuscripts were classiied irstly into the Northern and Southern recension
and then, on the basis of the scripts used, into versions.389
Though Brockington appears to have committed the error of thinking the manuscripts
were classiied by script independent of Grünendahl (as noted earlier, he does not cite
Grünendahl), the error is no less serious for that reason.
Although a cursory inspection— for example, checking whether the editors actually
classiied manuscripts by script— would have revealed the error in Grünendahl’s thesis,
not one scholar undertook this step. All the scholars cited failed to note that there is a
distinction between a manuscript’s text and its script. Despite the fact that they work
primarily with the Mahābhārata in transliteration, they did not notice that the text can
be transposed into a diferent script while still preserving the essential diferences between versions.
Not one scholar provided a clariication or restatement of Grünendahl’s thesis, much less
subjected it to a careful, dispassionate analysis.
The experts’ failure to detect the problems with Grünendahl’s work raises serious
questions about the viability of so-c alled critical Mahābhārata studies. It points to an
institutional crisis, because expert testimony, paradigmatically manifest as citation of
one’s peers, has replaced the need for demonstration. Not one scholar could paraphrase,
much less provide an argument for Grünendahl’s work. Rather, the mere fact that they cited
Grünendahl’s work functioned as an endorsement of it, even if good sense, the authority of
genuine scholars and tradition spoke against it. On one hand, the Mahābhārata scholars cre-
ated an untenable distinction between the critic— Western- trained, historical and allegedly
equipped with philological expertise— and the lay reader. On the other, they themselves
lack the necessary philological expertise to subject each other’s claims to an evaluation.
Rather, the criterion for valid scholarship has become: Who said it? Does he possess the
correct pedigree? Does he enjoy his peers’ conidence? Have other experts cited him?
274
274 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Instead of its traditional sense of “expert skill or knowledge in a particular ield,”
expertise has acquired the derivative meaning of “expert opinion or commentary.” It no
longer refers to an ability to make authoritative pronouncements grounded in insight,
technical knowledge or experience. Rather, expertise refers to the ability to declare cer-
tain ideas valid merely because they exhibit the institutional features of scholarship— for
instance, that a German scholar rather than an Indian made these claims.
By choosing expertise over arguments and ailiation over understanding, the
Mahābhārata critics have ill served not only their readers but also themselves. They
have understood almost nothing of this text.390 They have replaced a serious engage-
ment with philosophical issues with an empty formalism. They have not contributed
in any way to the life of this text.391 As Sukthankar noted, their learned debates and
dilemmas, their afectations of critical distance appear jejune before a text that the
average Indian grasps intuitively.392 Once we set aside the Mahābhārata critics’ ersatz
tradition, only two avenues remain for studying the Mahābhārata. The irst is a return
to the commentarial tradition, which provides not only valuable insight into the text’s
earliest state but also a guide to its history of reception.393 The second is a literary
and philosophical interpretation, such as Madeleine Biardeau developed. Rejecting
the German scholars’ problematic theses of an Aryan epic, Biardeau approached
the Mahābhārata as “the principal— and undoubtedly the most ancient— of all
monuments to bhakti.”394 Her work, rooted in her appreciation of Brahmanic philos-
ophy and theology, ofers a promising avenue for reading the epic freed of the ballast
of historicism and the German Indologists’ pseudocritical approaches.395 Beyond the
myth of a scientiic Indology and a critical Sanskrit philology, the Mahābhārata awaits
its readers as the “thought entire” (mataṃ kṛtsnaṃ, Mahābhārata 1.55.2 and 1.56.12) of
the seer Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa.
Notes
1 Lino Leonardi, “Il testo come ipotesi (critica del manoscritto-base),” Medioevo romanzo 35 (2011):
26 (Trovato’s translation).
2 See Winternitz’s comments in Moriz Winternitz, “The Mahabharata,” The Visva- Bharati
Quarterly 1 (1924): 343– 59 (cited in full in the introduction). Winternitz proposed a critical
edition of the Mahābhārata as the only “basis for such higher criticism and for any attempts at
the reconstruction of the old poem” (ibid., 347) as part of this project of a general enlighten-
ment of the Indian mind.
3 Jacques Froger, La critique des textes et son automatisation (Paris: Dunod, 1968), 41.
4 Andreas Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata: Seine Darstellung im Rahmen des Textes und seiner Entwicklung
(Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1998), 121.
5 Ibid.
6 Ibid. (Bigger’s italics).
7 Ibid.
8 Michael D. Reeve, “Shared Innovations, Dichotomies, and Evolution,” in Manuscripts and
Methods: Essays on Editing and Transmission (Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 2011), 56.
Timpanaro prefers “axiological,” since most editors distinguished between the “good” (meliores)
and the “bad” (deteriores) manuscripts. Sebastiano Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method,
ed. and trans. Glenn W. Most (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 93, 98, 101, 174–7 5.
9 Reeve, “Shared Innovations, Dichotomies, and Evolution,” 56.
275
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 275
10 At most it establishes that they are both descended from the archetype and that, in this respect
at least, they preserve the latter’s reading.
11 There are many ways the manuscripts could agree in not featuring the interpolation: (1) they
could be descended from three independent recensions, none of which featured the interpola-
tion; (2) two of them could be descended from recensions that did not feature the interpolation
and the third from a recension that did, but whose scribe did not copy it; (3) alternatively, they
might not feature the interpolation because they are all descended from the archetype, which
by deinition did not feature the interpolation, but this does not justify us in assuming that they
constitute a “recension” as they have no ancestor in common later than the archetype, which
they share with all other surviving manuscripts of the work in question. Bigger is unclear about
the diference between a trait that is shared because it is (simultaneously) present in many
exemplars of a work and a trait that is shared because it has been inherited. Only the latter is
genealogically relevant.
12 Froger, La critique des textes et son automatisation, 41.
13 The real reason the six manuscripts do not contain the passages in question is that they were
likely not part of the archetype and the manuscripts, having escaped contamination with the
inlated tradition, all preserve the archetype’s text. Bigger’s argument amounts to the claim
that all six manuscripts are descended from θ. But as we have already established that they are
members of the family selected for study— the family of Mahābhārata manuscripts descended
from the archetype θ— the circumstance that they lack the same passages does not bring us
further. For similar reasons, N cannot be their unique common ancestor. Whereas all six
manuscripts are descended from N, so are K4–6 , Ñ1– 3, V, B and D. What we seek, rather, is
the common ancestor of just these six manuscripts, that is, something that deines them as a
section of the wider family.
14 Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, 175. Timpanaro considers this error a basic
confusion, implicated also in the failure to distinguish between axiological and genealogical
classiication: “Another cause of erroneous bipartite classiications is partially connected with
the preceding one [the tendency to group manuscripts into two groups, the meliores and the
deteriores] but is more strictly derived from a logical mistake: the tendency to identify one class
of manuscripts α on the basis of shared characteristics and then to call β everything that in
reality is merely ‘non-α .’ There is a danger of falling into a similar error not only in textual
criticism but wherever classiications need to be made: Aristotle already fought against it in
zoology. If a certain number of shared corruptions deines a family of manuscripts, the lack
of those corruptions does not deine another family: so after having identiied a family α it
will be necessary to see whether the other manuscripts are connected by shared innovations in
their turn, or whether instead they constitute diferent groups, or whether, as is also possible,
they are so contaminated that their derivation from one or more subarchetypes cannot be
detected.”
15 Reinhold Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” in Studien
zur Indologie und Buddhismuskunde, ed. Reinhold Grünendahl, Jens Uwe- Hartmann and Petra
Kiefer- Pülz, Indica et Tibetica 22 (Bonn: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 1993), 130.
16 Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, 65.
17 Bigger’s idea that “not [being] attested in” is an argument for iliation is borrowed from
Grünendahl’s 1993 article, which elevates the idea— though fallacious— to a basic principle.
Hence our focus on Grünendahl rather than Bigger in this chapter.
18 Froger traces the principle back to 1872 when Gaston Paris irst systematically distin-
guished between shared corruptions and shared readings. Paul Lejay explicitly formulated
the underlying principle in 1888 as follows: “M. S. essaye d’établir que ce ms., du XIIe s.,
appartient à la meilleure classe désignée par Z et que les mss. connus de cette classe, B H b,
forment une sous- famille distincte de M. Dans le détail, la démonstration n’est pas très nette.
M. S. commence par démontrer la seconde partie de la proposition (p. 17); mais, dans sa liste
de variantes, il introduit de bonnes leçons de B H b qui ne prouvent rien. Si, en efet, B H b
276
276 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
ont une bonne leçon contre une faute ou plutôt une innovation de M, cela ne peut prouver
seulement que le copiste de M, comme tout autre, a ses fautes personelles.” Paul Lejay, “Revue
critique d’histoire et du littérature,” N. S. XXVI (1888): 281– 83. Reeve, in response to d’Arco
Silvio Avalle’s question “who irst saw that only shared innovations prove witnesses related?”
retraces Froger’s steps and discusses why the alternative (that is, that shared readings prove
witnesses related) does not hold. Reeve, “Shared Innovations, Dichotomies, and Evolution,”
55– 103.
19 For a list of examples, see Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method and see also Reeve,
“Shared Innovations, Dichotomies, and Evolution.”
20 Glenn W. Most, “Editor’s Introduction,” in Sebastiano Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s
Method, ed. and trans. Glenn W. Most (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 10.
21 Peter F. Dembowski, “The ‘French’ Tradition of Textual Philology and Its Relevance to the
Editing of Medieval Texts,” Modern Philology 90, no. 4 (1993): 514.
22 Ibid.
23 This expresses the minimum condition, though ideally we should have several such errors,
since scribes often corrected their source’s errors. However, since a scribe can only notice (and
so correct) a percentage of the errors in his source, the true state of afairs should become
apparent.
24 Paul Maas, Textkritik, 4th edn. (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1960), 26. Likewise, in genetics the
fact that someone possesses the genes for a hand does not permit us to conclude that he is
descended from another person who also has the genes for a hand, since every human possesses
the genes that program a hand. Thus, not the shared material, but the shared errors of tran-
scription are decisive: if both individuals had a rare genetic defect, then and only then would
we be justiied in positing a relationship (provided they could not have acquired the defect
independent of each other).
25 A “signiicant error” does not mean that the error is especially meaningful, but, rather, that
it cannot be such that two scribes made it independently. The error is signiicant if it signiies
something for the two manuscripts’ iliation. Contrariwise, insigniicant errors can be signif-
icant from the perspective of meaning, but they are still called insigniicant errors if they are
worthless for determining iliation.
26 Compare Austin’s argument for Bigger’s normative redaction: “it is reasonable to build,
on the basis of available evidence, inferences about things for which we have no evidence.
Or, to articulate this claim in terms I have proposed, it may be argued that it is reasonable
to infer that the same processes and patterns of textual growth which followed M0 (i.e. the
many M+N moments documented in the CE apparatus) also preceded M0; just as the M0
text was established reductively from M+N by the Bhandarkar editors through lower textual
criticism, hypotheses about M- N can be established from M0 through higher textual criti-
cism.” Christopher Austin, “Evaluating the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata: Inferential
Mileage and the Apparatus Materials.” Journal of Vaishnava Studies 19, no. 2 (2011): 75.
The problem is that the critical edition is already an inferred text. Its editors concluded
their work not because they were apathetic or lazy, but because they exhausted all the
licit inferences. All material supports only a inite number of inferences: inferences made
thereafter are illicit. Hence the subtle shift in method: since the irst method has ceased
to yield results, Austin now invokes “higher textual criticism.” The similarity of the two
names— higher and lower criticism— should not blind us to the fact that they are incom-
mensurable. Austin disingenuously suggests that the various “M-N ” moments established
through higher textual criticism are analogous to the “M0” established from the “M+N”
moments, even though the former are not established using a scientiic method much less
the same method.
27 Reeve, “Shared Innovations, Dichotomies, and Evolution,” 59. Timpanaro expresses a similar
idea in The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, 175.
277
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 277
28 The examples Bigger chooses (the appendix passages 63, 75, 80, 81 and 85) do not meet this
criterion because they are interpolations, which can be transmitted horizontally. Further, he
cannot show that the interpolation arose in a speciic branch of the tradition (for example,
in γ with the consequence that all manuscripts containing them are descendants of γ). Since
nothing can be concluded about the iliation of a group of manuscripts sharing common
readings, not even that they form a family in the narrower sense, and the additional passages
can be thought of as a kind of “common reading,” Bigger’s examples are genealogically irrel-
evant. We could assert that γ is the source of Ñ1– 3, V, B and D’s passages 63, 75, 80, 81 and
85 only if they contained a unique set of errors and the passages in Ñ1–3 , V, B, D reproduced
those errors, since it is unlikely that another manuscript would have contained the exact same
errors. If we cannot establish iliation using shared readings, we can do so even less on the basis
of a shared absence of readings, since the manuscripts that lack a characteristic do not consti-
tute a true class, much less a genealogical family.
29 J. B. Hall, “Claudian, De Bello Gildonico,” review of Claudii Claudiani, De Bello Gildonico, ed. E.
M. Olechowska, The Classical Review 33, no. 2 (1983): 203– 07 discusses a similar problem with
Olechowska’s division of the manuscripts of De Bello Gildonico into two families, α and β, based
on common variants.
30 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 121.
31 For a discussion of Maas’s principle, see Elio Montanari, La critica del testo secondo Paul
Maas: testo e commento (Florence: SISMEL edizioni del Galluzzo, 2003) and, for a response
to Montanari, Michael D. Reeve, “Reconstructing Archetypes: A New Proposal and an Old
Fallacy,” in Hesperos: Studies in Ancient Greek Poetry Presented to M. L. West on His Seventieth Birthday,
ed. P. J. Finglass, C. Collard and N. J. Richardson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007),
326– 40.
32 Reeve, “Reconstructing Archetypes,” 329.
33 Taking Maas’s “ohne seine Hilfe” not to mean without its help tout court but no longer depen-
dent on its help once reconstructed.
34 Reeve, “Reconstructing Archetypes,” 329.
35 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 130.
36 Vishnu S. Sukthankar, “Epic Studies VII: The Oldest Extant Ms. of the Ādiparvan,” Annals
of the Bhandarkar Oriental Institute 19 (1938–3 9): 201–6 2; see especially 205: “These signiicant
omissions, major and minor, prove that the text of our MS. is shorter than that of all other MSS. hith-
erto known” (all italics Sukthankar’s).
37 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 107.
38 Ibid., 107.
39 Ibid., 108 (Grünendahl’s italics).
40 Ibid., 108, n. 29 (all italics Grünendahl’s).
41 Ibid., 108.
42 Ibid., 108, n. 31.
43 Grünendahl does not clarify how he calculates the “pure textual additions” of the northern
recension. Does he include all additions found in one or more northern manuscripts, or does
the deinition exclude additions shared with one or more southern manuscripts? If the latter,
then the calculation is erroneous, for a text is no less expansive for sharing its additions with a
manuscript of the rival recension. We count 43 appendix passages for the northern recension
alone; 92 if we include passages shared with the southern recension. In contrast, Grünendahl
appears to arrive at 64 passages by excluding those found only in a single northern manuscript
when found in the southern recension as a whole. In that case, the count is 64, but we could just
as well exclude passages found in two northern manuscripts when found in the southern recen-
sion as a whole, since both are as likely to be contaminated with a southern source. Moreover,
why should we include passages found only in a single northern manuscript, since they are also
not characteristic of the northern recension as a whole?
278
278 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
44 Grünendahl actually thinks this is the case, as we show in the section “The Argument from
Extensive Contamination.”
45 This would be the case if a manuscript had many small interpolations as compared with another
with fewer but more extensive interpolations. In Grünendahl’s table, the former would have a
higher number than the latter. If we relied on his table for our knowledge of manuscripts, we
would treat the latter as the purer manuscript. In general, it is erroneous to treat interpolations
purely quantitatively: they must be examined in context.
46 See L. D. Reynolds and N. G. Wilson, Scribes and Scholars: A Guide to the Transmission of Greek and
Latin Literature (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991), 214– 16, on the problem of additional passages
in one part of a manuscript tradition.
47 M. L. West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique (Stuttgart: B. G. Teubner, 1973), 50.
48 Given the Śāradā codex’s fragmentary nature, we cannot identify the total number of insertions
unique to it. Sukthankar’s critical edition of the Ādiparvan lists only one such passage (*374
inserted after 1.31.11). A more accurate guide is to consider insertions in the ν recension (Ś and
K) and especially in Ś1 and K1, which have only two unique insertions (*1735 and *2161). In
spite of the contamination of the inferior K manuscripts, the ν recension is the shortest known
recension.
49 Reeve writes that he is currently writing an article on sections of a twelfth lorilegium fuller
than the quotations taken from a related source by Sedulius Scottus in the ninth century;
the question arises whether the additional material is a later interpolation. But he also notes
that there are witnesses to the lorilegium that make a selection and so have a shorter but
plainly unauthorial text. A witness’s quality cannot be determined by considering its length
alone: only the quality of its readings permits us to arrive at a conclusion regarding its place in
the stemma. Only then can we know whether it is a good guide and to what extent we ought
to follow it.
50 Grünendahl does not look at the passages in context: he does not consider whether they intro-
duce new themes or merely repeat or restate something said earlier; whether they were inserted
to expand on an existing detail or to introduce new narratives or episodes; whether their inser-
tion creates a hiatus and so on. Beyond calculating their relative frequency, he does not even
consider the pattern of their occurrence in diferent recensions: do they occur in the better
manuscripts or only in the more expansive groups; could they have been transmitted by con-
tamination or are they more likely inherited from a common ancestor. Beyond the fact that
they are listed as “interpolations” in Sukthankar’s apparatus, he is not interested in their status.
His sole concern is to demonstrate the superiority of the Nepālī manuscripts as concerns the
number of interpolations. That he censures Sukthankar for arguing “exclusively in terms of
quantity” is typical of his tendency to attribute his errors to others.
51 Michael D. Reeve, “Stemmatic Method: ‘Qualcosa che non funziona?’ ” in The Role of the Book
in Medieval Culture: Proceedings of the Oxford International Symposium, September 26–O ctober 1,
1982, ed. P. Ganz. Bibliologia 3 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1986), 69, n. 36.
52 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 108.
53 Ibid.
54 Ibid., 108– 9.
55 Ibid., 109.
56 Ibid., 128.
57 Unlike interpolations, which the critical edition lists and where all one needs do is count the
passages, calculating the length of the constituted text takes time and requires a careful study.
Like Bigger, Grünendahl uses material the critical edition already provides him, makes some
quick, inexact calculations and soon he can announce a new “theory” of critical editing (cf.
Bigger’s claim that his work “overturn[s]” the “current maxim ‘short equals old,’ ” but pos-
sibly permits us to approximate the “normative redaction’s actual form” more closely; Bigger,
Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 121).
279
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 279
58 Sukthankar notes that the manuscript in the collection of the Rajaguru (Grünendahl’s Ñ4)
“though […] appreciably shorter than any other MS. of the Ādi so far known,” is not “abso-
lutely free from inlation and contamination. This MS. has in fact just a few insertions not
countenanced by the Critical Edition.” Sukthankar, “The Oldest Extant Manuscript of the
Ādiparvan,” 205, and see ibid., 206, for the list of insertions. In all, the manuscript contains
three longer passages (App. 1, nos. 1, 12, 33 and 58) and 90 shorter one- line insertions (93*,
220*, 288*, 291*, 476*, 478*, 479*, 485*, 494*, 495*, 549*, 601*, 678*, 708*, 709*, 710*,
750*, 868*, 873*, 875*, 879*, 903*, 906*, 909*, 962*, 999*, 1004*, 1013*, 1017*, 1018*,
1022*, 1068*, 1087*, 1096*, 1104*, 1110*, 1120*, 1124*, 1141*, 1142*, 1144*, 1146*, 1148*,
1155*, 1162*, 1166*, 1173*, 1178*, 1186*, 1196*, 1212*, 1219*, 1224*, 1230*, 1240*, 1305*,
1309*, 1357*, 1430*, 1436*, 1463*, 1470*, 1623*, 1644*, 1665*, 1698*, 1786*, 1789*, 1796*,
1812*, 1815*, 1818*, 1855*, 1882*, 1883*, 1919*, 1920*, 1921*, 1922*, 1951*, 1953*, 1960*,
1975*, 2016*, 2087*, 2097*).
59 We could also have added a column for Ś and K (ν). However, in many cases, the ν recension
follows the readings of S1 and K1, as the other K manuscripts are often conlated.
60 The only star passages listed are the previously mentioned *374 (the sole example of an inter-
polation unique to Ś1) and *1735 and *2161 (the sole examples of interpolations unique to Ś1
and K1).
61 Ś1 has a lacuna here, so it is not clear whether we would include no. 33 as we have no way of
proving it existed in the shortest witness. But we might assume that it did given Ś1’s proximity
to K1 and therefore include it in our constituted text.
62 Silvia Rizzo discusses examples in her review of Il lapsus freudiano. Psicanalisi e critica testuale, by
Sebastiano Timpanaro, Rivista di ilologia e di istruzione classica (1977): 102– 5, but her examples
are on a smaller scale. She believes that if the editor must choose between “two equally possible
readings, one of which has a few additional words not necessary for the sense,” he ought not
exaggerate the potential for interpolation, but should “take into account the [scribes’] tendency
to eliminate superluous words.” Ibid., 105.
63 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 109 (italics in original).
64 Ibid., 115.
65 Ibid., 127.
66 See ibid., 108, n. 29. Grünendahl glosses the expression “factual increase [in the size] of the
text” with: “[passages,] which thus do not merely ofer another line or another verse in place of
a line or a verse of the constituted text or insert parts of the constituted text in another position”
(all italics in original).
67 V. S. Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” in The Ad̄ iparvan for the First Time Critically Edited, vol. 1 (Poona:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1933), xlvii.
68 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 108.
69 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxxiv.
70 Ibid., xcvii.
71 Ibid., lxi.
72 “Of important additions in ν, I can recall only one, that of an adhyāya of 42 lines, at the very
end of the Ādi (added probably as an Appendix), which is a variant, abbreviated version of
the Śvetaki interpolation. It is found only in Ś1 K0.1.4 and therefore cannot even be said to be
characteristic of the whole of ν (App. I, no. 121). Instances of small additions are nos. 349*,
449*, 451*, 516*, 565*, etc., found in K with or without some Devanāgarī manuscripts; while
969*, 1855*, 2077*, etc., are found in Ś1K, with or without some Devanāgarī manuscripts: all
these passages are missing in B [and] S.” Ibid., lii (Sukthankar’s italics).
73 Ibid., xlvi– xlvii.
74 Even the terms quantitative and qualitative are misnomers, arising from Grünendahl’s habit of
counting interpolations rather than studying readings. How is a manuscript’s length any less
of a qualitative criterion in evaluating it than its antiquity? How is the fact that a manuscript
280
280 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
is heavily interpolated any more a quantitative criterion—i gnoring the absurd procedure
whereby one counts interpolations rather than examine them— than its readings?
75 Ibid., lxxxvi.
76 Ibid., Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 109.
77 Ibid., 128.
78 Ibid., 109 (italics in original).
79 Ibid., 109.
80 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxxvi (italics in original).
81 Ibid., xlvii.
82 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxi. Grünendahl could also have referred to Sukthankar’s article
“More Text- Critical Notes,” which defends the constituted text against Winternitz’s objections.
Sukthankar explicitly notes: “I have taken the Śāradā MS. only as the norm for my edition;
I have not undertaken to reproduce its text verbatim.” Vishnu S. Sukthankar, “Epic Studies IV.
More Text- Critical Notes,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 16, no. 1/2 (1934–
35): 97. He lists several examples that illustrate that, in several cases, he rejected the Śāradā
codex’s reading.
83 See Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xlvi– xlvii.
84 Sukthankar notes that in instances of “ ‘double’ agreement [‘agreement between two or more
groups of each recension (N1 = S1 and N2 = S2)’]” “one of the agreements must, gener-
ally speaking, be accidental, since both can hardly be original.” In this case, “either may be
adopted, if they have equal intrinsic merit.” However, “owing to the much greater correctness
and reliability of Ś1 K” and “other things being equal,” he adopts the reading of Ś1 and K in
these cases. Ibid., xci.
85 See Grünendahl’s conclusion: “From what has been said until now certain consequences have
become clear for the editorial principles presented by Sukthankar. When the Schriftartprämisse
lose their place in the tool-b ox of Indological textual criticism, the classiication of manuscripts
must be placed on new foundations. It appears logical to focus initially on the manuscripts of
individual regions. In particular, the relationship of the Newari manuscripts to each other, their
position in the manuscript tradition of Nepal as well as of the Mahābhārata as a whole deserve
a closer investigation. The conditions for this are given by the work of the Nepal-G erman
Manuscript Preservation Project.” Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata-
Handschriften,” 130. See also the next note.
86 “In particular, Sukthankar’s classiication is placed in question by Ñ4: (1) it is shorter than the
textus simplicior constituted by him [sic], without standing in a demonstrable relationship to it;
(2) it fulills many of Sukthankar’s criteria for his constitution of the hyparchetype ν discussed
above; (3) it does not show any traces of contamination; (4) contrary to Sukthankar’s claim it
stands in a closer relationship to only one other Newari manuscript, namely, Ñ3; (5) according
to Sukthankar’s information, it manifests conformities with the southern recension that, when
they cannot be traced back to contamination, are possibly to be ‘traced back to an original
connection via the lost archetype.’ ” Ibid., 129.
87 Sukthankar considers four types of agreement— N = S (text = NS), N1 = S (text = N1S), N = S1
(text = NS1) and Nx = Sx (where x represents the series of cardinal numbers 1, 2, 3, etc.)
(text = Ś1K)— and one type of disagreement: N ≠ S (text = N). Only in one of these ive cases
does he adopt the reading of Ś1 and K without invoking extrinsic justiication. In other words,
even if we followed Grünendahl in his erroneous assumption that, qua shorter, Ñ4 should be the
base for the critical edition, we would replace the reading of Ś1 and K with Ñ4’s reading only in
this case. Here also Sukthankar does not justify adopting their reading on the ground that they
form the shortest group. Rather, he explicitly notes that their readings are adopted in these cases
owing to their “greater correctness and reliability.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xci (italics added).
88 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 104. The reference is to
Sukthankar’s statement that “in the case of works that are transmitted in diferent versions, the
script is characteristic of the version.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” vii.
281
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 281
89 Heinrich Lüders, Über die Grantharecension des Mahābhārata, Abhandlungen der Königlichen
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Phil.-H ist. Klasse, N. F. vol. 4, no. 6
(Berlin: Weidmannsche Buchhandlung, 1901).
90 Ibid., 3– 4 (Lüders’s italics).
91 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 102 (italics in original).
92 Ibid., 103.
93 Heinrich Lüders, review of The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, by Vishnu
S. Sukthankar, Deutsche Literaturzeitung 24 (1929): 1140.
94 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 104.
95 Ibid., 105.
96 Heinrich Lüders, Druckprobe einer kritischen Ausgabe des Mahābhārata (Leipzig: Drugulin, 1908).
97 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 104.
98 West assigns this name to the stage following presentation (West, Textual Criticism and Editorial
Technique, 72– 102). It involves selection of prefatory material, choice of sigla and the layout
of the edition and the text and critical apparatus.
99 The image is reprinted as the frontispiece to this book.
100 Contini rightly proposes, “a critical edition is, like any other scientiic act, a mere working
hypothesis, the most satisfactory, namely, the most economic one, and one which proves apt
to connect a system of data.” Gianfranco Contini, “Ricordo di Joseph Bedier,” in Esercizi di
lettura sopra autori contemporanei con un’appendice su testi non contemporanei (Turin: Einaudi, 1974),
369. Leonardi develops this idea when he writes, “I hope these three coordinates (scientiic
accuracy, diachrony, readability) make it clear that referring to a critical text as a hypothesis
doesn’t mean at all justifying the skepticism of contemporary philology, but in fact quite
the opposite. The fact that this text originates from a hypothesis doesn’t imply that every
hypothesis is valid; on the contrary, it demands a defendable justiication to support its
validity.” Leonardi, “Il testo come ipotesi,” 6.
101 West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique, 72.
102 For more examples, see the lists of manuscripts forming the critical apparatus for the diferent
parvans in the respective volumes of the Mahābhārata critical edition.
103 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” v. Grünendahl appears unaware of this passage. He writes: “The
inding in other parvans shows rather the opposite: in Mahābhārata 4, two of the three
Śāradā manuscripts available were not included, because they proved to be ‘recent copies of
Nīlakaṇtha’s text and therefore as Śāradā codices without value’ (Raghu Vira, Mahābhārata
4, Introduction, p. ix f.)— this also was a case that manifestly was not anticipated by the spiri-
tual fathers of the Schriftartprämisse.” Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata-
Handschriften,” 109– 10. Sukthankar’s footnote (Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” v, n. 1) shows
that they are the same manuscripts that Raghu Vira later cites in his edition: Grünendahl
has overlooked the citation. Hence his confusion that the discovery of Śāradā copies of a
Devanāgarī text is a fatal objection to the Schriftartprämisse: he has formulated the premise
independent not only of the manuscript evidence but also of the editor’s views.
104 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” vii.
105 Ibid.
106 West states the underlying principle as follows: “If the older manuscripts can be itted into a
stemma, the promiscuity of the younger ones should be easy to establish and may be unimpor-
tant. If the relationship of the older manuscripts resists analysis, it may still be possible to identify
sub- groups whose structure can be stemmatized.” West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique, 15.
107 Johann Gottfried Ludvig Kosegarten, Pantschatantrum, sive, Quinquepartitum de moribus exponens: ex
codicibus manuscriptis (Bonn: H. B. Koenig, 1848), vi.
108 This explains why Lüders could identify a Kaśmīrī version of the Mahābhārata, even though
he did not possess an example in the Śāradā script. Even though the manuscripts he iden-
tiied as the Kaśmīrī version were in Devanāgarī script, their common features justiied the
assumption of a common ancestor. Sukthankar acknowledges Lüders’s perspicuity: “The
282
282 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Kaśmīrī character of K1 was already fully recognized by Professor Lüders, who had uti-
lized it in the preparation of his specimen of a critical edition of the epic mentioned above,
although he had no genuine representative of the Kaśmīrī or Śāradā version to compare
it with.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xlix. Grünendahl thus understands neither the prin-
ciple that an editor can identify manuscripts as of a certain type or descended from a
common ancestor even in the absence of that ancestor nor Sukthankar’s comment when he
(Grünendahl) remarks that “When he [Sukthankar] remarks in the Prolegomena (p. xlix) that
Lüders ‘already recognized the Kaśmīrī character of K1, […] although he did not have a
genuine representative of the Kaśmīrī or Śāradā version for comparison,’ this holds no less
for his own constitution of the K- version in the Foreword.” Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung
von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 112. Sukthankar does not censure Lüders for consti-
tuting a K version in the absence of an exemplar; rather, he praises him for recognizing the
existence of this version even in the absence of an exemplar. Likewise, he does not need an
extant exemplar to posit a Kaśmīrī version. Grünendahl attributes his misunderstanding to
Sukthankar.
109 In the Mahābhārata, we initially get two subgroups in the Grantha version, G1– 3 and G4– 6,
which soon changes to G1.2.4.5 versus G3.6, that is to say, G1 (and G2) exhibit ainities with
G4– 5 rather than with the purer southern group G3– 6. See Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,”
lxxii. These changes suggest a change of exemplar, but if the editor is sensitive to them and
the reader is aware of the change in weight assigned to the manuscript (which he can do if
he reads the editor’s account of manuscripts and studies the table of manuscripts collated for
diferent portions of the text), they should not undermine conidence in the edition.
110 Although this method allows for a localization of the archetypes (Sukthankar notes that ν is
the “lost archetype of the North-W estern group”; γ is the “intermediate (inlated) source” of
the “central sub-r ecension […] (comprising the Eastern and Western groups) [and] occupying
a position intermediate between the North-W estern and the Southern groups”; ε is the “lost
archetype of the Eastern group”; while σ is the “lost archetype” of TG, the manuscripts from
the southeastern corner of the Indian peninsula; Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xxx), there is
a diference between identifying a broad area of inluence depending on the hyparchetypes’
position in the stemma and the traditions they engendered and simply positing “recensions”
based on an a priori scheme of classiication, as Grünendahl suggests Sukthankar does.
Grünendahl’s error arises from confusing the consequent and the antecedent of the argu-
ment: Sukthankar does not posit a northern and a southern recension because he thinks the
two families of scripts— north Indian and south Indian— had a common script as ancestor,
but because he observes that the manuscripts in the two families behave as though they had a
common manuscript as ancestor. In this case, one cannot hypothesize a simple oversight: the
incoherence is in Grünendahl’s mind.
111 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 106, n. 24.
112 Lüders, Über die Grantharecension des Mahābhārata, 3– 4 (Lüders’s italics).
113 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 103. Neither the idea
nor the criticism is new. The idea that the Mahābhārata manuscripts were classiied by script
occurs in Walter Ruben’s 1930 article “Schwierigkeiten der Textkritik des Mahābhārata,”
Acta Orientalia 8 (1930): 240–5 6. Ruben claimed that “Sukthankar, inspired by Lüders (Abh.
d. Gött. Ges. d. W. 1901, p. 3) groups the mss. according to their scripts in ‘versions’; he
groups multiple mss. of the same script in ‘groups.’ ” However, he argued, “this division may
not be taken all too seriously for textual criticism, since the mss. cannot always be consis-
tently pressed into the same groups, since individual groups of diferent versions (of the same
recension) go together just as often and since, inally, the mss. (or groups) break out of the
framework of their recension more or less often.” Ibid., 242. Grünendahl cites the passage
verbatim, additionally emphasizing the words “diferent” (verschieden) and “same” (dieselbe),
in defense of his claim that “regarding Sukthankar’s grouping of the mss., a reservation is
283
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 283
already expressed in Ruben’s essay, which he later, in another place, formulates more clearly.”
Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata-H andschriften,” 103– 4 (the quote is
cited in n. 15). He also cites Ruben’s remark that “even in the case of the Mahābhārata,
one cannot group the mss. according to their scripts in groups, as Sukthankar has attempted
to do.” Ibid., 104 (the reference is to Walter Ruben, Studien zur Textgeschichte des Rāmāyan ̣a
[Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer, 1936], 1– 2).
114 Lüders, Über die Grantharecension des Mahābhārata, 4 (italics added).
115 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata Handschriften,” 102.
116 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” vii.
117 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata Handschriften,” 106.
118 Ibid., 106.
119 Ibid., 106, n. 24.
120 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxv.
121 See Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 107. He
footnotes this passage with the words: “Ruben had already expressed himself in very sim-
ilar terms in his discussion” (ibid., 107, n. 28), but appears to be aware neither that Ruben’s
comment was based on a misreading of Sukthankar’s discussion of the manuscripts nor
that Sukthankar had already addressed Ruben’s confusion in Vishnu S. Sukthankar, “Epic
Studies III: Dr. Ruben on the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata,” Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Institute 11, no. 3 (1930): 259–8 3. In this brief, 22-p age article, Sukthankar destroys
Ruben’s argument. He shows that Ruben is a poseur, who lectures others on textual criti-
cism, but himself does not understand its principles. “R. might have mercifully spared us
this learned prooemium on the aims and methods of Classical Philology and their applica-
tion to the problem of the Mahābhārata textual criticism. The same thing has been said
by others before R., more simply but with ample clearness and emphasis.” Ibid., 261. He
refutes Ruben’s contention that the manuscripts were grouped by script: “This conclusion
is supported by numerous other agreements throughout the Ādiparvan. That the three new
Malayālam MSS. M6. 7. 8 again go back to the same original follows not merely from the
numerous readings these MSS. have in common, but conspicuously from one particular mis-
take where they repeat inconsequentially, at the same point, a fragment of a stanza (1. 85.
25): pūjayantıh̄a loke nāsādhavaḥ. Further the four Grantha MSS. G1. 2. 4. 5. […] must go
back to a not very distant common original. This group has not only numerous readings in
common, but it contains quite a considerable number of interpolations peculiar to itself.”
Ibid., 265 (Sukthankar’s italics) and see also ibid., 264–6 5. At the end of this overview of
his classiication, Sukthankar notes: “It will thus be seen that these generalizations of R. are
absolutely unwarranted. They appear to have been introduced by R. merely for the satis-
faction of having made some pointed and efective little statement.” Ibid., 265. Sukthankar
also addresses Ruben’s contentions regarding the G version (see Ruben, “Schwierigkeiten der
Textkritik des Mahābhārata,” 242, n. 1): he notes that Ruben overlooks both his comments
regarding the Grantha manuscripts’ conlated nature (“all Grantha manuscripts are prob-
ably contaminated (directly or indirectly) from Northern sources in diferent degrees”; Sukthankar,
“Prolegomena,” lxxii; italics in original) and his comments regarding the secondary nature of
the commonalities between G1.2.4.5 and N (“Now is this a case of contamination of the four
MSS. G1.2.4.5 from a Northern source; or are the common passages a remnant of the lost
archetype, which were somehow lost in the remaining manuscripts of the Southern recen-
sion? There is apparent agreement here between independent versions. But is this agreement
original? […] The said manuscripts contain a Northern stanza (belonging to manuscripts
of class T)— a mere string of attributes of Garuḍa—w edged in at a place where it can be
construed neither with what precedes nor with what follows. This proves incontrovertibly
that these four manuscripts G1.2.4.5 have been compared with some Northern manuscripts,
and makes it highly probable that the other doubtful stanzas, which they have in common
284
284 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
with the Northern recension, have crept into their text in the same surreptitious way”; ibid.,
lxxxi). Leaving the reader in no doubt of his low opinion of Ruben as a textual critic (“There
are in the Ādiparvan far more complicated passages than this: this is one of the simpler
conlations. I shudder at the thought of what R. would have done if he had to handle one
of the really diicult cases of conlation”; Sukthankar, “Dr. Ruben on the Critical Edition
of the Mahābhārata,” 271), he shows that Ruben is not even consistent in his argument: on
one hand, he criticizes Sukthankar for treating the agreement of K and S as an argument
for the reading of the archetype; on the other, he concurs with Lüders that the agreement
of B with G (Lüders’s S) is an argument for the reading of the archetype. See Ruben,
“Schwierigkeiten der Textkritik des Mahābhārata,” 247– 48. But, as Sukthankar notes, “as
a matter of documentary probability, there is no diference whatsoever between the con-
sensus of K and S against B on the one hand and the consensus of B and G against D on the
other.” Sukthankar, “Dr. Ruben on the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata,” 276. Lüders
also expressed approval of Sukthankar’s procedure in his review of the irst fascicule: “The
south Indian manuscripts agree with none of the other northern versions as closely as they
do with the Kashmiri version. Furthermore, they have none of the manifest additions of
the southern recension. The geographic distance between the two groups of manuscripts
practically rules out the direct descent of the southern recension from the Kashmiri version.
One must therefore assume that in cases where the two agree in their variants, we have the
reading of the oldest text that can be attained. I had already arrived at the time I was com-
pleting my sample edition at this evaluation of the relationship between the Kashmiri and
the southern manuscripts, which Sukthankar now [also] argues for.” Lüders, review of The
Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, 1141. Sukthankar concludes with a penetrating
summary of Ruben’s shortcomings (Sukthankar, “Dr. Ruben on the Critical Edition of the
Mahābhārata,” 282– 83). His inal judgment is withering: “Ruben’s paper is, in general, quite
intelligent but not at all important for the Mahābhārata textual criticism.” Ibid., 283.
122 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 107.
123 Ibid. (the question mark is Grünendahl’s insertion).
124 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xlvii. Grünendahl deletes the words “seems to be” and
Sukthankar’s observation that the manuscript “may be three or four centuries old.” In gen-
eral, he makes Sukthankar’s conclusions more categorical and less considered than they are.
125 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata-H andschriften,” 109. Grünendahl’s
superciliousness is evident, but the confusion is entirely his own. Both Lüders and Sukthankar
are aware that the presence of contamination complicates the identiication of regional
versions. But they do not allow it to confuse them regarding the underlying transmission. As
Reeve notes, the real problem with contamination is not that it “has the efect […] of falsifying
stemma but [that it] frustrat[es] attempts at drawing them up.” Reeve, “Stemmatic Method,”
67. Lüders and Sukthankar focus on irst identifying characteristic features of the regional
versions before they address contamination. In contrast, Grünendahl begins with contam-
ination and argues abstractly from it against drawing up a stemma. He can do so because
he is not interested in a critical edition. Rather than follow the principle primum recensere (do
the recensio irst), he raises the specter of contamination to undermine Sukthankar’s edition.
He could have beneited from Reeve’s observation: “Scholars [who] believe contamination
and interpolation were so common that stemmatic method seldom or never works […] are
biting the hand that fed them, because unless one can actually see scribes contaminating and
interpolating under one’s nose it is only by applying stemmatic method that one can detect
contamination and interpolation.” Ibid., 65. Apparently, Grünendahl had such a good view
of the scribes at work he does not require stemmatic method at all.
126 Reeve’s deinition.
127 In certain circumstances it may be advantageous to reduce the number of witnesses, for
example, if the editor faces a large number of manuscripts. But here also he cannot proceed
285
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 285
arbitrarily. He must irst show that the selected witnesses suice to give an account of the tra-
dition. West provides the following account of the steps an editor must follow: “1. Whenever
the manuscripts are at variance, make a note of the reading or readings that seem to be
ancient (true, and not found by conjecture, or else attested by an ancient source unavailable
to the scribes) and the manuscripts in which it or they appear. 2. Any manuscript that is the
sole carrier of such readings is obviously indispensable. Adopt it. 3. Remove from the list
all the readings for which the manuscripts just adopted may serve as sources (not just the
readings that appear only in them). 4. See which manuscript contains the largest number of
the remaining readings. Adopt it. Remove from the list the readings it contains. 5. Repeat
(4) until every ancient reading is accounted for.” West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique,
43 (West’s italics). Unlike the elimination of the codices descripti, this elimination has a purely
practical aim: in contrast to the former, where the eliminated witnesses cannot tell us anything
new, here it is possible that the witnesses we set aside contain more information about the tra-
dition, only we have decided to simplify our task by selecting only the manuscripts that suice
for an overview of the tradition. Applying West’s steps, we can immediately identify the error
with Grünendahl’s proposed elimination of the Kasḿ īrī version: most of the ancient and good
readings in the Ādiparvan were from the Śāradā codex. In any elimination of witnesses on
pragmatic grounds, the Śāradā codex would be eliminated last (in fact, it would not be elimi-
nated). At the latest by the second step, we would realize it was indispensable and adopt it as
one of the manuscripts for our edition.
128 Ibid., 44.
129 For example, the Śāradā version and the Maithilī version, of which Sukthankar had only
one exemplar (V1). In contrast, in the Sabhāparvan, three versions are represented by lone
exemplars: the Śāradā (represented by Ś1), the Nepālī (Ñ1) and Maithilī (V1; this is not
the same V1 as in the Ādiparvan). By Grünendahl’s logic, the editor of the Sabhāparvan
should not have constituted a Nepālī version! Grünendahl does not address this issue,
because it undermines his attempt to prove that the Nepālī manuscripts are the true bearers
of the Mahābhārata tradition. At the time, he worked for the Nepal-G erman Manuscript
Preservation Project and evidently hoped his access to the Nepālī manuscripts would secure
him a position as editor of a new Mahābhārata critical edition.
130 The hyparchetype b can be reconstructed using BCEF and therefore replaces these
manuscripts in the stemma (eliminatio codicum descriptorum). Its case difers from g.
131 There is no manuscript called MŚ: this siglum is Belvalkar’s designation for the ancestor
of M2, M4 and M5. The subscript letters denote “the versions with which the major
version is secondarily related” (in this case Śāradā). S. K. Belvalkar, “Introduction,” in The
Bh maparvan for the First Time Critically Edited (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute,
īṣ
1947), cxiv.
132 For Belvalkar’s views on the “Malayālam version,” see ibid., cxi– cxiii.
133 We could replace the manuscripts M1–5 and the hypothetical hyparchetype MŚ with a
single group M with no diference to the constitution of our archetype. Belvalkar notes that
“M3– 5 seem to have undergone, in parts, conlation with some Late-N orthern MSS. [either
D5 or D6 or their ancestor in his stemma]. […] M2.4 [, in contrast,] are the rebels of the
version: they often igure as the exceptions to the list of omissions and additions found in
the entire version (p. xlix– l). These are also exactly the MSS. which show the ŚK inluence
(p. li– lii), which is also shown, to a smaller extent, by M5 (p. liii).” Ibid., cxi. Belvalkar’s
comments suggest that M1 is the purest of the M manuscripts and that its agreement with Ś1
provides the strongest argument for their reading being the reading of the archetype.
134 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 109– 10.
135 See Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” v, n. 1.
136 See ibid. for the source of the manuscripts as the Raghunatha Temple Library and
Sukthankar’s comment that “they represent probably the Nīlakaṇṭha version.” Sukthankar
286
286 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
lists the manuscripts’ numbers as 3712–3 2 and 3951–7 9 (numbered according to Aurel
Stein’s catalogue of 1894). He also refers to the manuscripts two pages later as copies of the
“Nīlakaṇṭha (Devanāgarī) version written in Śāradā” (the manuscript numbers are the same;
in the footnote he adds Jammu as the location). Ibid., vii. Raghu Vira does not provide man-
uscript numbers. He refers to them only as “the Śāradā MSS. deposited in the Raghunath
Temple Library, Jammu (Kashmir).” Raghu Vira, “Introduction,” in The Virātạ parvan for the
First Time Critically Edited (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1936), ix.
137 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 111. The reference is
to Franklin Edgerton, review of The Mahābhārata, for the First Time Critically Edited, by V. S.
Sukthankar, Text of 1.1.1 to 1.2.233, Journal of the American Oriental Society 48 (1928): 187.
138 Edgerton, review of The Mahābhārata, for the First Time Critically Edited, Text of 1.1.1 to
1.2.233, 187.
139 Ibid.
140 See Franklin Edgerton, “Tribute from the West,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute 24, no. 1/2 (1943): 136: “I have just received the news of the death of Dr. V. S.
Sukthankar. It is not only a very grave personal loss to me; I counted him one of my best
friends, and I had come to feel a very deep respect and even afection for him as a man. But
the loss to scholarship is immeasurable, and, naturally, far more important. I am appalled at
the thought that it will now be necessary to entrust the Mahābhārata edition to others. Few
persons now living are as well gifted by nature as he was with the peculiar combination of
intellectual qualities needed for this work. And literally not one has had the experience which
he had, and which is second in importance only to that native ability. He had arrived at a
point where so many things had become almost automatic for him, like second nature; things
which even those of us who have helped in the edition cannot control as he did, though we
may have painfully struggled towards an approximation of a few of them. Now, just when
he could have exploited to the full this unique combination of knowledge and experience—
jñānam savijñānam— he is cut of in the midst of it.”
141 Edgerton disagrees with Sukthankar on very few points. The distinction of the Mahābhārata
tradition into three recensions— the northwestern, northeastern and southern— is one.
142 In a review of the succeeding fascicules, Edgerton explicitly noted the addition of the Śāradā
codex to the critical apparatus: “Of overwhelming importance is the unique ancient Śāradā
ms. which he calls Ś1.” Franklin Edgerton, review of The Mahābhārata, for the First Time Critically
Edited, Ādiparvan: fascicules 2 and 3, by V. S. Sukthankar, Journal of the American Oriental Society
49 (1929): 283. In his next review, he again championed Sukthankar’s identiication of the
Kaśmīrī version. See Franklin Edgerton, review of The Mahābhārata, for the First Time Critically
Edited, Ādiparvan: fascicule 5, by V. S. Sukthankar, Journal of the American Oriental Society 52,
no. 3 (1932): 252–5 5. His last review (of the seventh and last fascicule in 1936) included the
following concluding assessment: “It seems to me now scarcely possible for an open-m inded
and well-i nformed Sanskritist to question, any longer, the tremendous value of the under-
taking, nor the brilliant success of the performance. (Few such persons, I may add, have
questioned these matters even previously.)” Franklin Edgerton, review of The Mahābhārata, for
the First Time Critically Edited, by V. S. Sukthankar, Ādiparvan: fascicule 7, Journal of the American
Oriental Society 56, no. 3 (1936): 361. Grünendahl apparently thinks he is more intelligent than
Sukthankar, Edgerton, Lüders and nine other Mahābhārata editors and countless reviewers
combined.
143 Edgerton, review of The Mahābhārata, for the First Time Critically Edited, Ādiparvan: fascicules 2
and 3, 283. Grünendahl does doubt this fact, but this is, as we know by now, because he does
not read critical apparatuses.
144 Edgerton, review of The Mahābhārata, for the First Time Critically Edited, Ādiparvan: fascicule
5, 254.
145 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 111.
287
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 287
146 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xii.
147 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 111.
148 Ibid., 113.
149 V. S. Sukthankar, “Introduction,” in The Ar̄an ̣yakaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited, vol. 1
(Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1942), xxi.
150 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 113.
151 Ibid., 113 (italics added).
152 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” viii.
153 Ibid., viii.
154 Ibid., xxx (italics added).
155 Ibid., x. See also Sukthankar’s more detailed discussion of the Śāradā codex in the “Editorial
Note” to the third fascicule of the Ādiparvan (the codex was already added to the critical
apparatus in the second fascicule from adhyāya 26 onward): “This birchb ark (bhūrjapatra)
codex measures 12 in. by 9 1/ 2 in. and comprises 339 folios. The characters are Old Śāradā,
of perhaps the sixteenth or seventeenth century. The lines of writing, as is usual in Śāradā
manuscripts, run parallel to the narrow side of the leaf.” V. S. Sukthankar, “Editorial Note (2),”
in The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, Ad̄ iparvan: Fascicule 3 (Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1929), i.
156 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xi.
157 Sukthankar, “Introduction,” xxi (all italics added).
158 Franklin Edgerton, “Introduction,” in The Sabhāparvan for the First Time Critically Edited
(Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1944), xliii.
159 See Sukthankar, “Introduction,” xix, n. 1 where Sukthankar’s comments extend beyond his
earlier observations concerning the script and writing material to the Kaśmīrī character of
its text: “The Kaśmīrī character of the text of our Śāradā manuscript, which is suggested
by the script (Śāradā) and the writing material (bhūrjapatra), is conirmed not only by the
introductory mantra nārāyan ̣aṃ namaskṛtvā, etc.; but also by the regular omission of the word
uvāca in such references as vaiśaṃpāyana uvāca; and further by such Kaśmīrī spellings of names
like cārudoṣn ̣a (for cārudeṣn ̣a) in 3.17.22, corresponding to sudoṣn ̣ā (for sudeṣn ̣ā) in the Virāṭa; cf.
Raghu Vira, Introduction to the Virāṭaparvan, p. xi. The Bhāratamañjarī has cārudoṣn ̣a in
3.159 and sudoṣn ̣ā in 4.36, etc. That is a real Kaśmīrī trait.”
160 For instance, the Ādiparvan manuscript K1, of which Sukthankar notes, “Even the out-
ward form and get -up of this MS. are suggestive of Kaśmīrī origin. The lines of writing,
as in Śāradā (bhūrjapatra) MSS. run parallel to the narrow side of the folio. The signatures
in the margin are like those found in Kaśmīrī books. The numerous clerical errors, which
disigure every page, betray the writer to be a professional scribe, not thoroughly familiar
with the awkward Śāradā script [...].” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xi. Likewise, he notes
of the Āraṇyakaparvan manuscripts K1 and K2 that “the handwriting of the original is
Kashmirian in style” and that the “name of the scribe appears as: udairām liṣāyataṃ miśrajı ̄/ śrı ̄
sadānandjı;̄ in the Udyogaparvan, the scribe’s name is given as Kāśmīrīya Sadānanda,” respec-
tively. Sukthankar, “Introduction,” iii. Raghu Vira notes of the Virāṭaparvan manuscripts K1
and K2 that they feature “Devanagarī characters of the Kaśmīrī type. Orthographically one
of the most corrupt as it has been copied by a scribe not well versed in the ligatures of the
Śāradā script. K1, together with K2, writes uniformly sudoṣn ̣ā for sudeṣn ̣ā— an ancient Kaśmirian
hyper-s anskritization, also found in Kṣemendra’s Bhāratamañjarī.” Vira, “Introduction,”
iv (Vira’s italics). Belvalkar notes of the Bhīṣmaparvan manuscripts K0 and K1 that they
feature “Devanāgarī characters of the Kashmirian type.” Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the
Bhīṣmaparvan],” xx and xxii. He adds: “From a study of the various post-c olophon data
found at the end of the parvans, we learn that a Kashmirian Pandit, Miśra Sadānanda by
name, engaged ive scribes. […] Presumably owing to the circumstance that scribes more
familiar with the Devanāgarī than with the Sāradā are apt to be misled by the similarity of
288
288 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
the Śāradā u, ta, na, ra, ma, śa, etc., most Devanāgarī copies from a Śāradā original betray
a persistent tendency towards haplographical omissions. In K2, we have noticed at least 60
such cases.” Ibid., xxiv– xxv.
161 See Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” vii: “The reason for this concomitance between script and
version appears to be that the scribes, being as a rule not conversant with any script but that
of their own particular province, could copy only manuscripts written in their special provin-
cial scripts, exception being made only in favour of the Devanāgarī, which was a sort of a
‘vulgar’ script, widely used and understood in India” and ibid., lxii–l xiii: “It seems more nat-
ural to regard, as already observed, the Devanāgarī as a sort of ‘vulgar’ script (like the Latin,
in Europe), the script understood by the savants all over India, into which many of the local
versions were, from time to time, transcribed, a circumstance which facilitated contamination
and conlation.”
162 See Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Bhīṣmaparvan],” xxix: “This is the irst time that a
MS. written in Bengali characters has been classiied with K, which normally designates
Devanāgarī copies from a Śāradā original. But, à priori, there is no reason why direct copies
from a Śāradā original should not be made in Bengali characters. The text would in course
of transmission be contaminated with the Bengali version, just as, in the other case, it would
be with the Devanāgarī version. But the MS. must certainly be classiied as K if it possesses
suicient and distinctive characteristics of that group.” Belvalkar gives no hint of a con-
lict between Sukthankar’s editorial practice and his. Patrick Olivelle likewise notes in his
critical edition of the Mānavadharmaśāstra: “The ST is represented by the following mss.:
GMd1 TMd3 TMd4 GMd5 GMy, Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6. Most mss. written in the southern
scripts of Grantha, Telugu, and Malayalam appear to fall under the ST, although there are
exceptions. Tr1, which is written in Devanāgarī, follows the ST; it is probably a Devanāgarī
copy of an original in a southern script. The ms. MTr3, on the other hand, although written
in the Malayalam script, follows NT; it is probably a Malayalam copy of a northern orig-
inal.” Patrick Olivelle, ed., Manu’s Code of Law: A Critical Edition and Translation of the M nava-
ā
Dharma stra (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005). Apparently, the only person
śā
uncertain about how manuscripts are classiied is Grünendahl himself. In contrast, anyone
who has ever worked with manuscripts appreciates the distinction between a manuscript’s script
and its text.
163 This is true even of P. L. Vaidya, who misleadingly states in his introduction to the critical
edition of the Harivaṃśa that “the Mss. should be divided or classiied, according to their age
and script, into recensions and versions, script- wise classiication supplying to the editor clues
for diferent versions into which the text existed.” Vaidya nonetheless notes that “one manu-
script in Nandināgari script was collated, but it was found to give an identical text with that in
Telugu script and was, therefore, not taken into account” and likewise that the manuscript in
neo- Śāradā script from the Scindia Institute, Ujjain contained “an inlated text almost iden-
tical with the Vulgate.” P. L. Vaidya, “Introduction,” in The Harivaṃśa for the First Time Critically
Edited, vol. 1 (Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1969), xxxv– xxxvi, x and xvii.
Thus, even when editors were mistaken in theory about the principle of classiication, they
carried it out correctly in practice.
164 This occurred in the critical edition of the Sabhāparvan. The editor, Franklin Edgerton,
identiied three manuscripts in Telugu script (T2 = Melkote, Yadugiri Yatiraj Math, no. 155.
Telugu, palm leaves; T3 = Madras, Govt. MSS. Library, no. 1922, Telugu, palm leaves;
and T4 = Madras, Govt. MSS. Library, no. 1923, Telugu, palm leaves) as belonging to his
“ ‘E’ (B and D) version.” Regarding their classiication, he wrote: “These MSS. T2– 4 were
completely collated, and their collations have been considered by the editor with great care.
After much thought, it was decided not to include them in the Critical Apparatus. It is evident
that to group them with T1, the only other Telugu MS. we have, would be highly misleading.
T1 is on the whole a normal Southern MS., agreeing with G and M, especially closely with
289
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 289
G. It is true that it has some few Northern readings and interpolations; but this is true of some
G MSS. also, and I am not sure that it is commoner in T1 than in them. With T2– 4, it is just
the other way around. It is perfectly obvious that they are based on a Northern text; specif-
ically, on an Eastern one, agreeing with B and D. They also contain Southern readings and
(especially T2.3) interpolations; but there can be no doubt that it is these which are intrusions,
whereas in T1 it is the occasional Northern features which are secondary intrusions in its basi-
cally Southern text.” Edgerton, “Introduction,” xxi (Edgerton’s italics). The only person in
any doubt about the true basis of classiication is Grünendahl.
165 Edgerton found this was the case for the Sabhāparvan. In contrast to Sukthankar, who thought
the Ñ, V and B manuscripts formed one group and the D another, Edgerton found that “In
Book 2 […] neither V nor B nor D MSS. seem to constitute a unit, genetically speaking.”
“So far as I can see, they could all be lumped together as one version, which I should call E1,
within which only two minor sub-v arieties of little importance (Dn and D1.2) are discern-
able.” Edgerton, “Introduction,” xliii. The E1 recension (= VBD) thereafter replaced in most
cases the individual versions for Edgerton. For other examples of manuscripts separated out
from their presumed agnates and listed as independent groups, see Table 5.
166 If further conirmation were needed that a manuscript’s script is irrelevant to its place in
the stemma, we have an interesting example from the fourth volume of the critical edition.
The volume’s editor, Raghu Vira, notes that collations of two manuscripts (M1 and M2—
Trivandrum, Palace Library, nos. 377 and 378) were made from Devanāgarī transcripts of
the originals the Darbar had provided. In other words, the editor never saw the manuscripts
in Malayālam script, and yet he assigned them their correct place in the tradition! Vira, “Introduction,”
ix and see also ibid., ii.
167 Grünendahl’s error is understandable. Because he has not worked with the Mahābhārata
manuscripts (and, in fact, never created a stemma), he cannot grasp their relation. He
advances an a priori theory of classiication that no one except he himself subscribes to. This
theory’s origins likely lie in a supericial reading of Sukthankar’s “Prolegomena” for, in his
1982 dissertation, he labors to imitate its diction and style albeit without grasping its logic.
When he criticizes Sukthankar in his 1993 article for classifying the manuscripts by script,
he does not see that his criticism applies not to Sukthankar but only to his misunderstanding
of Sukthankar’s principles. For in his 1982 edition of the Viṣṇudharma, Grünendahl indeed
classiies the manuscripts by script. He identiies two traditions—a Nepālī and a Devanāgarī
tradition— of which the former breaks apart into two groups. His assignment of manuscripts
to the three groups evidently follows their script, for he notes that the manuscripts are so con-
lated that it is impossible to distinguish them otherwise.
168 This table does not list K manuscripts in Devanāgarī script, though numerous examples
exist. However, it is worth noting that four of the ive manuscripts of the Bhagavadgītā
in Śāradā script, Ś2– Ś6, contained slightly diferent texts—t he versions underlying
the commentaries of Abhinavagupta (Ś3), Rājānaka Rāmakaṇṭha (Ś4 and Ś5) and
Ānandavardhana (Ś6). The editor identiied them as such. See Belvalkar, “Introduction [to
the Bhīṣmaparvan],” xiii.
169 We thank Saraju Rath for clarifying these charts. For the source, see Saraju Rath, “The Oriya
Script: Origin, Development and Sources,” Heritage India 5, no. 2 (2012): 55 and “Varieties
of Grantha Script: The Date and Place of Origins of Manuscripts,” in Aspects of Manuscript
Culture in South India, ed. Saraju Rath (Leiden: Brill, 2012), 189.
170 Scribes could have copied entire exemplars from an unrelated script (for example, a Śāradā
manuscript into Grantha) or simply selections (for example, using a Proto- Grantha exemplar
for one part of the text and a Śāradā exemplar thereafter). But such changes of exemplar
would be relatively rare and easily detectable. Comparison of manuscripts in diferent scripts
is more problematic. This is where contamination might seriously mislead us.
171 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” v.
290
290 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
172 As West also notes. See West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique, 15: “If the older
manuscripts can be itted into a stemma, the promiscuity of the younger ones should be easy
to establish and may be unimportant.”
173 Grünendahl’s confusion is due to the fact that he has no experience with Mahābhārata
manuscripts in spite of claiming to have undertaken a study of the Nepālī manuscript Ñ4.
Like Ruben, on whose work he bases his case, he commits avoidable errors, because he fails
to appreciate either the tradition’s complexity or the constants with which the editor works.
Sukthankar’s comments on Ruben as an editor are apposite: “Ruben’s long disquisition on
the diiculties of the Mahābhārata textual criticism boils down to this: only that portion of
the text which is documented by both recensions, in identical terms, is tolerably certain; the rest
is doubtful in varying degrees, there being no criterion whatsoever which can enable us to dis-
criminate with complete conidence between the variants; even the concordance between K
and S (against B D) is not conclusive evidence of the originality of the common reading. This
is a more or less obvious standpoint, though partly erroneous and distinctly timid and conser-
vative. It was hardly necessary for the ‘Referent’ to write so much in order to say so little. His
attitude of dogmatic doubt has caused him to make unwittingly some wild exaggerations and
unwarranted generalizations as I have shown above. His perfunctory study of the manuscript
evidence has led him occasionally to make gross blunders in the estimation of the relationship
of the diferent manuscript groups and versions, some of which have been pointed out above.
Many of the diiculties of the Mahābhārata textual criticism of which he speaks in his paper
are due to his failure to understand the modus operandi of the redactors and copyists of the
epic and his lack of insight into the character of the diferent manuscripts—a n insight which
can be acquired only after a long familiarity with the manuscripts themselves and a close and
patient study of their tendencies and idiosyncrasies.” Sukthankar, “Dr. Ruben on the Critical
Edition of the Mahābhārata,” 282– 83.
174 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata Handschriften,” 103.
175 Ibid. And see also ibid., 129: “Lüders’s hypothesis cited above that the versions were ‘grad-
ually isolated to a speciic region’ is, in my opinion, even merely theoretically not quite
believable. Further, one can oppose against it that it was hardly conirmed in praxis. On
one hand, major diferences manifest between the manuscripts of a ‘version’; on the other,
the correspondences between manuscripts of diferent ‘versions’ is too obvious that the
classiication according to their script can really convince us.” When Grünendahl speaks
of “correspondences between manuscripts of diferent ‘versions,’ ” he does not mean their
shared errors (which could be attributed to contamination), but that they share the correct
reading, and from this agreement he concludes that the “classiication according to their
script can[not] really convince us.” He thereby overlooks that there is no reason the correct
reading cannot occur in two branches of the tradition! For instance, when ν and S agree, this
does not mean that their classiication into ν and S was false, but only that their reading is the
reading of the archetype! This confusion, which is his main reason for rejecting the critical
edition, occupies us in the next section (“The Argument from Independent Recensions”).
176 Ibid., 107.
177 Other than the obvious one that wherever the apparatus formerly read “K” it would now
read “Z.”
178 The manuscripts collated for this section of the text were Ś1, K0–4 , Ñ1–3 , V1, B1–5 , Da, Dn,
D1– 7, T1.2, G1– 6 and M1– 5. K therefore refers to only K0– 4 and not K0– 6 as elsewhere.
179 If mahāghorau were the corruption, the editor would have to explain how it was transmitted
horizontally to just these three manuscripts and M1.5. It is thus more likely the reading of
the archetype was transmitted via N and S to Ś, K and M, but was lost in the central recen-
sion and σ with the exception of D2.5 and G3. The alternative that Ś, K or M1.5 gained
the reading from each other or that they arrived at the same reading independently is less
plausible.
291
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 291
180 The Śāradā script was unfamiliar outside the region. It also ceased to evolve after the eighth
century CE. Given their geographic separation, Sukthankar thus thought Ś1— M contam-
ination was less likely, though not impossible. See Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxiv: “This
[Malayālam] version has several striking agreements with Ś1, a fact all the more impres-
sive, because M, a Southern version, hails from the province at the opposite end of India
from the province of Ś1, a Northern version.” Sukthankar found M the least contaminated
of the southern manuscript groups: “This is the version of Malabar, the Southernmost
extremity of India. It is, in my opinion, the best Southern version. It is not only largely free from
the interpolations of σ (= TG), but appears to be also less inluenced by N than σ, wherein
lies its importance for us.” Ibid., lxxiii (Sukthankar’s italics).
181 See ibid., lv: “In my opinion, therefore, this fact of the concord between ν and S in small
details, coupled with the almost entire lack of agreement as regards the additions peculiar
to ν or S is the strongest argument imaginable for the independence of these two versions,
and consequently for the primitive character of their concordant readings. It is needless to
point out that this is a factor of supreme importance for the reconstruction of the original.”
Although he extends the argument to the southern recension, the Telugu and Grantha are
contaminated with the northern recension so that, in practice, the agreement of Ś and K
with M had greater probative value for Sukthankar (see preceding note).
182 This example concisely illustrates that Grünendahl’s so- called Schriftartprämisse can play no
role in the reconstruction. The readings of both manuscripts have been transcribed into a third,
unrelated script— Roman, though it could also be Devanāgarī— and yet the essential diferences—
those relevant for a reconstruction— are retained. In fact, we could convert all of our witnesses
to a standard script and still undertake the reconstruction. We are interested in changes at
the level of semantic and syntactical units, and it is by comparing these (for example, is
the correct reading – ghorau, – vır̄yau or – kāyau?) that we seek to reconstruct the archetype.
Grünendahl errs because he does not grasp that the script is merely a conventional system of
signs— the bearer of meaning, not the meaning itself.
183 Reeve, “Stemmatic Method,” 67.
184 This only holds if a scribe combines sources that left behind other witnesses. It would not
hold if his source left behind no other witnesses, and we also did not possess other exemplars
of its version. If we possessed the copy in which the conlation occurred, there could be signs
such as a change of hand or ink to indicate that the text was copied at diferent times. But
if this copy were copied again, the apograph would contain no indication that its source
was conlated. We could not know that what appeared to be a continuous text was actually
an amalgam of two sources. Reeve notes, “it always needs to be proved that a manuscript
derives from the source throughout,” but in practice we must assume this kind of conlation
was widespread, especially as the practice appears to have been to copy the Mahābhārata
a parvan or several parvans at a time. Michael D. Reeve, “Eliminatio codicum descriptorum: A
Methodological Problem,” in Editing Greek and Latin Texts, ed. J. N. Grant (New York: AMS
Press, 1989), 32.
185 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxii.
186 K4 ofers valuable insight into the formation of these exemplars. Sukthankar notes: “Much
light is thrown on the origin of these misch-c odices by the MS. K4, a manuscript belonging
to the Bombay Government Collection deposited at the Institute. In this manuscript we ind
long extracts from other cognate versions (such as γ) as also from the Southern recension,
written out on separate folios and inserted at appropriate places in the body of the manu-
script, with the words atra śodhapatramekaṃ written on the margin of the original folio, near the
place where the passage is to be interpolated. Should this manuscript happen to be copied
again and should the copyist insert the passage at the place indicated by the previous scribe,
the interpolation would become an integral part of the new text which is externally absolutely
indistinguishable from the rest of the text.” Ibid., xcv (Sukthankar’s italics).
292
292 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
187 This was the case for D8– 14, which were discontinued after the second adhyāya.
188 Mahābhārata scribes appear to have compared manuscripts primarily to ensure no narrative
or passage found in other exemplars was lost rather than to record variant readings.
Sukthankar notes, “[A] n ancient Indian scribe, redactor or even commentator, not to speak
of the common reciter (pāṭhaka)— if I read aright Indian literary history— was not perturbed
in the least by a little diference in wording or in sequence, especially if the variant did not
give an appreciably better, or appreciably worse sense. The enormous and complicated crit-
ical apparatus assembled here, moreover, can leave us in no doubt as to the attitude of the
custodians of the epic tradition towards paltry verbal details: it was that of total indiference.
Addition or omission of passages is, I may add, a variation of an entirely diferent order. If
a reciter or commentator came across, in another manuscript, an additional passage, there
was every chance of his copying it down somewhere, either in the margin of his own copy,
or on a supplementary folio; for there would be, in his mind, always present the possibility
that the passage in question was some part of the original that his own manuscript had unac-
countably lost. How else, forsooth, could the passage get into the other manuscript?” Ibid.,
lv (Sukthankar’s italics) and see also ibid., lxxxi: “Here one notices above all the anxiety
that nothing that was by any chance found in the Mahābhārata manuscript should be lost.
Everything was carefully preserved, assembled in a picturesque disarray.”
189 Even if two manuscripts contain the identical interpolation, we can infer iliation only if one
retains the other’s errors and introduces several new signiicant errors.
190 Ibid., li (Sukthankar’s italics).
191 It is not always obvious whether a shared reading is owed to the archetype or to horizontal
transmission, although editors have evolved several criteria (geographic separation, likeli-
hood of contamination and the nature of change) to determine this. Edgerton’s introduc-
tion features an extended discussion: “Common secondary insertions found in E and S, but
not in W, are more numerous. The great majority are not found in Ñ, however, so that they
are really common only to E and S. Since I think it can hardly be doubted that E is a real
1
unit […] it seems that we must assume that these insertions have spread by contamination
(rather than inheritance from a common archetype).” Edgerton, “Introduction,” xlv– xlvi.
“In my opinion, the foregoing lists are not numerous enough to make at all likely secondary
genetic connections between E, or E and S. Nor are secondary readings of detail at all
1
common. Agreements between these versions, then, must be either inheritances from the
original, or due to contamination (or perhaps, in some minor points of phraseology, inde-
pendent changes due to accident).” Ibid., xlvi. “Insertions common to W and E, but lacking
in S, are less numerous than those common to S and E, though much more numerous than
1
those common to S and the whole of E (including Ñ). Some in the following list, it will be
noted, are lacking in some Northern, particularly K MSS., so that it is doubtful whether they
could properly be counted as tending to show closer genetic relations between W (ŚK) and
E (ÑVBD) as against S; in such cases it would seem more likely that the W MSS. which con-
tain the passage have been contaminated from an E source. Similarly, some insertions here
listed are not found in Ñ, suggesting that they did not belong to the original of E (or ‘N’),
1
and could have spread by contamination to the other E MSS., or perhaps were inserted in
E ” Ibid., xlvi–x lvii. He arrives at a similar conclusion as Sukthankar: “Study of the variant
1.
readings in detail leads to no other conclusion. When the generality of W and E (that is,
what in our Critical Apparatus is called N) agrees against S, there is no reason to doubt that
in the vast majority of cases W and E (or N) preserve the original, and S is secondary. The
same is true when W and S agree against E, and when E and S agree against W. General
agreement between any two of the three main streams of the tradition creates a presumption
of originality. I say, a presumption: not absolute certainty. But rarely can I discern any reason
to regard as original a reading of any of the three groups—W , E, or S—w hen most or all of
both the other groups agree against it.” Edgerton, “Introduction,” xlvii (Edgerton’s italics).
293
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 293
192 For reasons of clarity and legibility—t he line from ν or γ crosses over many lines—t his
stemma does not show contamination into G even though Sukthankar notes that “All Grantha
manuscripts are probably contaminated (directly or indirectly) from Northern sources in diferent
degrees.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxii (Sukthankar’s italics). It is unclear whether he
means contamination from Ñ, V, B and D, which are northern recension manuscripts, or only
Ś and K, as γ is referred to as the central subrecension.
193 The central subrecension γ occupies a large part of Sukthankar’s relections in the
“Prolegomena.” He notes that “The view that ν and γ may stand in genetic relation to each
other does not receive much support from the facts of the case. Neither ν nor γ can be derived
from the other. Each possesses original features that the other lacks, as is evidenced by their
alternate agreement with S, even in the matter of petty verbal details. All these coincidences need
not, of course, be original. Some could be indeed secondary changes, made independently
in the same direction; others again may possibly be explained as the result of contamination.
There will remain still an obstinate residue of agreements between ν and S, or between γ and
S, that must be set down as the expression of the ultimate connection of the respective con-
cordant versions through the lost original source. Contamination between ν and γ, owing to
the contiguity of the areas in which the respective versions were current, was inevitable, and
must, in any case, be assumed to have existed; on the other hand, contamination between γ
and S cannot be altogether denied.” Ibid., lvii (all italics Sukthankar’s).
194 “In my opinion, therefore, this fact of the concord between ν and S in small details, coupled
with the almost entire lack of agreement as regards the additions peculiar to ν or S is the
strongest argument imaginable for the independence of these two versions, and consequently
for the primitive character of their concordant readings. It is needless to point out that this is
a factor of supreme importance for the reconstruction of the original.” Ibid., lv (Sukthankar’s
italics).
195 As editors recognize, it is impossible to draw up stemmata for very short texts. The only
exception is if these texts are parts of larger collections.
196 A manuscript of another work such as the Rāmāyaṇa would also be free of this interpola-
tion, but its absence does not justify the conclusion that the two manuscripts have a common
source.
197 The argument is like claiming that two species that lack the same marker must be related. It
is clearly erroneous. Sparrows and robins lack webbed feet, but they are not members of the
same family.
198 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 116.
199 Ibid.
200 This irst argument is manifestly false. Sukthankar’s list of 25 readings illustrates the K
manuscripts’ proximity to the Śāradā codex. On the basis of this list, he posits that the
Śāradā and K manuscripts descended from a common hyparchetype he calls ν. The Ś-K
(ν) recension’s purity neither afects nor is afected by the other groups’ impurity. D2.5 are
occasionally contaminated with ν. But as ν is the source of contamination, the circumstance
that they share some of its readings is an argument neither for ν nor against ν. But this is pre-
cisely what Grünendahl asserts. According to him, “in light of the repeated and conspicuous
correspondence of D2 and especially D5—a gainst all manuscripts!— with the hyparchetype
ν,” Sukthankar’s decision not to assign these two D manuscripts to the K group is “not quite
comprehensible.” Ibid., 117 (Grünendahl’s italics). The fact that D2.5 are contaminated
manuscripts where the source of contamination is ν or one of its descendants is not an argu-
ment for including them under either K or ν. At most, we would draw a dotted line from ν
to D2.5 indicating contamination. In any case, since this does not afect the reading of the
archetype, their inclusion under K makes no diference. At most, it would afect the critical
apparatus. Where we noted that K has a uniform reading, we would now note that K, except
D2.5, has this reading. Vice versa, where we noted that D has a uniform reading against
294
294 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
the other groups, we would now note that D has a uniform reading along with the two “K
manuscripts” D2 and D5.
201 Ibid., 117.
202 Ibid.
203 Ibid.
204 Ibid.
205 Ibid.
206 Ibid.
207 Ibid. (all italics Grünendahl’s).
208 Grünendahl’s peculiar understanding of “contamination” as an inluence on another man-
uscript even if that this manuscript also does not feature the interpolations that the irst does
not feature also explains his curious deinition of “purity.” According to him, the fact that
D2.5 also do not feature passages that K0.1 do not feature is evidence not only of K0.1’s inlu-
ence on D2.5 but also of K0.1’s impure nature. His reasoning is as follows: “A greater signif-
icance accrues to the indicated commonalities between D5 and K0–3 ; they stand in manifest
contradiction to Sukthankar’s argument, which aims at displacing D2.5 into proximity to the
conlated mss. K3– 6 and thus to preserve the ‘pure form’ of the K version, represented by K0.1,
from every taint of contamination.” Ibid., 118 (Grünendahl’s italics). The phrase “indicated
commonalities” refers to the passages missing in D2.5 and K0– 3: 1214* and 221*, and (with
respect to D5 only) 1346*, 1444*, 1517*, 424*, 1202*, 1344*, 1345*, 1363*, 1450*, 1458*,
1494*, 1546* and 1821*. In his view, since D2.5 also do not feature these interpolations, they
must have been under K0.1’s “inluence” for how else, he reasons, could they have chosen
not to feature them if not for the inluence of the other manuscripts that also do not feature
them? Consequently, K0.1 cannot be “pure” as Sukthankar thought, for they have clearly
been fraternizing with other manuscripts. This is a new deinition of “purity,” which stipulates
that to be “pure” a manuscript must be free of contamination and, furthermore, that no
manuscript may resemble it in this respect. If even a single manuscript also does not contain
the interpolations it does not contain, it must be considered impure. The deinition is inane,
because a chaste person is no less chaste for the fact that several chaste individuals, others
who resemble him or her in this respect, exist. Grünendahl’s deinition could only be satisied
if except for this exemplar every other manuscript contained every interpolation. As this is
impossible, it efectively states that to the extent that a manuscript is pure it is also simulta-
neously impure! Grünendahl has repealed the principle of non- contradiction.
209 Ibid., 117.
210 Ibid. (all italics Grünendahl’s). Insertions in square brackets are Grünendahl’s.
211 A simple experiment suices to demonstrate this: if manuscripts A and B contain an addi-
tional passage x and we have no further information about them, their iliation cannot be
determined. A may have gotten the passage from B or B from A or both from a third source.
It is correspondingly more diicult to establish iliation if neither contains the additional
passage. If we could posit a relationship between two manuscripts based on the fact that one
does not contain a certain passage, we could establish indiscriminately many relationships
between indiscriminately many manuscripts. The Apollodorus manuscript Paris, BNF,
Graecus 2722 would be related to the Galen manuscript Paris, BNF Graecus 2267 (neither
contain the text of Plutarch’s Lives); the Diogenes manuscript Paris Graecus 1759 would
be related to the Isocrates manuscript Vatican Graecus 936 (neither contains the text of
Thucydides’s History of the Peloponnesian War) and so on.
212 Ibid., 117.
213 Ibid., 118. These passages, which Grünendahl calls “present textual additions,” are
interpolations in D5 and K4. They are therefore by deinition not features of the archetype.
Consequently, their occurrence in D5 and K4 does not prove them related. It only shows con-
tamination, without permitting us to infer that D5 was the source and K4 the contaminated
295
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 295
manuscript, or vice versa. We cannot prove relationship based on accidental characteristics
supervening on the manuscripts. Grünendahl’s argument would only hold if he could dem-
onstrate an intrinsic feature of these manuscripts, which caused them to attract these speciic
interpolations, that no other manuscript possessed this feature and that this feature does not
occur accidentally, but is inherited.
214 Grünendahl notes of the “present textual additions” common to D5 and K4: “it is therefore
diicult to determine whether these commonalities are to be traced back to mutual inluence
of the two lines of tradition ending in D5 and K4 or to the contamination of these two with
a third unknown [exemplar].” Ibid., 118. He rejects this possibility for the “not present textual
additions” on the grounds that in the “ case […] of not present textual additions, these simi-
larities […] cannot be explained away […] with the fact that they entered into the ‘composite
manuscripts’ D5 (and D2) due to contamination (conlation). This may serve as an explanation
for present textual additions but hardly for not present [textual additions].” Ibid., 120. But he
nevertheless thinks that if D5 and D2 resemble the K manuscripts in not featuring certain
interpolations, this must be due to the K group’s “inluence” on them. Why he does not con-
sider the possibility that their common ancestor N and, above all, the archetype could be responsible
for this omission is a mystery. Apparently, we can conidently exclude external “inluence” in
the latter cases.
215 The two manuscripts are unrelated in the literal sense that we cannot posit any relation at all
rather than in the sense that we can conclude that one of them is not descended from or not
contaminated with the other.
216 If the passage was not an insertion but part of the text, we might conclude that both
manuscripts were descended from a common source in which the text was missing. Here
also we could not establish the speciic nature of the relationship without other evidence,
for instance, that one contained all the errors of the other, plus at least one more or that,
in addition to containing the same lacunae, each one made at least one new error. But
these inferences are based on errors in transcription rather than the presence or absence of
passages.
217 Ibid., 117.
218 Grünendahl not only considers the absence of interpolation more signiicant the greater the
number of interpolations two manuscripts lack in common; he also considers this absence
more signiicant the greater the number of manuscripts that feature these interpolations.
He writes: “We can show something similar of Sukthankar’s ‘core group’ K0.1 expanded to
include K2 [in other words, for the manuscripts K0–2 ],” and he adds: “29 textual passages are
absent in this group of three manuscripts which are present in the majority of the northern
recension manuscripts.” Ibid., 118. He evidently views contamination as a kind of epidemic
such that the more individuals succumb to it, the more closely related those resistant to it
must be. But this is not how contamination works. Since iliation is not established on the
basis of contamination, it is irrelevant whether all or only some of the manuscripts outside
the “group”— using the term heuristically, since we have not established the uninterpolated
manuscripts form a family in the genealogical sense— contain the interpolation. Grünendahl
thereafter introduces two comparative degrees of the principle. He reasons that if all and not
just some of the interpolations whose absence is characteristic of a group are absent from
a manuscript and if the other members of its family reinforce this absence, then we have
strong grounds for assigning the manuscript to this group. “Except in K0.1.2 they [the 29
interpolations] are consistently absent only in Ñ4 and Ś1 (insofar as it is preserved), otherwise
they are absent ifteen times in Ñ3, ten times in Ñ1 (of this seven times both in Ñ1 and Ñ3,
two times including Ñ2), as well as eight times in D5!” Ibid., 118– 19. His logic appears to be
that the absence of all the passages in question in Ñ4 makes it just like Ś1 and K0–2 , and, since
they are also frequently absent in Ñ1 and Ñ3 and seven times in all three manuscripts Ñ1, Ñ3
and Ñ4, this makes the Ñ group just like the K group. The argument is nonsense: if the absence
296
296 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
of interpolation cannot establish iliation, the absence of many interpolations simultaneously
cannot intensify the iliation, irrespective of whether all or only some of the interpolations are
absent from the manuscript, even if some are absent from all the manuscripts of its group.
219 Ibid., 118. The phrase “indicated commonalities” refers to the fact of not possessing certain
characteristics.
220 Ibid., 117 (all italics Grünendahl’s). Insertions in square brackets are Grünendahl’s.
221 Ibid.
222 Grünendahl has not understood the basic diference between shared readings owed to
innovations in a recent ancestor, which establish iliation between two witnesses, and shared
readings that are evidence of an original inheritance and only prove iliation through the
archetype. The circumstance that Ś, K and S lack these passages is evidence of an original
inheritance through the archetype, but not of a closer relation. Their absence from Ñ4 only
conirms Sukthankar’s intuition that ν often preserved the correct reading, when γ and S had
an inlated text.
223 All cases of the latter are cases of the former, since the latter case is merely hypothetical.
When K and D2.5 agree in not featuring an interpolation, this does not mean that D2.5 were
inluenced by K in this respect. It only means that the passage is missing from the archetype
and its text has been handed down, at least in this respect, correctly to both K and D2.5.
Their agreement is coincidental in the sense that it does not permit us to infer a closer rela-
tionship between them.
224 In contrast to Sukthankar, who thought that, “with the possible exception of the Śar̄ada ̄ (Kasmır̄ı)̄
version, which appears to have been protected by its largely unintelligible script and by the
diiculties of access to the province, all versions are indiscriminately conlated” (Sukthankar,
“Prolegomena,” lxxxii; italics in original), Edgerton felt “no version, no single manuscripts
even, can be guaranteed to be absolutely ‘independent’ of any other version or manuscript,”
including the Śāradā (Kasḿ īrī) version. Edgerton, “Introduction,” xxxiii and see ibid., xxxv,
n. 3: “I doubt if he [Sukthankar] would now think this qualiication necessary. I, at least, think
I can deinitely prove that Ś too has some clear contaminations and ‘conlations.’ ” If Edgerton
nevertheless felt conident about recovering an archetype, this was because he distinguished
between horizontal transmission and the vertical constants of the tradition. Thus, noting that
“what seem to be certainly ‘secondary’ agreements can be found between practically any
two manuscripts. The origin of many such can easily be understood from the frequency with
which alternative variants, in many manuscripts, are written above or below the lines or in the
margins (the next copy would produce the “secondary” agreement!),” he asked, “May not this
be due to errors in our classiication of MSS. and versions? If all MSS. of what we have called
two ‘independent’ versions agree on a secondary reading, particularly an insertion, does that
not raise the presumption that these versions go back to a common secondary archetype?”
Ibid., xxxiii and xxxv, n. 3 (italics in original). He ofers a rule of thumb as a guide: “The
answer is that such instances can be found between any two extant versions; so that we should
arrive at the absurdity that each recension is necessarily related to every other. It is simply
a question of more or less. When apparently secondary agreements are very numerous, we
assume secondary relationship. When they are relatively sporadic, we assume contamination.
Precise igures for variant readings cannot be given— hardly even for insertions.” Ibid., xxxv,
n. 3. At any rate, he was conident that “There is certainly no reason to assume secondary
relations between W (ŚK) and S.” Ibid., xlv.
225 This a legitimate concern, but it can only be apparent once the editor succeeds in itting
the manuscripts into a stemma. As Irigoin notes: “He [the editor] should ensure, by all the
means provided by his science and his ingenuity, that he discovers therein the constants
of the ‘vertical’ tradition. It is at this price, and at this price only, that he will be able
to determine the reality, and eventually the amplitude, of a ‘horizontal’ transmission.”
297
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 297
Jean Irigoin, “Quelques rélexions sur le concept d’archétype,” Revue d’histoire des textes 7
(1977): 242– 43.
226 This is not iliation as a textual critic understands it. It does not demonstrate descent. But
it would be the sole criterion in the absence of unique errors introduced while copying
manuscripts.
227 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 119 (Grünendahl’s
italics).
228 Ibid.
229 Ibid.
230 The pleonastic “shared presence of interpolations” is only necessary because Grünendahl
thinks the absence of interpolations is also a criterion for iliation and hence contrasts “pre-
sent” interpolations with “not present” ones.
231 Ibid., 119 (italics in original).
232 We do not mean to assert that a scribe would either irst copy the interpolations or irst choose
which interpolations he wished to copy before copying his source. In this sense, Grünendahl’s
assertion is true, though trivially so: the inherited text must precede the interpolations added
to it. What we mean is that this conclusion only follows on the basis of his model of textual
criticism: it does not hold if one grasps that this is no way of determining iliation or, indeed,
of drawing up stemmata.
233 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xxx.
234 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 107.
235 Apparently, this would hold for sections for which a Śāradā exemplar was unavailable, even
though in the irst part of his argument Grünendahl argued that “constituting” a K version
without a Śāradā exemplar is inadmissible. The contradiction evidently eludes him.
236 Sukthankar’s examples preview only a selection of his observations while editing the man-
uscript. Like other armchair critics of the Mahābhārata critical edition, Grünendahl reads
the “Prolegomena” and cross- checks the examples given there against the apparatus, but
examines neither a signiicant extent of the constituted text nor the manuscripts to verify
that Sukthankar’s conclusions are borne out. He thinks that to refute Sukthankar it suices to
contradict the examples in the “Prolegomena.” But the real test of his work must be whether
it provides a more plausible account of the manuscript evidence, which challenge he has, of
course, not confronted as yet.
237 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 114. The reference is
to Sukthankar’s “Prolegomena,” xlviii.
238 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 114– 15.
239 See ibid., 112: “Since the determination of the K manuscripts [as K manuscripts] accordingly
theoretically presupposes a ‘Ś āradā version,’ in the parvans for which no Śāradā manuscripts
was available a K version could in fact not be deined.”
240 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” l.
241 Ibid., li.
242 For a discussion of the irst list, see the preceding section. The second list is discussed earlier
in this section under Grünendahl’s reasons for positing D2.5 contamination with K.
243 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 115.
244 Apart from the problem that at this stage we cannot know which these readings are (unless we
irst classify the manuscript material we cannot reconstruct the reading of the archetype), the
argument is nonsense. If we were to consider only readings that entered the constituted text,
we would be restricted to the readings common to the northern and southern recensions.
The constituted text features the reading attested in both recensions; in cases of discrepancy,
it defers to the northern reading, but here we seek to identify the southern manuscripts as a
distinct group!
298
298 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
245 Except when those readings were not in K. In this case, we would assume contamination
between neighboring groups. If the contamination was not between neighboring groups,
we would rethink our view of the tradition and possibly restore our original stemma—t hat
is, Sukthankar’s stemma of the Ādiparvan. The example illustrates the diiculty of trying to
do textual criticism in the abstract, as Grünendahl attempts, rather than beginning with the
manuscript evidence.
246 Each line with the small bar at its base indicates that a new text is being copied. These lines
replace the dotted lines that conventionally denote contamination, because the contamination
takes the form of expansion within the manuscript itself: there is no need to posit an external source.
247 The lines representing the diferent traditions are thus both linked to the archetype and not
linked. They are not linked insofar as a new text is propagated henceforward in this branch
of the tradition; they are linked insofar as this text consists of an unchanged original (in
Grünendahl’s model there are no corruptions) and its expansions, so that merely discarding
the latter permits a return to the archetype from any branch of the stemma (and not just K).
248 What is the evidence that K alone contains the correct reading when it was lost in all others?
Sukthankar thought that the editor should examine “as many manuscripts— and above all as
many classes of manuscripts— as possible.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxxvi (Sukthankar’s
italics). He accepted the reading “documented by the largest number of (what prima facie appear to be)
more or less independent versions” as the reading of the archetype. If no clear pattern emerged—
one pair of versions featuring one reading and another pair another— he gave credence to
the reading of Ś1 and K on account of their “much greater correctness and reliability.” Ibid.,
xci (all italics Sukthankar’s). Only in this last case can Grünendahl’s demand be satisied, but
since Ś1 and K’s reading is included in the constituted text on their authority alone, asking
for conirmation from the constituted text is pointless.
249 The argument that the editor should not have relied on readings not attested in the consti-
tuted text while identifying the K group is misguided, but we can appreciate why Grünendahl
raises it. From his perspective, it seems that the editor based his “constitution” of the group on
readings he ultimately discarded, and Grünendahl thinks this cannot be right. As he notes, “it
can hardly have been reconcilable with Sukthankar’s editorial principles to grant such poorly
attested readings such signiicance.” Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata-
Handschriften,” 115. From his perspective, his insistence that the K group should be identi-
ied only on the basis of readings included in the constituted text only makes the process more
rigorous. He thereby overlooks that the reason the constituted text is occasionally based on
the evidence of the K group alone is due to a unique limitation: if the editor could not iden-
tify the reading of the archetype and had two readings of “equal intrinsic merit,” he adopted
the reading of Ś and K owing to their “much greater correctness and reliability.” Sukthankar,
“Prolegomena,” xci. This does not mean that these instances are better attested. They are
not, for their inclusion in the constituted text is based solely on the evidence of these two
manuscript groups.
250 For Grünendahl, the relationship of one manuscript to another can only be of original
and facsimile rather than source and apograph. As he interprets manuscript transmission,
witnesses are not related by descent to their sources. Rather, manuscript copying either
produces a facsimile edition identical to its source in every respect (providing no inlation
occurred) or a new, inlated text. The copy is therefore related to its source not as its descen-
dant but as its peer.
251 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 116.
252 Ibid.
253 Ibid., 107; and see ibid., 109: “Since Sukthankar argues exclusively in terms of quantity, he
can really only elevate Ś1 to the norm in a quantitative respect. This would correspond to his
conviction that one—m anifestly in contrast to extent!— may not constitute the text on the basis
of individual manuscripts, indeed not even individual versions or recensions” (all italics in original).
299
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 299
254 Ibid., 116.
255 Ibid.
256 For Grünendahl’s comments about Sukthankar’s (and other scholars’) failure to adequately
recognize the work of German scholars, see ibid., 102: “The preliminary work from the
European side made available by the association of the [scientiic] academies did not receive
any meaningful recognition just as the 230 manuscripts preserved outside India that were
identiied under Lüders were barely made use of”; ibid., 102, n. 5: “V. S. Sukthankar’s
Prolegomena to his edition of the Ādiparvan (p. If.) only provides a very sketchy impression of
the work already done and the reasons for its interruption, and he only speaks very generally
of an ‘occasional use’ of the collations provided by the association of the academies (p. vi)”;
ibid., 102, n. 6: “This preliminary work is not mentioned in J. Dunham: ‘Manuscripts used in
the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata: A Survey and Discussion,’ Essays on the Mahābhārata,
Leiden 1991, pp. 1–1 8 (Brill’s Indological Library, 1), contrary to the title less a ‘discussion’
than a restatement of what is already suiciently well known from the Prolegomena and the
Introductions by the individual editors of the BORI-e dition.”; and ibid., 103: “As W. Ruben
rightly supposed in his essay on fascicules 1–3 of the Ādiparvan, Sukthankar’s grouping of
the manuscripts ‘according to their script in “versions” ’ (in the Foreword to the irst fasci-
cule, p. iiif.) was inspired by Lüders, even though his preliminary work is not mentioned
here.” He would doubtless prefer a situation like the one, he claims, French critic Hippolyte
Taine described in 1864, when he explained, “without any sense of rivalry, but with a clear
understanding of what philology is about,” “why contemporary studies of Sanskrit, Persian,
Greek, Latin, and Bible exegesis—i n short: philological disciplines based on historical
principles— had ‘their heart and centre in Germany.’ ” Reinhold Grünendahl, “History in
the Making: On Sheldon Pollock’s ‘NS Indology’ and Vishwa Adluri’s ‘Pride and Prejudice,’”
International Journal of Hindu Studies 16, no. 2 (2012): 225– 26. To judge by his own work, how-
ever, the skills of the present generation of German scholars are not as impressive. Neither is
the idea that the Bhandarkar editors were unwilling to recognize German contributions accu-
rate. Vaidya recollects his irst visit to Europe: “Dr. Sukthankar, the irst General Editor of
this scheme of the critical edition of the Mahābhārata, and myself visited Europe in 1931 to
attend the International Congress of Orientalists held in Leyden. During the period of three
months when we toured together, we held talks on his plan of entrusting diferent parvans to
diferent scholars. He wanted for this scheme the co-o peration of Indian as well as European
and American scholars. It is a well- known fact that the Sabhāparvan was irst assigned to the
late Dr. M. Winternitz who was chosen for that very parvan by the International Association
of Academies. Both Dr. Sukthankar and myself called on him at his residence in Prague
to persuade him to come to India for some months for editing that parvan, but his age and
health would not allow him to undertake the voyage. Similarly, it was Dr. Sukthankar’s idea
to assign the Karṇaparvan to Dr. Lüders. Dr. Sukthankar spent a few weeks in Berlin in
October 1931 for this purpose. Dr. Lüders also would not leave Germany on account of his
academic commitments there and undertake the work.” P. L. Vaidya, “Introduction,” in The
Karn ̣aparvan for the First Time Critically Edited (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute,
1954), xl– xli. Sukthankar includes a fond and respectful recollection of Moriz Winternitz in
Vishnu S. Sukthankar, “In Memoriam: Professor Moritz Winternitz (1863–1 937),” Annals
of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 18, no. 3 (1937): 313–2 0. He notes that Lüders and
Winternitz persuaded the XVIII International Congress of Orientalists in 1928 to place
the existing collations and the funds collected for the Mahābhārata critical edition at the
Indian scholars’ disposal. “Professor Winternitz was not merely an Honorary Member of
the Institute, but also an active member of the Mahābhārata Editorial Board, and of the
Mahābhārata Board of Referees.” Ibid., 313. He recalls that Winternitz declared that “after
a careful examination of the irst fascicule of the new edition, he was convinced that this
edition would be the edition that is wanted and that he had in mind when thirty- one years ago
300
300 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
he urged the necessity of a critical edition of the Mahābhārata.” Ibid., 317 (italics in original).
See also the bibliography for Western scholars’ encouraging reviews of the Mahābhārata
critical edition. The only person who views textual criticism through a nationalist lens is
Grünendahl.
257 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xxx.
258 Sukthankar had no reason to treat Ś1 and K1 as members of a group, since their relation-
ship could be stemmatized (as descendants of a common archetype ν). He considered the
possibility that Ś1 was the ancestor of the K manuscripts and rejected it. Their manifest
diferences meant they were not manuscripts of the same version, albeit with a common
ancestor.
259 As we saw Grünendahl only has a tenuous grasp of why manuscripts are grouped. He writes,
“Precisely because there is no further representative of this supposed ‘old version of Kashmir,’
the existence of such a version [Śāradā or Kámīrī], based on the material of one manu-
script of the Ādiparvan, cannot initially be considered demonstrated.” Grünendahl, “Zur
Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 109 (Grünendahl’s italics). Apparently, he
thinks a version based on a large group is more certain than one based on a single manuscript,
since there are more witnesses for it, not realizing that a version refers to a speciic form of
the text, whereas a group refers to a subfamily, the relation of whose members resists analysis.
He thinks grouping manuscripts is an index of their closeness, when it is an index that their
relationship is unclear. His proposed solution, subsuming Ś1 and K1 to one group, therefore
will not express their greater commonality—g reater, that is, than he thinks Sukthankar was
willing to recognize—b ut at most underscore the editor’s inability to determine their rela-
tionship. Since the editor was not in doubt about their relationship, Grünendahl’s proposal
efectively discards known facts for a speculative consideration.
260 Their internal relationship never poses a problem for Grünendahl, because he is not inter-
ested in their readings, but only their extent.
261 Grünendahl thinks that a critical edition is only justiied if it completely and accurately
succeeds in reconstructing a historical archetype, but this is not the sole purpose of a critical
edition. In fact, few scholars still think critical editions replicate historical exemplars in all
their particulars. The more sophisticated view is that the critical edition is an arrangement of
the available data, a hypothesis that presents the diachrony of the tradition.
262 Edgerton comments, “Much has been said of the ‘luidity’ of Mbh. tradition. In a sense the
term is justiied. But it is dangerous to use it without deinition, and I miss this in the writings
of many who use it. What do they mean? (a) If they mean that there has been a vast deal of
inter- inluence and contamination between various MSS and recensions, I have already said
I agree. But none of these inluences seems, as far as I can see, to show evidence of coming
from any version not descended from our ‘original’ text (however expanded or otherwise sec-
ondarily altered). (b) Or if what is meant by ‘luidity’ is that, before the establishment of this
text, the ancestor of all our MSS, there were already diferent versions of the Mbh. stories,
again I agree. I have cited evidence from our text (as Sukthankar did from the Ādi) to show
that this text itself contains signs of such variant versions. The late and obviously secondary
attempts to patch them up, to which reference was made, are to me further evidence that all
our MSS go back to this text, inconsistencies and all. Whatever other versions existed before it
are now, apparently, lost forever, except as they are dimly relected in the manner described in
our text itself. But this text itself is nothing ‘luid’! To be sure we must at present, and doubtless
forever, remain ignorant about its many details. But we should not confuse our ignorance with
‘luidity’ of the text itself. That, to put the matter in a nutshell, seems to me precisely what
those critics are doing who call the critically edited Mbh. an ‘imaginary’ thing. Because we, the
editors, honestly admit that we cannot be sure just what form it had in many details, they jump
to the conclusion that it never had any form. I, on the contrary, have no doubt at all that every
line of the text had once a deinite, precise form, even though we are now frequently uncertain
301
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 301
about just what that form was. It is not an indeinite ‘literature’ we are dealing with, but a def-
inite literary composition.” Edgerton, “Introduction,” xxxvi– xxxvii (all italics in original).
263 “At best,” because it is uncertain whether such an edition could be completed at all. Certainly,
Grünendahl’s accomplishments in this area do not inspire conidence: 25 years since he
published his criticisms of Sukthankar, his irst collations are yet to appear.
264 Leonardi, “Il testo come ipotesi,” 9.
265 Ibid., 8.
266 Cited from the abstract to the article.
267 Ibid., 9.
268 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 120.
269 Ibid., 120– 21.
270 Edgerton, “Introduction,” xxxviii (Edgerton’s italics).
271 Contrary to Grünendahl’s claim, Sukthankar did not “attempt” to “explain away” the “not
present textual additions” in D2 and D5 as due to contamination. He cited contamination
to explain the occasional commonalities between the K manuscripts and D5 even though
D5 was not descended from ν. He could not have cited contamination to explain the absence
of certain interpolations, for the simple reason that it probably never occurred to him that
anyone could establish iliation on the basis of the absence of interpolation.
272 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata-Handschriften,” 120– 21.
273 As the latest common ancestor of K0.1, D5, Ñ4 and S, θ is the ultimate source to which all
three recensions owe the passages’ absence. As the latest common ancestor of K0.1, D5 and
Ñ4, N is the latest source to which the northern recension manuscripts owe the passages’
absence.
274 Ibid., 121.
275 Classifying manuscripts by number of interpolations is like grouping children into “families”
by the number of their illings. Just because it can be done, does not mean it should be done.
276 Ibid., 121 (italics in original).
277 Large numbers of interpolations only mean the two manuscripts are equally contaminated.
If we found they consistently had the same interpolations, we might suspect the contamina-
tion was into a common ancestor, but whether they are really related must be established in
terms of shared corruptions. In contrast, large numbers of absent interpolations— a possi-
bility we must address, since Grünendahl also argues from shared absences to iliation— only
means both manuscripts are equally free of contamination. It does not mean one of the
contaminated manuscripts belongs with the other, either in a group or as an apograph of a
common hyparchetype.
278 The restriction is also pointless in another sense: it is not an accurate indicator of contamina-
tion even between pairs of manuscripts. If our aim was to show the extent of contamination
of K2 with some other K manuscript, we would draw up a list of all the interpolations they
have in common and not just those they have in common with only each other. Although
we could not rule out a third manuscript as the source of contamination, the problem is not
solved by restricting ourselves to only a pair of K manuscripts at a time. A simple example
suices to show this: let K3’s scribe compose 80 additional passages and K4’s scribe, two. Let
the scribe of K2’s ancestor have access to both K3 and K4. Anxious not to lose any verse
that might possibly be original, he copied all the additional verses into his manuscript, either
in the margins or on separate sheets. If this copy were copied again and the scribe inserted
the additional passages into the text, we could no longer distinguish the original from the
additions. Let us further assume that the scribes of K0 and K1 also had access to K3 and
copied its additional passages, either some or all of them, but between the two of them at
any rate all of them. K2 is thus heavily contaminated with K3 and only slightly with K4.
Yet, by Grünendahl’s logic, we would ignore the interpolations K2 shares with K3, as they
are not unique to these manuscripts—o r, as he puts it, K2 does not have these passages “in
302
302 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
common only with one other K manuscript”—a nd focus on the two passages K2 shares with
K4, which are not contained in any other K manuscript, since K0.1 escaped contamination
with K4. We would conclude that K2 is closer to K4 than any other manuscript, even though
K4’s inluence on K2 is slight. We would also ignore the interpolations in K3—s ince they are
shared with more than one K manuscript, we would not include them in our list at all—a nd
we would conclude that K3 was the purest manuscript even though it is the source of most
of the interpolations. If K2 was itself a source of new interpolations (say, 40) and 30 of them
were transmitted to K0 and K1, while the remaining 10 were transmitted to K4, we would
ignore the contamination of K0 and K1 since the passages are found in both, and conclude,
from the fact that K4 has 10 passages in common with K2, that these two manuscripts were
especially closely related. This would be erroneous, because, in fact, K2 is much more closely
related with K0 and K1 (“related” in the sense of being contaminated with and not in the
sense of being iliated, which is impossible to establish).
279 Ibid., 121.
280 This confusion illustrates how little Grünendahl understands manuscript transmission. The
primary source of diference between manuscripts is not contamination, but the signiicant
errors made each time they are copied. Contamination has rather the efect of homogenizing
the tradition.
281 Ibid., 121.
282 Ibid.
283 Namely, the hyparchetype γ was “not as yet constituted at this stage of his discussion”;
K5.6 “were only available for a portion of the listed passages”; “none of the Ñ manuscripts
were collationed for the irst two adhyāyas […] so that conclusions based on evidence from
these sections can a priori not hold for the Newari manuscripts”; and “Ś1 also was not
available for these sections of the text.” Ibid., 121– 22.
284 Grünendahl’s objections are false. When Sukthankar says that “the contamination of K3–6
with γ is illustrated by the following passages,” γ stands for the manuscripts of that recension,
not the hyparchetype γ itself. It is impossible to demonstrate that contamination took place
with the hyparchetype itself— as Sukthankar knew. Further, the fact that some manuscripts
of this recension such as D5 do not contain the passages is evidence that they were not
features of the hyparchetype γ. Even if Sukthankar meant the hyparchetype itself, the idea
that he cannot refer to it as it has not yet been “constituted” is mistaken. An editor need not
reconstruct all of the hyparchetypes he posits during the recensio on the way to the arche-
type. The reason he cannot is that it entails a circle: in order to reconstruct hyparchetype
α he must refer to hyparchetype β, but he cannot refer to it— at least, by Grünendahl’s
logic— without irst reconstructing it, but in order to reconstruct it, he must refer to α, but
he cannot refer to it without irst reconstructing it and so on. In contrast, Grünendahl’s
second claim is a ib: K5.6 were not “only available for a portion of the listed passages.”
They were discarded from the critical apparatus after the irst two adhyāyas as of little value
in establishing the text, as Sukthankar explicitly notes. The list of passages therefore self-
evidently only applies to K5.6 for the irst two adhyāyas. Why Grünendahl feels obliged to
point this out is unclear. Once an editor has shown that manuscripts are contaminated—s o
contaminated that he sees no point in retaining them in the critical apparatus—t here is
no reason he should continue giving examples of their contamination. Grünendahl raises
this objection because it casts doubt on the probity of Sukthankar’s list. The same thing
applies to his third claim, albeit in reverse: collations of Ñ1 and Ñ2 began only after the
irst two adhyāyas; collations of Ñ3 after the 13th. Obviously, examples that pertain to parts
of the text for which they were not available do not apply to them. But no one claims that
every interpolation is found in every manuscript. When Sukthankar says that these passages
illustrate K3–6 ’s contamination with the manuscripts of the γ recension, he simply means
these interpolations are characteristic of the latter; not they are found in all manuscripts
303
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 303
of the latter. It suices to show that the manuscripts on the right frequently feature the
interpolations of the manuscripts on the left, without either every manuscript on the right or
every manuscript on the left containing every interpolation. Finally, Ś1 need not be available
for this section of the text for the editor to identify a K type. As we saw, this is Grünendahl’s
delusion. Since we addressed this confusion in the preceding section, we do not discuss
it again.
285 Ibid. (all italics Grünendahl’s). Contrary to Grünendahl’s claim, Sukthankar explicitly notes
that G1.2.4.5 and T1 are the inferior manuscripts of their respective groups, as several
northern interpolations demonstrate. “T1 is one of the extremely few Southern manuscripts
which contain the (Northern) salutational stanza nārāyan ̣aṃ namaskṛtya, etc. For the Northern
element in the make- up of T1, cf. 29*, 30*, 96*, 97*, 98*, 106*, etc. As compared with
T1, T2 shows a purer Southern tradition and has distinct leanings towards the Grantha
version.” “The latter group (G3.6) represents the purer Southern tradition, agreeing
with M against the other Southern manuscripts, whereas the four MSS. G1.2.4.5 are not
merely heavily interpolated but stand palpably under Northern inluence.” Sukthankar,
“Prolegomena,” lxxii. “Take, for instance, the case of the subg roup G1.2.4.5 of the Grantha
version. In opposition to other manuscripts belonging to the same recension and even the
same version, G1.2.4.5 contain, as shown above, an astonishingly large number of passages
which are found otherwise only in some inferior manuscripts of the Northern recension.
Now is this a case of contamination of the four MSS. G1.2.4.5 from a Northern source;
or are the common passages a remnant of the lost archetype, which were somehow lost in
the remaining manuscripts of the Southern recension? There is apparent agreement here
between independent versions. But is this agreement original? The clumsy interpolator of
a remote ancestor of G.1.2.4.5 happens to have supplied us with the means of answering
these questions. He has left behind, quite unintentionally, an impress of his ‘inger prints,’ so
to say, by which we can easily and conidently trace him and examine his handiwork. The said
manuscripts contain a Northern stanza (belonging to manuscripts of class γ)— a mere string
of attributes of Garuḍa— wedged in at a place where it can be construed neither with what
precedes nor with what follows. This proves incontrovertibly that these four manuscripts
G1.2.4.5 have been compared with some Northern manuscripts, and makes it highly prob-
able that the other doubtful stanzas, which they have in common with the Northern recen-
sion, have crept into their text in the same surreptitious way.” Ibid., lxxxi (Sukthankar’s
italics). As App. 1, no. 14 is an insertion into the Garuḍa narrative, we have every reason for
thinking it a northern insertion into the manuscripts of the southern recension that feature
it rather than vice versa.
286 For Sukthankar’s comments on these manuscripts, see preceding note.
287 The reference is to 116*, 119*, 122*, 124*, 125*, 128*, 132*, 137*, 139*, 142*, 143*, 144*,
145*, 151*, 157*, 160*, 162*, 166*, 167*, 168*, 172*, 173*, 189*, 190*, 191*, 221*‚ 228*,
245*, 281*, 305*, 354*, 372*, 405*, 416*, 417*, 438*, 487*, 490*, 523*, 536*, 564*, 692*,
694*, 824*, 1000* and 1035*. Sukthankar introduces them with the words: “The contamina-
tion of K2–4 .6 with γ is illustrated by […],” illustrating the list’s general nature. It is neither
necessary that every K manuscript contain every interpolation nor necessary that every inter-
polation appear in every γ manuscript. Ibid., li.
288 Grünendahl has at most shown that the absence of App. 1, nos. 14, 43 and 61 is not restricted
to K0– 2 but also extends to K3. In contrast, he has not shown anything concerning K4–6 .
But the unwarranted generalization irst lends his argument persuasive force.
289 Grünendahl could simply have noted that App. 1, nos. 14, 43 and 61 are interpolated only
in K4, or he could have noted that he did not think Sukthankar had suicient examples
of K3’s contamination with γ. But as we saw (see preceding note), the argument relies
for its persuasive force on the generalization and on phrasing the criticism negatively and
incomprehensibly.
304
304 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
290 The absence of 26– 50 and 76– 100 is no less characteristic of ν than the absence of 51– 75
(the passages whose absence is characteristic of ν are thus 26– 100). But as Grünendahl uses
the term, he means passages absent only in ν. We have retained his usage.
291 A scribe could only know which interpolations are characteristically absent in ν if he knew
which interpolations exist in γ and S. But to know this, he must have access to γ and S along
with all of ν. No scribe can be expected to do this.
292 If Grünendahl had simply argued that contamination must be proved in terms of manuscripts
not lacking the same passages as the purest members of their group, the problem would have
been obvious: the demand does not address the impure manuscripts’ contamination but their
lack of contamination with passages with which the purest members are also not contami-
nated. Hence the obscure formulation “preferentially demonstrate […] in terms of textual
editions whose not being present is characteristic of the hyparchetype,” necessary to render
the argument opaque. Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,”
122 (italics in source).
293 This is true in the trivial sense that every manuscript is contaminated with the passages it
is contaminated with and not contaminated with the passages with which it is not contam-
inated. Grünendahl’s entire genius consists in phrasing the requirement so impenetrably
that no one realizes that it places an arbitrary and exorbitant restriction on the editor: that
he demonstrate A’s contamination only in terms of passages absent from α and in terms of
all the passages absent from α. Consequently, every manuscript, even the most contami-
nated, can now be proven not contaminated provided we select our examples appropriately.
294 Ibid., 122– 23.
295 The source of the confusion is Grünendahl’s belief that the Ñ manuscripts were assigned to
the γ recension for containing all of these passages. Consequently, he thinks that by pointing
out that they do not, in fact, contain all of the interpolations in question, he can controvert
their assignment to this recension.
296 Grünendahl’s igure is incorrect. D14 features 139* in addition to 132*. It also features the
irst line of 137*. His error is probably due to the fact that the note to verse 1.2.148 is com-
plicated. Sukthankar notes that D4 (marg).9–1 1 and S insert the passage 138* after 148
(G7, after 139*); Dr and D14 after 150 and then he continues: “K3.4.6 V1 B D (except
D14) G7 ins. after 148 (D4.9– 11, after 138*): 139* [etc.].” V. S. Sukthankar, ed., The
Ad̄ iparvan for the First Time Critically Edited (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute,
1933), 50 (note to 1.2.148). In other words, whereas D14 inserts 139*, it does so following
an additional insertion 138* characteristic of the southern manuscripts, but absent from
the K manuscripts. This undermines Grünendahl’s theory that “D14 […] could have, with
justiication, been assigned to the K manuscripts.” Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von
Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 123.
297 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxi.
298 Ibid.
299 Ibid., xx.
300 Edgerton conirms Sukthankar’s assessment. He notes that the manuscript “described as
‘D14’ by Sukthankar on Ādi. Text of Sabhā originally had 78 folios (of which about a dozen
are lost), 16– 18 lines, 60– 65 akṣaras. [It was] completely collated, but collations have been
discarded (except for an occasional citation in the Addenda), since it is fragmentary and goes
closely with Dn1.” Edgerton, “Introduction,” xix.
301 Grünendahl also errs in claiming that as D14 lacks two of the irst 25 passages it belongs
with the K or Ñ manuscripts. As we observed earlier, a manuscript’s contamination must
be demonstrated in terms of the passages with which it is contaminated. In the pre-
sent case, what is decisive is not whether D14 features all or only two or none of the
irst 25 passages in Sukthankar’s list. Rather, what is decisive is how many of the 244
smaller interpolations in the irst two adhyāyas are inserted in D14. When the insertion
305
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 305
is characteristic of the northern manuscripts, D14 frequently does not feature it. In this
respect, it usually agrees with the best K manuscripts, though not always: sometimes it
is the K manuscripts that feature the insertion. On the other hand, when the insertion
is characteristic of the southern manuscripts, D14 often features it, against the practice
of the K manuscripts. This is exactly what Sukthankar found. As his list is speciically a
list of insertions illustrating K3– 6’s contamination with γ, that is to say, with manuscripts
of the northern recension, it is not surprising that D14, a composite of a Kaśmīrī and a
southern source, should not feature these insertions. In parts unafected by contamination,
D14 follows the purer Kaśmīrī tradition. In the others, it follows the southern. At most,
Grünendahl’s list demonstrates that D14 is not contaminated with a northern source.
As no one claims this— D14 was discarded as contaminated with a southern source— it is
not clear what Grünendahl hopes to prove with this argument. Every manuscript can be
shown not contaminated if we restrict our discussion to passages with which it has not
been contaminated.
302 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 123– 24.
303 As noted, K6 is discarded from the critical apparatus after the second chapter. The inal
21 passages therefore cannot apply to it, and it is disingenuous to suggest that Sukthankar
claimed otherwise. The circumstance that K2 features eight of the passages is evidence of
its contamination. It may not be as highly contaminated as K3 and still less than K4, but
an editor must still note with which passages it is contaminated. Why Grünendahl thinks
the editor should adopt the most contaminated manuscript of its group as his standard is a
mystery. It contradicts what he said earlier about an editor having to adopt as his standard
the non- contaminated manuscripts of its group, although there he was trying to prove
that K3 was not contaminated. Likewise, the circumstance that K3 contains 37 of the
passages is a strong argument for contamination. We can turn this evidence around and
claim that K3 does not contain 9 of the 46 passages, but this is a bizarre argument against
its contamination. No one claims K3 contains all the central recension’s interpolations,
just suicient numbers to assume contamination with a γ source. Likewise, the fact that
D5 “manifests diverse similarities with […] the non- contaminated manuscripts” only
means it is less contaminated than other D manuscripts; not it is an apograph of a K
source. Many of these passages are characteristically northern insertions and hence
absent from the southern recension. Should we now claim the southern manuscripts are
apographs of a K source?
304 Ibid., 124 (all italics Grünendahl’s).
305 These are the insertions 221*, 228*, 245*, 281*, 305*, 354*, 372*, 405*, 416*, 417*, 438*,
487*, 490*, 523*, 536*, 564*, 692*, 694*, 824*, 1000* and 1035* from Sukthankar’s list. The
ive longer passages are App. 1, nos. 63, 75, 80, 81 and 85.
306 Edgerton addresses the underlying fallacy in his introduction to the critical edition of the
Sabhāparvan: “Retention of original features never even tends, in the slightest degree, to
prove secondary relationship with any other manuscript or recension which also retains
them. Such relationship can only be proved, or made in any way likely, by demonstration of
common departures from the original.” Edgerton, “Introduction,” xlviii (Edgerton’s italics).
Grünendahl evidently overlooked the passage.
307 It is evident why Grünendahl thinks these passages should have been the “touchstone” for
evaluating Ñ4’s place in the stemma. According to him, since these insertions distinguish
K0.1 from K2–6 and K2–6 again from γ, they constitute the speciic diference between ν
and γ. Thus, if we want to determine whether a manuscript belongs under ν or under γ, we
must examine whether it contains only some or all or none of the passages. The argument
is doubly erroneous: the passages in question are neither characteristic insertions in K nor a
complete list of characteristic insertions in γ. If our aim was to demonstrate that Ñ4 was sim-
ilar to K0.1 by virtue of not containing many of the insertions K0.1 do not contain, we would
306
306 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
draw up a list of all the passages absent in Ñ4 irrespective of the recension in which they
feature. This is exactly what Sukthankar did: he notes that “our MS omits most of the short
insertions given in the foot-n otes of the constituted text. There are more than two thousand
of such passages, the majority naturally from the Southern Recension,” and then he cites 47
examples “selected at random.” Sukthankar, “The Oldest Extant Ms. of the Ādiparvan,”
204. On the other hand, if our aim was to demonstrate that Ñ4 was similar to K0.1 by
virtue of not containing many of the insertions from the γ recension K0.1 also do not con-
tain, we would draw up a list of all the passages absent in Ñ4 though characteristic of the γ
manuscripts, but in no case would we draw up a list of just these 21 passages! Why Grünendahl thinks
“the choice in his list of the shorter additions not attested in Ñ4 must not therefore have been
a random one, as Sukthankar here claims too” is a mystery. Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung
von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 124. Perhaps he suspects this because he thinks they dem-
onstrate something they cannot, namely, the iliation of Ñ4 with Ś1 and K0– 3.
308 See ibid., 127: “As regards the ‘important additions’ in ν that are discussed next (Prolegomena,
p. lxx), Sukthankar can only ‘recall’ one, namely, the similarity with Kṣemendra’s
Bhāratamañjarı ̄(App I, 121), already discussed earlier (see above, p. 112). He [Sukthankar]
tries to dispel the fact that ν at all manifests ‘important additions,’ which he manifestly found
a defect, by referring to the fact that the addition is found ‘only’ in Ś1, K0.1(4) and hence
‘cannot be considered as characteristic for ν as a whole.’ Such reasoning reveals Sukthankar’s
remarkable lexibility in interpreting his material: was he not concerned previously to show
that K0.1 in particular constituted the ‘pure’ core of the K version and that all of them— but
especially K1— are especially close to the representative of the ‘Ś āradā version,’ Ś1 (which,
to all excess, also features this addition!)?”
309 Grünendahl could have spared himself the word “recall” in quotation marks (see preceding
note): App. 1, no. 121 is the only longer insertion in ν. Does he expect Sukthankar to make
up passages where none exist? As for his claim that Sukthankar “manifestly” found its
presence in ν a defect, he is right in that the presence of an interpolation is a defect, albeit
a relatively harmless one, since it is easy to identify and to correct. But it is not a defect
in the sense he means it, namely, as a ground for Sukthankar to revise his classiication.
Sukthankar neither had a reason to suppress other important additions in ν, since there
weren’t any, nor a reason to feel that citing them would undermine his classiication, since
it wouldn’t. Only Grünendahl thinks these insertions would afect the stemma, because
he does not consider readings and, above all, shared corruptions, but interpolations when
grouping manuscripts.
310 Why exactly Grünendahl thinks the fact that ν itself has “important additions” is an argu-
ment against it is a mystery. Perhaps he thinks this argument strengthens the case for his
proposed edition or perhaps he thinks the stemmatic method does not work and therefore
all we can do is take the shortest manuscript, discard its interpolations and arrive at the
archetype. In the preceding section, we saw that, for him, all an editor needs to do to create
a critical edition is begin with the shortest text, identify the longest open line and then
brush aside the dead ends. But how are we to identify interpolations if not for the stem-
matic method?
311 The fact that App. 1, no. 121 is found only in Ś1, K0, K1 and K4 is not an argument against
Ś1 and K0.1 as the best ν manuscripts. Grünendahl thinks it is but that is because—a s we know
by now—h e classiies manuscripts into the meliores and deteriores based on speciic insertions. In
contrast, an editor will distinguish between a manuscript’s readings, which can be good or bad,
likely the reading of the original or a corruption, and its expansion, which is not necessarily a
sign of poor quality. Grünendahl errs in disregarding this distinction. From his perspective, it
seems that, because Sukthankar concedes Ś1 and K0.1 also have one longer insertion (albeit
one not characteristic of ν as a whole, since it is absent from the remaining K manuscripts), he
expresses “remarkable lexibility in interpreting his material.” Actually, the circumstance that
307
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 307
Ś1 and K0.1 also contain some interpolations does not negate their good readings. Neither
does it negate the fact that they are the purest representatives of their group. Indeed, they
contain several other insertions, but Grünendahl likely focuses on App. 1, no. 121 because he
thinks, as an “important addition,” it especially disproves Sukthankar’s claims.
312 Among longer passages App. 1, nos. 1, 12, 33 and 58. The shorter additions were listed
previously.
313 Ibid., 125– 26.
314 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” liv.
315 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 126.
316 Ibid., 126– 27.
317 If the reading in γ was the original and that in ν and S the corruption, we would have to
explain how both could contain the same corruption. Their scribes could have coincidentally
made the same error several times, but if they agree consistently in their reading, this suggests
a common source. Their reading must be the reading of the archetype and the divergent
reading in γ a corruption.
318 Grünendahl is evidently projecting his anxiety on Sukthankar. Since his aim is to argue for a
critical edition based on the Nepālī manuscripts, he thinks Sukthankar must be negating the
claims of the Nepālī recension, since this is what he would have done in his place. See the
next note.
319 Contrary to what Grünendahl thinks, Sukthankar had no reason to insist on K’s superi-
ority. He had access to all the Mahābhārata manuscripts, including Grünendahl’s Ñ4. If
he thought it the better manuscript, he would have used it. As a matter of fact, he studied
it extensively— more so than Grünendahl, who relies exclusively on Sukthankar’s informa-
tion about it—a nd produced the irst and, until today, sole collations of the manuscript.
Grünendahl’s argument depends not only on imputing his own motives to Sukthankar but
also on the assumption that Sukthankar in 1931 knew that in the future German Indologists
would have preferential access to the Nepālī manuscripts through the Nepal- German
Manuscript Preservation Project and wished to preempt them from making a contribution to
the Mahābhārata.
320 If the reading attested in ν and S is the correct reading, then it originated with the archetype.
If it originated with the archetype, it could have descended to some manuscripts of the central
recension. In this case, some γ manuscripts will preserve the correct reading and we should not
be surprised that ν and Ñ share the same reading. Contrary to what Grünendahl thinks, this
does not mean ν and Ñ are related, since correct readings are not evidence of iliation.
321 Sukthankar overlooks to write “mostly” only once in the 21st example in his list (the 15th in
Grünendahl’s). This is the sole case where Grünendahl can claim to have identiied an excep-
tion. But as the fact that at least one Ñ manuscript features the correct reading is only further
conirmation for the constituted text, its relevance is trivial.
322 Grünendahl claims in four additional cases to have found a discrepancy between what the
manuscript contains and what the critical apparatus notes. But as he provides no evidence,
we could not verify the truth of this claim.
323 Grünendahl does not think so, but this is because he misinterprets Sukthankar’s comment,
“One notable feature of ν to which I must now draw attention is its frequent agreement with
S against γ, especially in the matter of isolated and even unimportant readings.” Sukthankar,
“Prolegomena,” liv. He thinks Sukthankar means to assert ν and S’s independence from γ,
when, in fact, he asserts ν’s independence from S or, rather, infers from this independence
that their reading must be the reading of the archetype.
324 That is, in those cases when they agree with ν. When they do not, they, of course, contain
diferent readings, but this is not the aspect that interests Grünendahl.
325 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 127.
326 Ibid.
308
308 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
327 “Since our codex (Ś1) is fragmentary, it must be considered a piece of singularly good fortune
that there has been preserved at least one nearly complete Devanāgarī manuscript of the Ādi,
namely, India Oice no. 2137, that may, as will presently be shown, be used, without hesitation,
to supplement the missing portions, since it undoubtedly is a moderately trustworthy, though
comparatively late and slightly contaminated and incorrect transcript of a Śāradā exemplar.”
Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xlvii. And see also his comments concerning the ν recension: “An
unbiased comparative survey of the diferent versions leads one to the conclusion that the Śāradā
(Kasḿ īrī) version is certainly the best Northern version, and probably, taken as a whole, the best
extant version of the Ādi, a conclusion not based on abstract considerations, but one that may
be veriied inductively and pragmatically. As is natural, this version is, not by any means, entirely
free from corruptions and interpolations. These must be carefully corrected and controlled with
the help of the other versions, particularly of those of the rival recension.” Ibid., lvi.
328 Ibid., li.
329 2.144b: K0 cābhibho; K1 cābhitaḥ; K2 V1 B Da Dn D4 D2– 6.13 vā vibho; K4.6 D7– 12 vā vibhoḥ;
D1 yā vibho; T1 G4.5 tu prabhuḥ; T2 G6 ca prabhuṃ; G1–3 M2.4 ca prabhuḥ; G7 ca prabhoḥ; D14
saṃjayaḥ sarvatraḥ prabho.
2.177b: V1 ślokānāṃ; K1 ślokā caivātra kathyate; K3 ślokā granthārthasanmataḥ; K4 Da D2.13
ślokasaṃkhyātra śabdya; K6 ścaivātra bhāṣitāḥ; B1.2 D6 ślokasaṃkhyātra kır̄tya; B3 ślokasaṃkhyā ca
kır̄tya; B4 nāṃ cāpi śabdya (marg. cātra kır̄tya); D3 Dn D1.3.4.7.9– 12 ślokasaṃkhyātra kathya; D5
˚nāṃ cātra gıȳa; D3 ślokasaṃkhyātra gan ̣ya; T1 gryaṃ yasya śabdya; G1.4.5 nāṃ cātra śabdya; G2 gryaṃ
yatra gan ̣ya; G3 gryā yatra yasya; ślokā yatra praśabdya. Cd has at least ślokāgraṃ.
98.13a: Ś1 kanyasaṃvāde; K1 kamahaṃ vade; K2 labdhā sa vade; K3.4 Ñ2 B D mā gamaḥ kāmaṃ;
Ñ1.3 kanyasa bhrūhi; S kanıȳastāt naiveha.
98.18c: K0– 2 samudre; D5 samūhe; S samṛddhe; K3.4 Ñ2 B D (except D5) buddhoḍupe pari (B5 vini)
kṣipya.
330 In a ifth case (1.2.189c), the diicult reading is found in all K manuscripts except K4. All
southern manuscripts except one support this reading, so Grünendahl’s objection is moot. In
a inal case (1.10.6c), all K manuscripts except K1 and K4 have the reading, so the objection
is once again moot. Grünendahl appears to have misread the critical apparatus, since it notes
that all Ñ manuscripts feature the reading kāmaṃ māṃ.
331 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxxvi and see also ibid.: “With that end in view, we must
examine as many manuscripts—a nd above all as many classes of manuscripts—a s possible,
and group them into families” (all italics Sukthankar’s).
332 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 127.
333 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lvi.
334 As we have seen, this is Grünendahl’s misconception. Sukthankar’s point is that ν’s reading
must be the correct one since it explains the other variants. This reading is also correct in any
other manuscripts that contain it. The idea that he seeks to claim “exclusivity” for ν or that,
because other manuscripts conirm its reading, Sukthankar should not have constituted the
text on “ν alone” is Grünendahl’s interpretation.
335 The critical apparatus includes only the three manuscripts Ñ1– 3. For Ñ4, Grünendahl appears
to have consulted Sukthankar’s collations in “The Oldest Extant Ms. of the Ādiparvan,” and,
from the fact that he does not list a variant for 1.166.23, concluded that Ñ4 has the reading
of the constituted text.
336 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 127 (italics added).
337 Grünendahl does not title the sole edition he produced—R einhold Grünendahl, ed.,
Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ: Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u Part 1: Adhyāyas 1– 43 (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,
1983)— a critical edition, but it is also not a true Bédierist edition, that is, an edition of the
best available manuscript. He elects a group of manuscripts and reprints their readings
with random “improvements” from the manuscripts of the other groups, following no
apparent logic. He claims, “No single manuscript, and none of the established groups,
taken by itself, ofers a satisfactory text. Given the choice between following in efect one
309
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 309
manuscript singled out on account of its reliability, age, or other criteria, or selection the
‘best’ reading of all available manuscripts, a modiication of the former approach seemed most
suitable to the material,” but neither identiies a single manuscript nor consistently follows the
reading of the better group. Thus, while the edition appears to be based on the manuscript
N4, many instances exist (1.32b, 1.47a, 6.4b, 6.13b, 7.21ab, 17.9c etc.) where its reading is
rejected from the constituted text. He writes, “Of the three groups distinguished above, the
two consisting mainly of palm-l eaf MSS deserve preference over the paper MSS of Group
III. Of the former, Group I clearly stands out for its reliability. Its numerous insertions
(always deined with regard to the constituted text) do not justify the assumption that its
general ‘correctness’ is merely the result of thoroughgoing revision,” but at 2.25c, 2.42a,
2.57c, 2.73b, 2.78ab, 3.56c, 4.3ab and 5.22b he rejects readings contained in three of
the four manuscripts— N3, 6 and 9— of Group I (the sole exception is N4); and at 1.34b,
1.42d, 7.11cd, 7.16a, 8.9cd, 13.30ab, 16.3b and 16.21d, 17.1b readings contained in N3,
4 and 6 of Group I. Sometimes all manuscripts of his better Group I are against the con-
stituted text’s reading (2.48c, 4.40c, 4.49b, 5.4cd, 5.15c, 5.25a). At 3.29ab, 4.15b, 4.54cd,
6.23cd, 10.3c, 13.6b and 17.5cd all N manuscripts of either group are against the constituted
text. Neither is he consistent in the application of the principle, “the bulk of the readings of
Group I, as well as its predominance over the lacunae of Group II, is supported by another
branch of tradition, i.e. Group III (cf. above). Therefore I have considered their far-r eaching
agreement as ofering the irmest basis for the present edition,” because sometimes the D manuscripts,
either with or without some of the manuscripts of his Group I, support a diferent reading
than that of the constituted text—f or example, at 1.22d, 1.47d, 1.50a, 1.58a (at 1.32b
with two of his better manuscripts N4 and N6 and at 1.47a with his best manuscript N4).
Indeed, without drawing up a stemma and localizing his manuscripts, he cannot show that
their agreement is “far-r eaching.” Occasionally, he prints the reading of DB and DL in the
constituted text, for example, at 19.14c where he notes “all mss. except DB, DL” contain
the variant kāsāram (constituted text: kṛsāraṃ), even though otherwise he discounts their
reading (1.64b, 2.31d, 2.49a, 2.54c, 2.58c, 2.72b, 3.34a, 3.45c, 4.22a, 4.36cd, 4.40a, 4.45c,
4.45d, 4.50b, 5.18b, etc.). He writes, “concerning its insertions, the evidence of Group III,
corroborated by Group II and independent sources (citations, parallel versions) proves to
be superior to that of Group I,” but he often treats as original passages that are clearly
insertions in some exemplars, since they are marginal insertions in the others and omitted
in either the best groups or sometimes a majority of manuscripts (for example, 1.61cd,
2.82cd– 84ab, 7.29ef, 16.8ab and 19.23). 1.61cd is absent from N1, 2, 5, 7 and 8 and
inserted in the margin in N2, so that the evidence of Group III is not corroborated by Group II.
Again, 7.29ef and 16.8ab are absent from N1, 2, 5, 7 and 8, and inserted in the margin in
N1, suggesting its secondary nature. Ibid., 25–2 6 (all italics added).
338 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 128.
339 Ibid.
340 “So also I consider the starting point of his [Sukthankar’s] inductive demonstration, the
Schriftartprämisse, to put it mildly, highly questionable. ‘Abstract considerations,’ to which
Sukthankar pretends to be little inclined, speak, in my view, unambiguously against it.”
Ibid., 128.
341 “How would the emergence of a version have to be thought ‘abstractly’ under the
Schriftartprämisse? I basically see two possible explanations: either the text was ixed in a
deinite script directly from the oral transmission or it was transferred from another script
into this one. Whichever explanation one accepts neither of these two processes need have
occurred only once. The text could have been ixed in a script from the oral tradition repeat-
edly and in completely diferent periods or it could also have been transferred from completely
independent sources. I consider it unlikely that this transition— be it from the oral tradition
or from another script— should have occurred only once and that all the manuscripts in a
speciic script should therefore be traced back to this prototype. In the present case, it is after
310
310 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
all far more likely that the manuscript tradition of the Mahābhārata that has come down to
us in a speciic script goes back to multiple, independent sources.” Ibid., 128– 29.
342 “When the Schriftartprämisse lose their place in the tool-b ox of Indological textual criticism,
the classiication of manuscripts must be placed on a new foundation. It appears logical to
focus initially on the manuscripts of individual regions. In particular, the relationship of the
Newari manuscripts to each other, their position in the manuscript tradition of Nepal as well
as of the Mahābhārata as a whole deserve a closer investigation. The conditions for this are
given by the work of the Nepal- German Manuscript Preservation Project.” Ibid., 130.
343 “In particular, Sukthankar’s classiication is placed in question by Ñ4: (1) it is shorter than the
textus simplicior constituted by him [sic], without standing in a demonstrable relationship to it;
(2) it fulills many of Sukthankar’s criteria for his constitution of the hyparchetype ν discussed
above; (3) it does not show any traces of contamination; (4) contrary to Sukthankar’s claim
it stands in a closer relationship to only one other Newari manuscript, namely, to Ñ3;
(5) according to Sukthankar’s information, it manifests conformities with the southern recen-
sion that, when they cannot be traced back to contamination, are possibly to be ‘traced back
to an original connection via the lost archetype.’ ” Ibid., 129.
344 See Reinhold Grünendahl, “Post-p hilological Gestures— ‘Deconstructing’ Textual Criticism,”
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 52–5 3, Text Genealogy, Textual Criticism and Editorial
Technique (2009– 10): 27, n. 55: “In my view, a stemma may contribute substantially to what
I consider the ultimate goal, viz., Nachvollziehbarkeit of the editorial process, but it is not a sine
qua non. If it was, Indologists would ind themselves without critical editions of the Sanskrit
epics, where contamination precludes such pretensions (see, e.g., Sukthankar, op. cit. [n. 23],
p. lxxxii and lxxxvi; for general aspects, cf. Timpanaro, op. cit., p. 24). The same holds for
various other ields where serious reservations towards strict stemmatology have been voiced;
see, e.g., J. Hanneder’s edition of Abhinavagupta’s Mālinīślokavārttika 1.1– 399 (Groningen
1998, p. 40– 45), and the Groningen edition of the Skandapurāṇa by R. Adriaensen et al.
(Vol. 1. Groningen 1998, p. 39).”
345 In his edition of the Viṣṇudharma, Grünendahl eschews genealogical analysis for a
classiication of the manuscripts into the meliores and the deteriores. On pages 20– 21 of the
edition, he draws up a table, listing whether manuscripts feature certain passages. If a manu-
script does not feature a given passage he enters a “–” sign before it; if it does he enters a “+”
sign. If it repeats the passage, he enters an “r” (“repetition”); if it features it in another place
he enters an “o” (“order changed”). Finally he also uses three other annotations: “m” (“mar-
ginal insertion”), “d” (“common defect”) and “≠” (“divergence”). He prefaces the table with
the words: “the interrelationship of the manuscripts can best be determined on the basis of
variants comprising more than one pāda. With few exceptions that give convincing proof of
a (more or less) direct dependence of individual manuscripts, smaller units hardly ever aford
assistance in forming a picture as clear as circumstances would allow. The following table
records the major variants of Adhyāyas 1–4 3. The conclusions drawn from it have been ver-
iied by also checking Adhyāyas 67 and 102– 105 (some 420 verse altogether).” Based on this
table, he arrives at the following tripartite classiication: (1) Group I, which has “N6 and N3 at
its centre and Ñ4 and N9 as gradually absenting associates [?] ”; (2) Group II, which “clusters
around N5 and N2, which are very intimately linked”; and (3) Group III, which “consists of
the Devanāgarī-m anuscripts.” Grünendahl, ed., Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ: Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u
Part 1, 22– 23. The problem with this approach is that whether manuscripts contain or do not
contain speciic passages is no guide to their iliation. Grünendahl does not examine their
readings. Indeed, he appears unaware of the distinction between a signiicant error, a trivial
error and a coincident error. He also appears not to know the distinction between horizontal
and vertical transmission or that additional verses could most likely be transmitted through
comparison, and do not mean that the two manuscripts featuring those verses were either
copied from each other or constitute a “version.” His reconstruction is not stemmatic, and
does not pretend to restore an archetype, though it presumably aims at an earlier state of the
311
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 311
tradition, since he notes, “the bulk of the readings of Group I, as well as its predominance
over the lacunae of Group II, is supported by another branch of tradition, i.e. Group III (cf.
above). Therefore I have considered their far- reaching agreement as ofering the irmest basis
for the present edition” and “In case of divergency [sic] between the two, I have generally
preferred the readings of Group I. However, concerning its insertions, the evidence of Group
III, corroborated by Group II and independent sources (citations, parallel versions), proves
to be superior to that of Group I.” Ibid., 26. Actually, his edition represents a completely
new text. It aspires neither to idelity to the original work nor to one of its witnesses, but
randomly combines readings from diferent sources (cf. his comment “As against that the
variants of other manuscripts had to be regarded as the last resort in those few cases, when
the two constitutive groups [sic] ofered no acceptable alternative”; ibid.). with only the
most supericial avowal of the principle of critical reconstruction. Gyula Wojtilla, review of
Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ. Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u, Part 1 Adhyāyas1– 43, by Reinhold Grünendahl,
Acta Orientalia Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 39, no. 2/3 (1985): 393 is therefore incorrect to
call Grünendahl’s Viṣn ̣udharmā a “critical edition.”
346 At 1.14.5b, Ñ1.3 and Ñ4 read pitāmahasute, while Ñ2 reads prajāpatisute. Grünendahl would
reprint the reading of Ñ1.3.4, corroborated by T1.2, G4–6 and M, but, in fact, Ñ2 alone
preserves the correct reading, attested in K0–4 , V1, B1–5 , Da, Dn, D1–7 and G1–3 .
Grünendahl could not know this without conducting a recensio of the entire tradition. In fact,
he could not even know that T1.2, G4– 6 and M support Ñ1.3.4’s reading. Alternatively,
he could print Ñ4’s readings throughout, but Ñ4 does not always preserve the original.
At 1.16.3c, it reads abhūt; Ñ1 and Ñ2 have adho bhūmeḥ, while Ñ3 has antarbhūme. All other
manuscripts except D5 (which reads bhūmau cāpi) have adho bhūmeḥ.
347 Leonardi, “Il testo come ipotesi,” 8.
348 Ibid., 11.
349 Ibid., 12.
350 Grünendahl evidently does not consider contamination a problem except when it afects other
editors. In his edition of the Viṣṇudharma, he notes the “degree of contamination is consid-
erable” and “the material does not lend itself to the clear- cut determination of a stemma,”
but this does not prevent him from reconstructing a presumed original. Grünendahl, ed.,
Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ: Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u Part 1, 22 and 3.
351 Leonardi, “Il testo come ipotesi,” 9.
352 Ibid., 7.
353 Ibid., 8.
354 Ibid., 12.
355 See Dembowski, “The ‘French’ Tradition of Textual Philology,” 531: “While the Bedierist
critique successfully dealt with the excesses of restorative and interventionist practices in tex-
tual criticism— or, more speciically, in the establishment of the ‘critical text’—i t also dimin-
ished the role of editing in general. In stressing the role of the base manuscript, this critique
often ignored the rest of the manuscript tradition. The great successes of the CFMA series
in practice conirmed, so to speak, the validity of the one- manuscript method and made
any emendation, except that of the most obvious errors, somehow illegitimate. While we
are most unlikely ever to return to the practices of a ‘critical’— that is to say, composite and
restorative— text, I believe that the ideal of the critical edition itself should be maintained
and redeined.”
356 Curiously for someone who commits manifold errors, Grünendahl is a passionate spokes-
person for textual criticism. He sees himself as defending philology against those with no
understanding of the art. See Grünendahl, “Post- philological Gestures—‘ Deconstructing’
Textual Criticism,” 17– 28 especially ibid., 27, n. 55: “In my view, a stemma may contribute
substantially to what I consider the ultimate goal, viz., Nachvollziehbarkeit of the editorial pro-
cess.” Witzel likewise notes that “Grünendahl (2008: 11) rightly stresses that a critical edition
has the general goal of the Nachvollziehbarkeit, that is, the replication by readers of the editorial
312
312 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
process,” even though his sole edition is a single- manuscript edition based on conjecture.
Michael Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology and in European Philology during the 19th
and 20th Centuries,” Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies 21, no. 3 (2014): 21.
357 Grünedahl’s prior work scarcely inspires conidence in his proposed edition (whose publica-
tion we still await). The sole full-l ength review of Grünendahl’s edition of the Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ
that appeared is critical. “Grünendahl indicates that instead all his energies have gone into
the editing of the text; I wish that I could therefore give it a warmer welcome. However, it
contains too many discrepancies to inspire conidence. The table of major variants (pp. 20–
21) lists 44 items on which he bases his view of the interrelations of the manuscripts; in a
quarter of them the manuscripts listed are at variance with the critical apparatus, while a
further two are wrongly numbered (for 4.49cd–5 1ab and 52ab read 4.48cd– 50ab and 51ab).
Although his division of the manuscripts into three main groups looks broadly correct, the
necessary corrections to his table might modify the picture. His irst two groups contain the
bulk of the Newārī manuscripts, which comprise 10 out of the 15 manuscripts used (a tribute
to the success of the Nepal German Manuscript Preservation Project in making accessible
such material), while the third contains the Devanāgarī manuscripts. N8 ‘stands between
Group I and Group II’ but is assigned overall to Group II; however its alignment with Group
I in *(33), *(34) and *(36) shown in the table is contradicted by the critical apparatus. These
three are among the passages which he regards as inserts by Group I, on which in general
he bases his text, despite its presenting a slightly longer text than Group II. However, on
three occasions (1.61ed, 7.29ef and 25.31ef) he retains a line found in Group I but absent
in Group II and B (the sole Bengali manuscript) where the reduction of a 3- line stanza to a
regular one seems preferable both by sense and meter. He regards B as independent, though
noting ‘a rather close relation between B and N2’ in subsequent adhyayas, but even in this
part of the text the evidence for its alignment at least with Group II is greater than he gives,
since *(20) does not occur in B and 7.29ef (cf. above) does, according to the critical appa-
ratus but contrary to the table and p. 25. N1, which he recognizes as having a ‘particular
ainity with N5’ in addition to its eclectic character, seems in fact to be quite possibly derived
from that manuscript with extensive additions from elsewhere. On his own evidence, DL is
so derivative from DB that it should in general have been discounted. Finally, he notes the
existence of South Indian manuscripts but was unable to utilise them— a potentially serious
lacuna. A dependable critical edition of this text would be a real asset. It is regrettable that
so many indications of carelessness, if nothing more, call in question the reliability of the
present work.” John L. Brockington, review of Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ: Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u,
Part 1: Adhyāyas 1– 43, by Reinhold Grünendahl, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain
and Ireland 2 (1984): 291–9 2. Shorter book notices are in J. W. de Jong, review of Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ.
Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u. Part 1, Adhyāyas 1– 43, by Reinhold Grünendahl, Indo- Iranian
Journal 29, no. 1 (1986): 64–6 5; J. W. de Jong, review of Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ. Precepts for the Worship
of Viṣn ̣u. Part 2, Adhyāyas 44– 81. Part 3, Adhyāyas 82–1 05 (with a Pāda-I ndex of Adhyāyas 1– 105),
by Reinhold Grünendahl, Indo- Iranian Journal 36, no. 2 (1993): 138– 39; Hartmut Bobzin,
review of Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ: Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u, by Reinhold Grünendahl, Zeitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 135, no. 1 (1985): 203– 4; and Hartmut Bobzin, review of
Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ: Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u, by Reinhold Grünendahl, Zeitschrift der Deutschen
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 136, no. 3 (1986): 658– 59.
358 For a paradigmatic example of this contrast, see Heinrich von Stietencron, “Editor’s
Introduction,” in Angelika Malinar, Rājavidyā: Das königliche Wissen um Herrschaft und Verzicht
(Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1996), 6– 7. Stietencron writes: “The analytical thinking
of Western scholars trained in historical and philological methodology stood in contrast
to the traditional Indian commentators. The latter not only generously harmonized all the
disjunctions in the text but, above all, attempted to recognise in particular passages of the text
their own philosophical and theological concepts. This was done in order to secure for them-
selves the divine authority of Kṛṣṇa. In this manner, several philosophical schools developed
313
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 313
Gītā interpretations of their own— a spectrum that has been further expanded through
politically motivated, modern interpretations since the beginning of the Indian indepen-
dence struggle.”
359 Jewish scholars have long recognized the motivations underlying German scholars’ devel-
opment of new “critical” methods of biblical scholarship. Writing in 1935, Benno Jacob
asked: “Has anybody considered what share in the immense sufering brought recently on
mankind and on the Jewish people in particular has to be accredited to the modern German-
Protestant science of the Old Testament?” Benno Jacob, The Jewish Quarterly Review 26 (1935–
36): 189, cited in Alan T. Levenson, The Making of the Modern Jewish Bible: How Scholars in
Germany, Israel, and America Transformed an Ancient Text (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleield,
2016), 66. Solomon Schechter is even more radical: “my real sufering began later in life, when
I emigrated from Roumania to so- called civilized countries and found there what I might call
the Higher anti- Semitism, which burns the soul though it leaves the body unhurt. The genesis
of this Higher anti-S emitism is partly […] contemporaneous with the genesis of the so-c alled
Higher criticism of the Bible. Wellhausen’s Prolegomena and History are teeming with aperçus
full of venom against Judaism, and you cannot wonder that he was rewarded by one of the
highest orders which the Prussian Government had to bestow. Afterwards Harnack entered
the arena with his ‘Wesen des Christenthums,’ in which he showed not so much his hatred
as his ignorance of Judaism. But this Higher anti-S emitism has now reached its climax when
every discovery of recent years is called to bear witness against us and to accuse us of spir-
itual larceny.” Solomon Schechter, “Higher Criticism—H igher Anti- Semitism,” in Seminary
Address and Other Papers (Cincinnati, OH: Ark Publishing, 1915), 36– 37 (Schechter’s italics).
We are in full agreement with them as to the specious nature of historical criticism, which in
Mahābhārata studies as in biblical studies was applied with the sole intent of delegitimizing
traditional communities of the book.
360 Grünendahl’s ideas of classiication have their source neither in textual criticism nor in biology,
because editors know contamination has the efect of homogenizing the tradition. In contrast,
the minor errors introduced into the text each time it is copied are responsible for the diferen-
tiation of manuscripts. Rather, these ideas appear to derive from nineteenth-c entury anthro-
pology of race: his attempted classiication relied on distinguishing the manuscripts into two
groups— the pure and the impure. The pure manuscripts constituted a family among them-
selves and no further test of belonging was required than to show that a manuscript did not
possess the characteristics of the impure group. In contrast, the impure copies played no role in
reconstructing the archetype, and hence could be discarded. In his view, the text’s transmission
occurred like the handing down of a perfect copy, while its changes were always attributed to
an external source. According to him, if not for contamination, the pure tradition would not
undergo corruption: its text would descend unchanged from source to apograph and from this
source to a further apograph in perpetuity. This was the real reason typological classiication
could substitute for genealogical: for him, the better manuscripts so obviously constituted one
“family” and the worse ones another, that he considered it unnecessary to prove their iliation.
Indeed, the copy was no less pure than its source: it never developed any errors unless contami-
nated with an impure source. Once contaminated, it ceased to produce pure copies and set forth
only the impure tradition. We encounter a similar notion in a distant ield where genealogical
relations were also of concern: ideas of racial purity, as found in the work of Hans F. K. Günther
(1891– 1968) and later formalized in the Nuremberg Race Laws of 1935. In a manner reminis-
cent of Grünendahl’s idea of transmission, these laws held that as long as extrinsic characteristics
did not supervene through the much-r eviled Rassenschande (racial pollution), the individual would
reveal his true origin. The absence of speciic characteristics such as a Jewish nose were con-
sidered positive evidence for the individual’s descent, because in parts unafected by contamina-
tion this absence permitted the phenotype—t he blond Nordic individual— to shine through.
Likewise Grünendahl views the absence of certain characteristics as evidence of an original
ainity, because, unlike additions, which can be transmitted through contamination, the absence
314
314 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
of these characteristics can never be shared with impure specimens. The reference is to Hans
F. K. Günther, Kleine Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes, 3rd edn. (Munich: J. F. Lehmann, 1934).
361 Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,” 34, n. 136. The complete passage reads: “Note
Grünendahl, 1993, on the branches of Mbh. MSS, going beyond the facile division into
various script traditions.” Elsewhere he notes: “This is reminiscent of the branches of
Mahābhārata MSS, and perhaps due to the same reasons: use of divergent local scripts. See
however Grünendahl, 1993, who goes beyond the division into various script traditions.”
Ibid., 26, n. 88.
362 “But this still does not explain the general failure to try for a stemma if more than a lim-
ited number of MSS were available. (An exception obviously is the— ultimately futile—
Winternitz- Sukthankar undertaking of establishing a stemma for Mahābhārata MSS early
in the 20th century.” Ibid., 55.
363 Ibid., 17. The reference is to Grünendahl’s “Post-p hilological Gestures—‘ Deconstructing’
Textual Criticism.”
364 Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,” 33 (Witzel’s italics): “the many original Bardic
compositions underlying the Mahābhārata, as well as its crystallization, remained unstable and
open to additions— especially in the southern tradition. This is quite diferent from saying
that the text as a whole was luid from its Bardic beginnings down to Gupta times, and then
onward to the testimony of the late medieval MSS. Instead, we clearly have an early crys-
tallization and later, local recensions.” And for his defense of critical editions, ibid., 20– 25
and 47– 50.
365 Georg von Simson, Mahābhārata: Die Große Erzählung von den Bhāratas (Berlin: Verlag der
Weltreligionen, 2011), 688.
366 “Reinhold Grünendahl, Zur Klassiizierung der Mahābhārata- Handschriften, in: Studien zur Indologie
und Buddhismuskunde. Festgabe <. . .> für Heinz Bechert, Indica et Tibetica 22, Bonn 1993,
S. 101– 130.” Ibid.
367 Walter Slaje, “The Mokṣopāya Project,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 77,
no. 1/ 4 (1996): 210, n. 7.
368 Johannes Bronkhorst, “Archetypes and Bottlenecks: Relections on the Textual History of
the Mahābhārata,” in Pūrvāparaprajñābhinandam: East and West, Past and Present. Indological and
Other Essays in Honour of Klaus Karttunen, ed. Bertil Tikkanen and Albion M. Butters, Studia
Orientalia 110 (Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society, 2011), 47.
369 His comments, however, are collected here for convenience in the original: “GRÜNENDAHL
und andere haben gezeigt, dass im Bereich der niederen Textkritik im MBh noch nicht das
letzte Wort gesprochen ist. Die Erkenntnisse dieser Kritik an der ‘Ersten Kritischen Edition,’
denn man darf nicht vergessen, dass SUKTHANKAR sie ganz bewusst so genannt hat,
sollen auch in diese Arbeit einliessen und ihrerseits, wo die Beleglage dies aufdrängt, erweitert
werden.” Bigger, Balaram̄ a im Mahab̄ har̄ata, 15. “Für die Hs. Ñ4 vgl. SUKTHANKAR
(1938) und GRÜNENDAHL (1993b).” Ibid., 115, n. 24. “Zur Sonderstellung von D5 vgl.
GRÜNENDAHL (1993b), insbesondere S. 116–1 8.” Ibid., 115, 25. “Will man die Menge
der in der Kritischen Edition verwendeten Hss. zu eigentlichen Hss.-T raditionen ordnen,
muss man sich über Unterscheidungskriterien Gedanken machen. Dies taten bereits die
Herausgeber der Kritischen Edition selbst, allerdings nicht im Hinblick auf die Untersuchung
der einzelnen Traditionen, sondern um die Qualität der einzelnen Hss. festzulegen. Das
Hauptkriterium ist hierbei dasjenige, das GRÜNENDAHL später die Schriftartenprämisse
genannt hat. Sie beinhaltet die Theorie, dass sich Traditionen innerhalb eines bestimmten
Schriftgebietes leichter ausbreiten als über die Grenzen dieses Schriftgebietes hinaus. Damit
können Hss., die in der gleichen Schrift geschrieben sind, zu einer Gruppe zusammengefasst
werden. Die Schriftartenprämisse ersetzt für die Herausgeber der Kritischen Edition das
Stemma.” Ibid., 118. “GRÜNENDAHL hat meines Erachtens überzeugend gezeigt, dass
die Schriftartenprämisse in dieser Form nicht haltbar ist. Sie lässt sich aber andererseits auch
nicht völlig von der Hand weisen. Wohl muss man annehmen, wie GRÜNENDAHL betont,
315
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 315
dass nicht ‘alle in einer bestimmten Schrift vorliegenden Hss. […] auf […] einen Prototyp
zurückzuführen wären. […] Meiner Meinung nach lässt sich die Schriftartenprämisse nach wie
vor als ein erster Wegweiser im Dschungel der Hss. verwenden, auch wenn die strenge Trennung
zwischen den Schriftarten in der Folge einer diferenzierteren Sicht weichen muss.” Ibid., 119.
“Ñ4 scheint aufgrund der Schriftartenprämisse nicht zu dieser Gruppe zu passen. Diese hat
aber, wie ich in Kapitel 4.2.1 dargelegt habe, mit den Ausführungen GRÜNENDAHLS ihre
Unanfechtbarkeit eingebüsst. Ñ4 könnte also mit Ś1 und K0– 3 verwandt sein und mit ihnen
zusammen eine Rezension bilden.” Ibid., 121. “So far, we know nothing about the develop-
ment of the MBh after the normative redaction; there may even have been later redactions cov-
ering only parts of the tradition. To sort their MSS for the edition, SUKTHANKAR and his
followers used what GRÜNENDAHL (1993b) called the premise of scripts (Schriftartenprämisse).
GRÜNENDAHL showed that this idea, namely that all MSS written in a certain script belong
together, is not tenable, but it may still be useful as a irst criterion.” Ibid., 164.
370 Oskar von Hinüber, “Der vernachlässigte Wortlaut. Die Problematik der Herausgabe
buddhistischer Sanskrit- Texte, Zur Überlieferung, Kritik und Edition alter und neuerer
Text,” in Kleine Schriften, Teil I, ed. Harry Falk and Walter Slaje (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,
2008), 435.
371 Reinhold Grünendahl, “Zur Textkritik des Nārāyaṇīya,” in Nārāyan ̣ıȳa- Studien, ed.
Peter Schreiner, Purāṇa Research Publications Tübingen 6 (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,
1997), 30– 74.
372 Von Hinüber, “Der vernachlässigte Wortlaut,” 435, n. 19 (the references in square brackets
are Hinüber’s and refer to footnotes in his text).
373 Ibid., 436.
374 Ibid., 435.
375 Oskar von Hinüber, review of The Sanskrit Epics, by John Brockington, Wiener Zeitschrift für die
Kunde Südasiens 46 (2002): 268.
376 James L. Fitzgerald, “Mahābhārata,” in Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism vol. 2, ed. Knut A.
Jacobsen, Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar and Vasudha Narayanan (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2010);
Brill Online, 2015; http:// referenceworks.brillonline.com/ entries/ brill- s- encyclopedia- of-
hinduism/ mahabharata- BEHCOM_ 2020040 (accessed September 23, 2015).
377 Ibid.
378 James L. Fitzgerald, “General Introduction: The Translation Resumed,” in James L.
Fitzgerald, trans., The Mahābhārata, vol. 7:11. The Book of the Women; 12. The Book of Peace,
Part One (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004), xvi. This paragraph also occurs
verbatim (with an inserted “lectiones diiciliores” in parentheses after “diicult readings”) in
James L. Fitzgerald, “Making Yudhiṣṭhira the King: The Dialectics and Politics of Violence
in the Mahābhārata,” Rocznik Orientalistyczny LIV, no. 1 (2001): 64, n. 17.
379 Sheldon Pollock, “Sanskrit Literary Culture from the Inside Out,” in Literary Cultures in
History: Reconstructions from South Asia, ed. Sheldon Pollock (Berkeley and Los Angeles and
London: University of California Press, 2003), 110– 11.
380 Sheldon Pollock, The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and Power in
Premodern India (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2006), 229.
381 Pollock, “Sanskrit Literary Culture from the Inside Out,” 111, n. 155.
382 Pollock, The Language of the Gods in the World of Men, 229, n. 11.
383 See Sheldon Pollock, “Towards a Political Philology: D. D. Kosambi and Sanskrit,” Economic
and Political Weekly, D. D. Kosambi Centenary Volume (2008): 52– 59; Sheldon Pollock,
“Future Philology? The Fate of a Soft Science in a Hard World,” Critical Inquiry 35, no. 4,
The Fate of Disciplines (2009): 931–6 1 and Sheldon Pollock, “Kritische Philologie,” trans.
Brigitte Schöning, Geschichte der Germanistik 45/ 46 (2014): 5– 12. In “Kritische Philologie,”
the term is deined as follows: “Philology becomes critical when it grasps its own historicity,
constructedness, and changeability; when it understands that it is not and cannot be a local
form of knowledge that passes as universal under the mask of science, but must be part
316
316 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
of a global—a nd, by preference, a globally comparative—d iscipline, seeking global—a nd
by preference, globally comparative— knowledge; when it realizes that understanding by
what means and according to what criteria thinkers in past eras have grounded their truth
claims must be part of our own understanding of what truth is, and a key dimension of our
knowledge politics.” Pollock, “Kritische Philologie,” 5 (the English is from Pollock’s original
English text uploaded at: www.columbia.edu/ cu/ mesaas/ faculty/ directory/ pollock_ pub/
Kritische%20Philologie%20(+%20English%20original).pdf, accessed February 26, 2017).
See also ibid., 5– 6 (Pollock’s italics): “In 2004 while still a professor at The University of
Chicago I organized a workshop on ‘critical philology,’ inventing the term—a s I thought
I had done—a s a kind of provocative tautology: if philology has from its origins been con-
ceived of as a critical practice— in the dictionary sense of an objective analysis and evalua-
tion of something in order to form a judgment—i t had ceased to be critical in the relexive
way I felt to be essential to its continued viability. It had abandoned its large and ambitious
theoretical aspirations, indeed, its leadership among the human sciences, and had become
a completely routinized, self- complacent, and—t he most deadly sin of all, in America at
least— boring. Its celebrated rigor had turned into rigor mortis. What was needed was a
new philology that really was critical.” And for the related “critical classicism” see Sheldon
Pollock, “Crisis in the Classics,” Social Research: An International Quarterly, special issue titled
India’s World 78, no. 1 (2011): 21– 48.
384 “If philology is the discipline of making sense of texts, and making sense of texts is making
sense of life, what does making sense of texts actually consist of? Answering this question
would seem to call for some heavyweight philological theory, but what I want to ofer instead
is rather lightweight autobiography: a relection on how I myself have come to reconcile what
for me were seriously conlicting modes of interpretation. I was trained to a very hard histor-
icism, but also, as a Sanskritist, heir to a brilliant tradition of reception with its own strong
claims to knowledge. Over time, I have also been tempered by a critical hermeneutics of
understanding and a neopragmatist conception of truth. This autobiography has prompted
me to conceive of a philological practice that orients itself simultaneously along three planes
of a text’s existence: its moment of genesis; its reception over time; and its presence to my
own subjectivity.” Sheldon Pollock, “Philology in Three Dimensions,” Postmedieval: A Journal
of Medieval Cultural Studies 5, no. 4 (2014): 399. And see ibid., 409: “Learning to read in three
dimensions, which is the autobiography of my own philology, is learning to practice a deli-
cate balancing act that requires both training and untraining. The act is especially diicult
for hardcore historicists such as myself, but real historicism requires not only consistency but
history.”
385 Sheldon Pollock, “What Was Philology in Sanskrit?” in World Philology, ed. Sheldon Pollock,
Benjamin A. Elman and Ku- ming Kevin Chang (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
2015), 136.
386 Not to mention historical self-a wareness. For Adluri’s criticisms, see Vishwa Adluri, review
of World Philology, ed. Sheldon Pollock, Benjamin A. Elman and Ku-m ing Kevin Chang,
American Historical Review 121, no. 3 (2016): 908– 10.
387 Pollock, “What Was Philology in Sanskrit?” 136.
388 Alf Hiltebeitel, “The Nārāyan ̣ıȳa and the Early Reading Communities of the Mahābhārata,” in
Between the Empires: Society in India 300 BCE to 400 CE, ed. Patrick Olivelle (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2006), 231– 32.
389 John L. Brockington, The Sanskrit Epics (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1998), 58 (italics added).
390 Besides Madeleine Biardeau, whose work is cited later, some of Hiltebeitel’s early studies—
for example, the article “Two Kṛṣṇas on One Chariot: Upaniṣadic Imagery and Epic
Mythology,” History of Religions 24, no. 1 (1984): 1– 26— are insightful. In contrast, where
he seeks to assimilate himself to the German historical paradigm— quoting, for example,
Grünendahl, Bigger, Bronkhorst and Witzel— his work goes astray. This attempted assimi-
lation is in striking contrast to his criticisms of German Mahābhārata studies in “Kṛṣṇa in
317
CONFUSIONS REGARDING CLASSIFICATION 317
the Mahābhārata: A Bibliographical Essay,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 60
(1979): 65– 110.
391 Nearly three- quarters of a century ago, V. S. Sukthankar prophetically observed: “It would be
a rather hazardous conjecture to suppose that such a thing might perchance happen also to
the works of the critics of the Mahābhārata, for within less than half a century the lucubrations
of these wiseacres have approached perilously near the limbo of oblivion, from which they
are periodically snatched out by the industrious pedagogue and the curious antiquarian.”
V. S. Sukthankar, On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata (Bombay: Asiatic Society, 1957), 29–3 0
(Sukthankar’s italics).
392 “The learned philologist of the present day feels a deal of hesitation in answering this question,
which to the unsophisticated Indian would present no diiculty whatsoever. If questioned,
the latter will no doubt promptly and conidently answer that the Mahābhārata is a divine work
recounting the war- like deeds of his ancestors, the god- like heroes of a past age, the unrigh-
teous Kauravas on the one hand and the righteous Pāṇḍavas aided by Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa on the
other,— of the Golden Age when gods used to mingle with men, when the people were much
better of, much happier, than they are today. And the illiterate Indian is right, to a very large
extent, as he far more often is than his ‘educated’ brother. For, the Mahābhārata, as the poem
itself tells us, arises out of the following question of Janamejaya addressed to the great Ṛṣi
Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa on the occasion of the snake sacriice (1.54.19): kathaṃ samabhavad
bhedas teṣām akliṣtạ kārin ̣ām | tac ca yuddhaṃ kathaṃ vṛttam bhūtāntakaran ̣aṃ mahat || ‘How arose the
quarrel among those men of unblemished deeds? How occurred that great war which was
the cause of the destruction of so many beings?’ ” Ibid., 32– 33.
393 See Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxv: “We accordingly ind that he [Nīlakanṭ̣ha] occasionally
mentions (in about 125 places) variant readings and additional passages found in diferent pro-
vincial versions (most of which can be identiied among the readings of the manuscripts com-
prising our critical apparatus), and cites (as a rule, without naming the source) the explanations
given by other scholiasts—i nformation, scanty though it is, yet of immense interest and
value for the history of the received text.” In his article on the Mahābhārata commentators,
Sukthankar emphasizes: “The study of these commentaries must be now taken up more seri-
ously, not so much for the sake of the explanations contained in the commentaries—t hough
even the glosses of a commentator like Devabodha are extremely important—a s for the
readings and pāṭhāntaras recorded in them; because, most of the commentaries are older—
some very much older—t han our manuscripts; and therefore the documentation of these
readings by the commentators takes us back a stage further in our investigation of the history
of the epic.” Vishnu S. Sukthankar, “Epic Studies V: Notes on Mahābhārata Commentators,”
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 17, no. 2 (1935– 36): 185– 86.
394 Madeleine Biardeau, Hinduism: The Anthropology of a Civilization, trans. Richard Nice
(Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1989), 170, n. 1.
395 Biardeau’s irst work, Théorie de la connaissance et philosophie de la parole dans le brahmanisme classique
(The Hague: Mouton, 1964), was the outcome of her studies with Brahmans in Pune. It is
testimony to her assimilation of their thought systems and commentary. For her applica-
tion of these insights to the Mahābhārata, see the volumes Madeleine Biardeau, Études de
mythologie hindoue I: Cosmogonies purān ̣iques (Paris: École française d’Extrême-O rient, 1981) and
Madeleine Biardeau, Études de mythologie hindoue II: Bhakti et avatāra (Pondichéry: Publications
de l’École Française d’Extrême Orient, 1994).
318
The prevalent system of classiication: Hans F. K. Günther’s identiication of individuals
of the “Nordic” type—in clockwise order, from Mecklenburg-Strelitz, Niedersachsen and
Munich (front-facing and proile).
Source: Reproduced from Günther, Kleine Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes, 3rd edn., 23.
319
CONCLUSION: TEXTUAL CRITICISM
AND INDOLOGY
There are no new or old philologies, only good ones, based on long study, and mediocre, hasty ones, not supported
by adequate training.
— Paolo Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method
This now completes the second half of our two-p art argument that, considered as an aca-
demic discipline, German Indology fails to meet even basic canons of objectivity, truth and
method.1 In the irst half, we argued that although Indologists claim a superior critical con-
sciousness and decry all other approaches as nonscientiic, their work shares little in common
with textual criticism.2 Their work cannot claim the title of philology at all; it is rather a
mixture of dogmatic assertion and Protestant anti- traditional, anticlerical sentiments
masquerading as rigorous textual scholarship. Its true antecedents, we argued, lay not in
the work of editors and textual critics such as Karl Lachmann, Hermann Kantorowicz,
Paul Maas and Eduard Fraenkel, but rather in the work of eighteenth- century Protestant
theologians Johann Salomo Semler, Georg Lorenz Baur and Ferdinand Christian Baur.3
As we analyzed in our irst book, The Nay Science, it is this combination of a noncrit-
ical polemical method with Romantic fantasies of the Aryans that largely explains why
these scholars to this day tend to reject stemmatic methods in favor of a priori theories
of the Mahābhārata textual transmission.4 It also explains why scholars from Edward
W. Hopkins to Georg von Simson and Andreas Bigger thought to reconstruct the earliest
epic using circular methods such as identifying supposed Ks ̣atriya passages or themes
in the epic or a range of equally circular criteria such as the presumed style and meter
of the earliest epic.5 But the claim that Indologists as a rule had little understanding of
textual criticism could, at this stage of the argument, only be advanced as a promissory
note and not fulilled within the conines of the irst book. Hence the need for this book.
The present volume now fully redeems that claim: by tracing how Bigger and Reinhold
Grünendahl, though they constantly belabored the language of “textual criticism,” had
only the barest understanding of the principles involved, we have exposed Indology’s
claims to being a science and, above all, to being a rigorously textual science. Not only
Bigger and Grünendahl but also, by extension, all of the scholars who cited their work
proved incapable of discriminating between rigorously stemmatic arguments and those
that only had the appearance of being critical.
Yet even today, whenever Indologists look to make a case for their discipline, they still
invoke the comparison with classical philology.6 Grünendahl, for instance, was not even
clear about the fact that if the editorial process aims at the reconstruction of the best and
320
320 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
most archaic text, then the true basis of classiication of a manuscript must be its text, and
yet he saw himself in the role of having to defend philology against its “post-p hilological”
critics.7 Yet so far, Indologists have succeeded in delecting criticisms of their discipline by
portraying the critics as little more than amateurs, outsiders to the discipline motivated by
resentment and envy to bring down a science that exceeds their comprehension.8
But if we set aside this narrative of initiates into and adepts of a highly evolved canon
of method, on one hand, and parvenu intellectuals, on the other, we gain a new perspec-
tive on the history of the discipline.9 We begin to see that the problem is not the contrast
between an intricate method and its isolated and insuiciently appreciated practitioners
but that the idea of method has itself become a hurdle to the examination and audit of the
discipline. What are these methods? What is their history? Do they appear fully formed,
or must they constantly be subjected to calibration? Who authored these methods and
why? Whose interests do they serve?
Every time Indologists have been called upon to legitimate their discipline, they
have invoked the comparison with classical philology, even though, as we have seen, as
a rule they had only the haziest notions of philology. Michael Witzel, for instance, lets
the story of Indology begin with Richard Bentley (1662–1 742) and F. A. Wolf (1759–
1824), though the link with Indology is tenuous at best. He writes that “diferent from his
contemporaries Rousseau (1712–1 778) and Herder (1774–1 803), Wolf deined classical
philology as the ‘knowledge of human nature as exhibited in antiquity,’ that was to be
studied in its writings, art, and other forms of ‘national thought,’ ”10 but does not explain
the relevance to Indology.11 He writes that “his [F. A. Wolf’s] method inspired the crit-
ical approach of the 19th century in analyzing ancient texts. He is often regarded as the
founder of modern philology,” but the implied argument, namely, that Indology belongs
within the tradition of “modern philology” inaugurated by Wolf, only draws force from
the tacit assumption of a contrast between “modern” modes of inquiry and traditional
ones.12 Citing an unnamed author, he notes that “ ‘philology is a Kulturwissenschaft based
on texts,’ the study of a civilization based on its texts,” but does not speciically clarify
wherein the philological nature of this study might lie or how a philological preoccupa-
tion with texts might difer from other kinds of preoccupations with texts.13 He writes
that “Philological study comprehends both the investigation of the available written and
oral texts of a civilization and employs a range of tools (Hilfswissenschaften) necessary for
understanding these texts; these tools deal with the realia met with in the texts and they
range from archaeology to writing systems, and from astronomy to zoology,”14 but this
only tells us that he understands philology as the historical study of past epochs and does
not clarify wherein the speciically philological nature of this study might lie.15
As with Grünendahl, the wide-r anging focus of Witzel’s article (within the space of 80
pages he discourses, in sequence, on: “Textual criticism”; “Renaissance and Classicism”;
“A new stimulus: comparative linguistics”; “Philology”; “Manuscripts”; “Stemmatic
method”; “Lectio diicilior”; “Contamination and its neglect”; “Stemma and arche-
type outside classical European texts”; “ ‘Discovery’ of India: Sanskrit languages and
the European languages”; “Commentaries”; “Epic texts”; “Other approaches to (non-)
European texts”; “Extra-C lassical use of textual criticism”; “Ethnology/A nthropology”;
“Mutual inluences”; “Critique of the stemmatic method versus lack of critical editions
321
CONCLUSION 321
in Indology”; “Criticism”; “Archetype”; “Abundance of Indian MSS”; “Continuing use-
fulness of the stemmatic method”; “Recent inds of 2000-y ear- old MSS”; “The way
forward in Indian textual studies: critical editions”; “Commentaries (again), variants
and editing”; “Types of editions, their critique”; “Oral and written traditions”; “History
of writing”; “The scribes”; “Commentary and other testimonials”; “Oral and musical
traditions”; “Other necessary prerequisites for editing and interpreting texts”; “Computer
editing and stemma generation”; “Methods”; “Precursors”; “ ‘New Stemmatics’ ”; and
“Prospects”— all of the sections are general; not one of them would convince a spe-
cialist) is meant to detract attention from the fact that he knows almost nothing of textual
criticism.
Thus, Witzel repeatedly confounds historical criticism with textual criticism, arguing
that “the early 19th century saw the establishment of both the modern method of histor-
ical and textual criticism and of the development of historical comparative linguistics,”16
even though historical criticism and textual criticism have quite distinct genealogies and
frequently pursue opposing aims. He writes that “The stemmatic method was largely
developed by Lachmann. He developed the principle of recensio, that is the study of the
received MSS of a text [?], the establishment of their ‘family tree’ (stemma), followed by
the edition of the text,”17 even though Lachmann never drew up a stemma and was not
the irst to appreciate the merits of conducting a systematic recensio.18 Witzel claims that
“available MSS usually fall into a number of families, whose ancestor MS may no longer
exist— biologists would call this a ‘bottleneck’ event,”19 even though the constriction in
the tradition is only apparent and not real, being a consequence of the fact that the sur-
viving copies of the text are descended from a single source and not because there was
a real, observable reduction in the number of copies circulating at a certain moment in
time. We already saw in the introduction the importance of not confusing the arche-
type in the sense of an oicial or especially signiicant text (sometimes taken for the
sole exemplar in existence) with a Neo-L achmannian archetype. As Trovato notes, the
archetype in this second sense refers to a manuscript that, “ ‘lacking any “oicial status”
or normativity’ (Timpanaro), is [...] ‘randomly’ identiied by philologists while classifying
witnesses.”20 Witzel, however, thinks the constriction is real, for he writes: “Curiously,
the parallel development in Indian MSS around 1000 CE has not even been noticed by
scholars.”21 Now it would be very curious indeed if there were to be a similar reduction in
the number of copies of any given manuscript circulating in India at a certain moment in
time (we might wonder: what is this strange event that compels the reduction of all man-
uscript traditions— east or west—a t a certain moment in their history to one single exem-
plar?), but, fortunately, the constriction here, as there, is only apparent.22 Only someone
unfamiliar with the principles of textual criticism would think that because all our copies
are descended from a single source, this means there really must have been only one
source, yet Witzel’s work is rife with examples of this error.23
In general, Witzel seems to associate “textual criticism” with the genealogical-r econ-
structive method, but appears not to have quite grasped the principle of how editors
proceed from creating a list of variants to establishing some of those variants as errors.
In his account of how editors reconstruct the reading of the archetype, he notes: “In
other words: irst comes noticing a mistake, and perhaps an inkling of what might be
322
322 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
the solution, all of which is then tested using the various tools and Hilfswissenschaften that
we always use in philology. In this fashion, we can prove our point, or at least, make it a
probable one. More on this, later.”24 It is clear from this account that, in Witzel’s model
of textual criticism, there is no space for “a true, continuous, and systematic recension,”25
much less for genealogical analysis of the relations of iliation between manuscripts.26 His
procedure is not stemmatic at all, since it relies on the editor “noticing” a mistake, which
he immediately proposes redressing by ofering a conjecture.27
For instance, noting that Paippalāda Samḥ itā 8.12.9 reads “idam ̣ kuru cemam̄ ̣ suram̄ ”
in Raghu Vira’s edition, but “idam ̣kodacemam̄ ̣sura”̄ in D. Bhattacharya’s edition and that
“another Orissa variant (MS ma)̄ has: idam ̣ koda- dacema,̄” Witzel proposes that “this is
restored, with minimal emendation to: +udamḳ odañcemam̄ ̣ (udank̇ a/ udañca/ imam̄ )̣ suram̄ ‘o
ladle, scoop up the brandy.’ ”28 As is clear from this example, his method is not actually
stemmatic and he is not interested in deriving any one of the readings from the other. This
makes his comment on the following page—“ We can thus approach a solution by using
the stemmatic method combined with paleography and other Hilfswissenschaften, and if we
can show how the reading of a certain MS has come about (Textgeschichte)”29— even more
puzzling.
In fact, it can be shown of Witzel’s critical edition of the Kaṭha Āranỵ aka that it is not a
critical edition at all.30 For the major part of the text only one manuscript was available; the
critical apparatus is inadequate; the principles followed in the reconstruction are unclear;
much of the text has been “restored according to parallel passages, or even freely so”;31
emendations are not clearly signaled;32 and, most important, the reconstruction is not stem-
matic. He writes that “next to the Tübingen Rc̣ aka (T) that mainly contains KaṭhĀ I and
III, the following manuscripts were available for text constitution, though they only contain
parts of the mantra section (KaṭhĀ I). Ms. Tübingen MaI 396, fols. 274a–2 84b (t ), a part
1
of the Rc̣ aka (T) just mentioned and unfortunately damaged in almost the same fashion,
accented (but not in all Mantras)—P aris, National Library (Bibliothèque Nationale),
Ms. dév. 230, p. 304–3 17 (P), written in modern Śāradā on paper, no accents, dated (17)80
C. E. (or perhaps 1880)— Paris, Ms. dév. 227b, fols. 10 sqq. (P2), written in younger Śāradā
script, on rough ‘country paper,’ accent rests— edition of the Laugāksị Grḥ yasūtra (L) by
M. S. Kaul, vol. II, p. 52– 91 (unfortunately without variant readings, but with Devapāla’s
commentary on the Mantras),”33 but explains neither according to which principle he has
combined the readings of his sources or how he has dealt with variants, if any.34 Perhaps
he simply means he has used the secondary sources to ill in the lacunae in his primary
source. Likewise, he describes the method of reconstruction as follows: “Text in brackets []
has been restored according to parallel passages, or even freely so. However, restoration fre-
quently results with remarkable certainty, due to the ‘inevitability’ of Brāhmanạ style. For
the irst lines of a page of the manuscript that have mostly been broken of, […] has always
been inserted in order to indicate the amount of missing text.”35
In the absence of a stemma, however, the reader has no way of knowing what stage of
the tradition Witzel is reconstructing.36 Without identifying a pattern of conjunctive and
separative errors between the manuscript sources that, as we saw, is key to establishing
iliation, Witzel has no evidence his sources are related. Strictly speaking, each is a codex
unicus. There is no evidence the texts were ever handed down as a whole. Given the
323
CONCLUSION 323
sensitivity of Vedic texts to even slight changes of wording or accent, the logical solution
would have been to produce a scrupulous diplomatic edition, preserving all the features
of the text. Even if Witzel imagines himself as a paleographer dealing with a lost script
rather than a textual critic, his reconstruction remains purely hypothetical.37 In view
of the emerging consensus among textual critics that the reconstructive edition should
respect the integrity of a single manuscript, the idea that the text can be restored “even
freely so” is especially problematic.38
In essence, all Witzel has done is use two partial manuscripts (Paris, Bibliothèque
Nationale, Ms. dév. 230 and 227b) and one edition of a related work (M. S. Kaul’s edition
of the Laugākṣi Gṛhyasūtra) to attempt to restore the text to a readable state. While this
is a laudable intention and Witzel may feel conident in being able to do so in view of
what he, borrowing an expression from Karl Hofmann, considers the “ ‘inevitability’ of
Brāhmaṇa style,”39 the fact is that a reconstructive edition that combines the available
manuscripts, merely on the principle that without superimposing the texts over each
other it is impossible to obtain a continuous text, is not a critical edition. Witzel has no
corroboration for the authenticity of the text that results. Neither is the resultant text an
accurate representation of the text’s diachronic evolution. His edition is, at best, a com-
posite edition and, at worst, an attempt to pass of as a critical edition a text that is merely
the transcription of a single manuscript with a mix of conjectures carried out with only
occasional recourse to the manuscripts.40
This vacillation between a strictly stemmatic procedure and a relapse into conjectural
criticism is not accidental. As we saw, it was also a feature of Bigger’s and Grünendahl’s
work. Both scholars insisted that they were interested in “textual criticism,” even though
what they ultimately ended up producing were reconstructions based on subjective and
circular theories of the originally oral nature of the Mahābhārata. Likewise, Witzel,
even though he repeatedly emphasizes the need for critical editions,41 proves incapable
of producing a true critical edition, that is to say, a mechanical reconstruction of the
archetype based on the principles of a systematic recensio and a genealogical analysis of
the relations of iliation between manuscripts. Thus, under the cover of calling for more
critical editions, what he is arguing for is much greater scope for emendation,42 since, like
Otto Böhtlingk— whose work Patrick Olivelle has severely criticized43— his real interest is
in proposing bold conjectures.44
In contrast, Witzel’s statements about the Mahābhārata critical edition, especially as
regards the impossibility of producing a critical edition due to the widespread presence
of contamination,45 are simply untrue: he appears to have only the haziest understanding
of the Mahābhārata tradition, as evinced by his claim that “the many original Bardic
compositions underlying the Mahābhārata, as well as its crystallization [?] , remained
unstable and open to additions— especially in the southern tradition.” 46 But how does
Witzel know this? The only way he could know of the existence of “original bardic
compositions” that “underlay” the Mahābhārata is if he were alive at the time of those
compositions; otherwise, the assumption of an oral epic, as we have seen, only leads
to speculative theories of the epic. Likewise, his claim that “this is quite diferent from
saying that the text as a whole was luid from its Bardic beginnings down to Gupta times,
and then onward to the testimony of the late medieval MSS. Instead, we clearly have an
324
324 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
early crystallization and later, local recensions”47 revives aspects of Grünendahl’s notion
of independent recensions of the Mahābhārata, without, however, being able to prove
this theory any more than Grünendahl could. We ind it surprising that Witzel should
feel compelled to lecture Indians on the need for critical scholarship when he himself has
only the haziest understanding of textual criticism.48
Witzel’s statements about the Mahābhārata’s critical edition illustrate just how
problematic it is to unthinkingly accept “critical” views about the Mahābhārata and,
by extension, about Indian texts in general. It is one of the deining characteristics of
German Indology that its practitioners insist that the production of critical editions is
the unique distinction of their tradition, while at the same time attempting to weaken
the deinition of a critical edition.49 In this contrast between what the Indologists say it
is that they do and what they actually do we see the central contradiction at the heart of
the discipline: on one hand, in order to be recognized as a legitimate discipline within
the university canon, they were forced to constantly seek the comparison with classical
philology, the discipline that had most successfully mastered the transition from an indef-
inite literary enterprise to a discipline modeled on the natural sciences and their rigorous
procedures;50 on the other, the depth of expertise available in the ield was always scant
as compared with their colleagues in classical philology.
Ever since the nineteenth century, when Indology irst constituted itself as a discipline
at the university by evoking the parallel with classical philology, Indologists have made a
proitable living by claiming that what they specialized in was producing critical editions
of Sanskrit texts.51 Yet, as we saw in this book, these claims are not entirely accurate. Not
one of the Indologists whose work we examined had produced a true critical edition,52
yet all of them claimed that they practiced textual criticism. Given the inlation in the
use of the expression critical edition in Indology, it appears appropriate to institute some
criteria for its use.53 We propose the following deinition: “Only those editions should
be permitted to call themselves critical as make use of the genealogical-r econstructive
method (also known as the common- error method) to reconstruct the relations of iliation
between manuscripts and that propose a reconstruction of the archetype of the tradition
on the basis of an explicit stemma.” This reconstruction, moreover, must be mechanical
in the sense that it must be apparent, from a glance at the apparatus, what stage of the
tradition the editor is reconstructing at any given moment. Further, no edition should
be permitted to call itself a critical edition unless it is based on a systematic recensio of a
large number of manuscripts (this would a priori exclude such one- manuscript “critical”
editions as Witzel’s edition of the Kaṭha Āraṇyaka).54 We are aware that in many cases
this ideal will not be attainable, but if this reduces the number of critical editions of
Indian texts in circulation, so much the better.
Notes
1 As clariied in the introduction, it bears repeating that German in “German Indology” does not
refer to national origins: it merely speciies a certain style of doing Indian studies. We could
also have just used “Indology,” but this would be to subsume other traditions of Indian studies,
perhaps unfairly, under this term. For this reason, we have chosen to retain the epithet German,
well aware that it may result in misunderstanding and misrepresentation of our views.
325
CONCLUSION 325
2 See Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee, The Nay Science: A History of German Indology
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2014), especially the introduction and chapters 3– 5.
3 See ibid., 11– 19 (“The Origins of the Historical- Critical Method in the Neo- Protestantism of
the Eighteenth Century”).
4 If one truly wished to understand the arguments for identifying various historical strata on
the basis of considerations such as “redactional history” or “redactional ideology,” one would
have to begin with biblical critics, whose work represents the closest parallel to contempo-
rary Mahābhārata studies. Via Heinrich Ewald’s student, Veda scholar Rudolf von Roth, their
method then entered German Indology. The earliest scholar to adopt the methods and termi-
nology of biblical criticism in Mahābhārata studies was Christian Lassen. Mahābhārata studies
really only came into its own as a discipline with the uncle–n ephew duo of Adolf Holtzmann
Sr. and Adolf Holtzmann Jr., who fused the methods of biblical criticism with nascent ideas
of an Indo- Germanic/ Aryan heritage to create modern Mahābhārata studies. We should also
not overlook the role of the newly discovered science of geology, which, through its extension
to ethnology, anthropology and, ultimately, history, signiicantly inluenced Indian historical
writing, as Guha has shown. See Sumit Guha, “Lower Strata, Older Races, and Aboriginal
Peoples: Racial Anthropology and Mythical History Past and Present,” The Journal of Asian
Studies 57, no. 2 (1998): 423–4 1. Guha does not discuss the Mahābhārata, but one vital link in
the chain of “the mythic history of clashing races” (ibid., 438) is clearly Lassen’s pseudo-e thno-
logical research based on the Mahābhārata as discussed in Adluri and Bagchee, The Nay Science,
41– 48 and 124.
5 The paradigmatic author for this style of “criticism” is Holtzmann Jr. Although Lassen had
already argued for the existence of a shorter, more ancient Kṣatriya epic, Holtzmann Jr. irst
formalized the “criteria” for recovering this older epic. The following passage is revelatory
of his concerns: “Here now, in the irst place,” writes Holtzmann, “the thoroughly warlike
worldview is to be highlighted which constitutes the genuine soul of the old portions of the
epic. […] Instead of the elegiac softness, the resignation, being tired of life, of later Indian
literature, the raw warrior-l ike air of the old Germanic North blows against us here. If we
were ever to succeed in determining the oldest cultural phase of the Indian race accessible
to research and to dissolve away almost by means of a chemical process all inluences of
the Brahmanism that is already slowly developing […] we would ind conditions before us
only a little diferent from those described by Tacitus as unique to the ancient Germans. But
even in its contemporary ruined form the Mahābhārata often delivers us the best commen-
tary on Germania.” Adolf Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahābhārata (Kiel: C.
F. Haeseler, 1892), 45– 46 (emphasis in original). Compare Bigger’s claim that verse 13.135.81
from the Viṣṇusahasranāmastotram of the Mahābhārata might go back to an earlier stage
of the epic’s history, that is, to a time when the names Aniruddha and Pradyumna were still
identiied with Kṛṣṇa’s son and grandson rather than Kṛṣṇa’s vyūhas or hypostases, as the two
are addressed here with the titles apratiratha (“peerless in chariot warfare” or “one possessing
a matchless body”) and amitavikrama (“of limitless power”). “These are,” he continues, “in
my eyes, statements such as one might make about Kṣatriyas.” Andreas Bigger, Balarāma
im Mahābhārata: Seine Darstellung im Rahmen des Textes und seiner Entwicklung (Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz, 1998), 64.
6 Most recently, Franco, in his review of our irst book, when he claims: “The nature and
origin of ‘Indology’ were already clearly stated in A. W. Schlegel’s founding essay, ‘Über den
gegenwärtigen Zustand der Indischen Philologie,’ which marks the beginning of ‘German
Indology’ as an academic discipline: ‘If the study of Indian literature is to thrive, the principles
of classical philology have to be thoroughly applied to it, and that with the most scientiic rigor.’
[...] This opinion was still widespread and taken for granted when I irst came to Germany in
the early 1980s. It lasted as long as classical philology itself was able to maintain its prestige,
until the repeated waves of neo- liberalism, secondary school and university reform, and the
cultural turn in the humanities marginalised it, and with that Indology as well. In other words,
326
326 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
‘German Indology’ is not, at its core, a ‘nay’ science; rather, ‘German Indologists’ wanted to
accomplish for India what their fellow philologists had accomplished for Ancient Greece and
Rome— and presumably, some of them still have this aim. Looking back at what they have
accomplished over the last 200 years, they have not done such a poor job.” Eli Franco, review
of The Nay Science: A History of German Indology, by Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee, South
Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies 39, no. 3 (2016): 697– 98.
7 See Reinhold Grünendahl, “Post-p hilological Gestures—‘ Deconstructing’ Textual
Criticism,” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 52–53, Text Genealogy, Textual Criticism
and Editorial Technique (2009–1 0): 17: “ ‘Post- philological’ sounds like just another of those
‘sign- post’ neologisms devised to mark a supposedly radical break with something, in this case
philology”; ibid., 21: “To be sure, none of these post-p hilological arguments are really to the
point, but that is as close as the critical theorist gets to the real thing. The basic misunder-
standing that usually prevents an adequate assessment is the notion that textual criticism is
about extracting a certain meaning from a text, while textual critics tend to follow the rule that
questions concerning the meaning of a given text had better be postponed until its wording
has been established as accurately as its textual tradition allows” (Grünendahl’s italics); and
ibid., 22: “I see this caricature of textual criticism in terms of mechanistic pedantry as an
attempt to discredit its very foundation, namely, what is called ‘Akribie’ in German, from
Greek akríbeia, originally the accuracy of a craftsman in adjusting two workpieces to one
another, and as such a itting term for the textual critic’s ambition, typically psychologized
by Cerquiglini as ‘hysteria of detail.’ ” But Grünendahl could have spared himself the ref-
erence to the German Akribie (meticulousness): other languages have similar words, and it is
not a good idea to insist on the speciically German nature of this quality when one has pro-
duced a work as appallingly full of errors as his 1993 article. We are told that “Frank Kolb
has recently pointed out the importance of Akribie as a prerequisite of Geisteswissenschaften in
general [...],” but “the ‘Newspeak’ of German education politics shows diferent tendencies
in its efort to market its latest invention, the mass-p roduced Generalist. It may be interesting
to see how Akribie will fare in the frantic deconstruction of Geisteswissenschaften according
to the political dictate of ‘international standards,’ compounded by economization and the
impact of social sciences.” Ibid., 22, n. 36 (Grünendahl’s italics). Only, the Akribie Grünendahl
claims is the hallmark of German scholarship manifested in his case rather as an Akribie in
generating errors.
8 Grünendahl argues that the “very reality” of textual criticism “is called into question by
little more than lavish use of inverted commas and words to that efect, such as ‘construct,’
imaginaire, etc.” and that “consequently, the critical theorist can hardly be expected to enter
into a detailed discussion of the actual ‘philological handiwork of critical editions, etymology,
historical grammar’ and the like,” but without having irst shown that he either understands
the “philological handwork” of critical editions or knows anything of etymology or his-
torical grammar. Ibid., 24. In fact, he does not, as his discussion of Sukthankar’s editorial
choices shows. He describes “textual criticism” as “just […] a tool” and asserts that “it is
the faculty of handling texts according to reasonable principles,” but then commits the
error of claiming that, as two manuscripts are lacking the same interpolations, one of them
must have “contaminated” the other. Ibid. He argues that “the formulaic performance of
the accusatory epic [sc. of the ‘post- philological’ critic] is directed irst and foremost at a
favourable audience; an exchange with practising textual critics is not intended, as far as
I can see,” but does not clarify whether he includes himself among the “practising textual
critics.” Ibid., 26.
9 This contrast is invoked not only in Grünendahl’s writings but also in those of Indologists
such as Stephanie Jamison and Sheldon Pollock. The former writes, “Ancient India remains
the province of the philologists— among whom I am proud to number myself. It can only be
approached through its texts, and the philological methods employed to investigate these texts
327
CONCLUSION 327
may, to the outsider, appear to approach the status of a mystery religion, to be even more
esoteric than the contents of the texts they study. As a philologist, a practitioner of this cult,
I am certain that the intricacies of the method are necessary. But I also regret the result: that
the knowledge we gain too often remains walled of from the rest of the scholarly community,
that the process of gaining it is so consuming that we often lack the energy to communicate
it to others— and that others will not invest their energy in attending to the unfamiliar details
that must be grasped in order to understand the whole.” Stephanie W. Jamison, Sacriiced Wife/
Sacriicer’s Wife: Women, Ritual, and Hospitality in Ancient India (New York: Oxford University Press,
1996), 3 (Jamison’s italics).
10 Michael Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology and in European Philology during the 19th
and 20th Centuries,” Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies 21, no. 3 (2014): 12.
11 Witzel is obviously at pains to claim a separate genealogy for Indology than the one most often
proposed for it, namely, as arising out of German Romanticism and sharing in the latter’s
nationalism, for he emphasizes: “Incidentally, this semi-p olitical cultural movement had little
to do, contrary to what is now often asserted, with the strong German interest for [sic] Sanskrit
and India, which was just one of the many avenues in the Romantic search for early textual
materials. Still this interest is now frequently depicted, though erroneously, as having been
instrumental for German nationalism of the Romantic and later periods, usually by those who
know little of the original German language texts of the period— especially so in the Anglophone
world: this has then been parroted all over the Indian right wing (Hindutva- leaning) internet.”
Ibid., 15 (all italics Witzel’s). But his attempt at grounding the scientiic character of Indology
in philology might have been more successful had he shown how exactly the Indologists dem-
onstrate a knowledge of philology. Certainly, matters are not helped by the fact that he thinks
Grünendahl “go[es] beyond the facile division into various script traditions.” Ibid., 34, n. 136.
Pollock likewise implies a connection between Wolf and Indology by juxtaposing Wolf’s phi-
lology with Schlegel’s. See Sheldon Pollock, “Introduction,” in World Philology, ed. Sheldon
Pollock, Benjamin A. Elman and Ku- ming Kevin Chang (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2015), 7. For an assessment of this claim, see Vishwa Adluri, review of World Philology,
ed. Sheldon Pollock, Benjamin A. Elman and Ku- ming Kevin Chang, American Historical Review
121, no. 3 (2016): 908– 10.
12 This is something that every Indologist, of course, assumes, because, as we analyzed in The Nay
Science, Indology as a discipline lives of of the postulated contrast with traditional scholarship.
Thus, every time Indologists were asked what Indology was, they responded with a clariica-
tion of what it was not: it was not the tradition. But the fact Indologists felt the need to belabor
the contrast with tradition, especially insofar as it was “theological,” shows that theology has
only been transformed and not overcome within Indology. Hence the need to constantly run
down the tradition. It is precisely as a theological enterprise, speciically as a radicalization of
the Protestant separation of faith from reason, that Indology felt that it was in competition with
the tradition.
13 Even traditional exegetes, when they clarify the meaning of the śruti or the smṛti, are working
with texts. If all that Witzel means by “philology” is a thorough acquaintance with the texts,
then we would have to accede that traditional scholarship is also “philological,” indeed, “phil-
ological” to a degree the Indologist could never hope to be. This is, of course, something no
Indologist is willing to concede, since the discipline, as we argued in The Nay Science, draws its
legitimation from the contrast with the tradition.
14 Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,” 17. And see also ibid., 67: “This is not the case with
a recent (re-) translation of Manu, where neither the readily available (semi- )critical edition of
J. Jolly nor the oldest available commentary of Bhāravi have been used and where matters of
realia (for example the system of weights) are treated with cavalier neglect.”
15 Witzel’s insistence on the recovery of the realia from the text as the real task of “philology”
corresponds to Semler’s distinction between the sensus literalis and the realia and the insistence
328
328 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
that the former could only be reached through a rigorous historical- critical methodology.
Witzel’s insistence that recovery of the realia makes up either the whole or the largest part of
careful “philological” reading reveals that he is confused about the distinction between his-
torical criticism and textual criticism. Even though he claims to be interested in philology, all
that he means when he says that Indologists contributed to philology is that they set forth the
valorization of historical context over other kinds of exegetic concerns that is characteristic of
Protestant scriptural hermeneutics.
16 Ibid., 16; see also ibid., 16–1 7: “The ensuing combination of the early development of his-
torical and textual criticism, building on Bentley’s and Wolf’s [sic] philology and Jones’ and
Bopp’s comparative linguistics, was especially due to the circle of scholars that W. v. Humboldt
had assembled at the new Berlin (later, Humboldt) University, whose liberal and Wissenschaft-
oriented structure was to become the model of many other western Universities”; and ibid.,
19: “Instead, it had been accepted, at least since Lachmann early in the 19th century, that
we need a irm basis in order to study our classical texts: we need a text that is ideally the
same, or rather comes as close as possible to the text the author had in mind. This means to
employ the methods of historical and textual criticism, strictly adhering to the principle of
establishing a family tree of manuscripts (stemma)”; and ibid., 39– 40: “Since Lachmann we
have been aware that we need to establish, as pointed out above (§1.4.), a text that comes as
close as possible to the author’s text. This is to be carried out by historical and textual criti-
cism, with a Lachmannian stemma, for which see P. Maas and M. L. West.” And see also ibid.,
10: “Prominent was an historical and critical approach bolstered by the newly developed MSS
stemmatics and the new evidence from comparative historical linguistics”; ibid., 30: “Vedic
and other Sanskrit texts were studied by employing the historical and critical method, already
familiar from Classical texts, though some allowance was made for the strict oral transmission
of the Vedic texts [?]” ; and ibid., 33–3 4: “The recently acquired means of textual and histor-
ical criticism were thus consistently applied, just as one had done with Classical and medieval
European texts. The second part of the 19th and the early 20th century was the heyday of the
critical and historical method (which in turn was heavily inluenced, especially for the older
texts, by the expanding knowledge of comparative Indo- European linguistics).” Does he mean
the historical- critical method or textual criticism?
17 Ibid., 19.
18 See Sebastiano Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method, ed. and trans. Glenn W. Most
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 96. Giovanni Fiesoli, in La genesi del lachmannismo
(Florence: Edizioni del Galluzzo, 2000), provides deinitive proof that Lachmann never used
the common- error method. Witzel cites P. L. Schmidt’s essay “Lachmann’s Method: On the
History of a Misunderstanding,” in The Uses of Greek and Latin: Historical Essays, ed. A. C.
Dionisotti, Anthony Grafton and Jill Kraye (London: The Warburg Institute, University of
London, 1988), 227– 36, but not Fiesoli’s work.
19 Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,” 20, and see also ibid., 18 for the claim: “Earlier
European scholars of the Renaissance and Baroque periods had already noticed that their
MSS frequently were just bad copies made by medieval scribes, whose mistakes were in part
due to the change from uncial to miniscule characters in the 9th century CE, a bottleneck neck
[sic] event, as we would now call it following biological parlance.”
20 Paolo Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method: A Non-S tandard
Handbook of Genealogical Textual Criticism in the Age of Post- Structuralism, Cladistics, and Copy- Text
(Padua: Libreriauniversitaria, 2014), 141.
21 Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,” 18.
22 Bronkhorst makes the same error, though in his case the error is attributable to his reliance on
Witzel: “In both of these examples it is possible to think in terms of a bottleneck: of all the
manuscripts that existed, only one became the ancestor of all those that survived (or have been
taken into consideration). However, neither in the case of the Vākyapadıȳa nor the Mahābhāṣya
329
CONCLUSION 329
do we have reason to think that only a few manuscripts existed at the time of the archetype.
Quite on the contrary, there may have been many manuscripts in existence during the crea-
tion of the one manuscript that would become the archetype of all manuscripts extant today.
Seen this way, there may have been no real bottleneck. Some texts may have gone through a
real bottleneck in the sense that few manuscripts existed at certain points in their history. An
example may be found in the Paippalāda Saṃhitā of the Atharva Veda. The manuscripts of this
text, preserved in both Kashmir and Orissa, go back to one written archetype from around
800– 1000 CE in Gujarat. This, at any rate, is the theory presented by Michael Witzel (1985),
who ofers the following explanatory hypothesis: For many centuries Brahmins of the Atharva
Veda were centered in Gujarat, whence some were invited from time to time by kings in other
parts of India. They arrived with their texts (i.e. the version of the Paippalāda Saṃhitā current in
Gujarat). Other traditions of that text either did not exist or were overshadowed by the origi-
nally Gujarati tradition. In other words, it is possible that only a small number of manuscripts
of the Paippalāda Saṃhitā existed in that period. Here we can speak of a real bottleneck.”
Johannes Bronkhorst, “Archetypes and Bottlenecks: Relections on the Textual History of the
Mahābhārata,” in Pūrvāparaprajñābhinandam: East and West, Past and Present. Indological and Other
Essays in Honour of Klaus Karttunen, ed. Bertil Tikkanen and Albion M. Butters, Studia Orientalia
110 (Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society, 2011), 41.
23 See Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,” 57: “Such cases are due to a bottleneck situa-
tion, mentioned above (§1), where a new stream of tradition evolved, superseding all others,”
and see also ibid., 60–6 1, for the reference to the “Nāgarī/ Grantha bottleneck,” apparently
responsible for the reduction in the number of copies in circulation to one: “Given the Nāgarī/
Grantha bottleneck and the inherent lack of understanding of older MSS, therefore more
easily discarded, it should not surprise that a new successful ‘species’ of textual tradition took
over around 1000 CE. I suspect that most of our well- known ‘classical’ texts go back to such
archetypes, written after the emergence of the (sub)regional scripts.” The argument parallels
Bigger’s “normative redaction” hypothesis. Witzel also appears inluenced by Grünendahl’s idea
that a text “could also have been transferred from completely independent sources” (Reinhold
Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” in Studien zur Indologie
und Buddhismuskunde, ed. Reinhold Grünendahl, Jens Uwe- Hartmann and Petra Kiefer- Pülz,
Indica et Tibetica 22 [Bonn: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 1993], 128–2 9) when he writes: “Such
imports naturally lead to contamination, but importantly also to the superimposition of, and
eventual replacement by a distant tradition over one’s own local one. This was common when
a new, highly regarded version of a text was copied and the ‘older’ version ceased to be copied.
Indeed, we can, occasionally, establish that there was just one late classical or medieval arche-
type, from which all surviving MSS of a text derive.” Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,”
55– 56 (Witzel’s italics). But there is a diference between saying that all surviving manuscripts
of a text are descended from the same copy and saying that just one copy existed. Which is it
that Witzel means? The same error occurs in Michael Witzel, “On the Archetype of Patañjali’s
Mahābhāṣya,” Indo- Iranian Journal 29 (1986): 249–5 9. Witzel begins the article thus: “W. Rau
recently indicated that all available MSS of the Mahābhāṣya go back to ONE single archetype
from which all have been copied” (ibid., 249; Witzel’s capitalization). Archetype in the sense of a
reconstructed source from which all extant manuscripts are presumed to descend is only ever
used in the singular. “ONE single” is redundant unless Witzel means the number of copies
in existence at the time was reduced to one. The fact that all the extant manuscripts share
certain features indicating a common ancestor, however, does not justify us in assuming this
manuscript was the sole one in existence at the time. If Witzel’s attribution is correct, Wilhelm
Rau, Die vedischen Zitate im Vyākaran ̣a- Mahābhāṣya, Mainzer Akademie der Wissenschaften und
der Literatur, Abhandlungen der Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaftlichen Klasse, Jahrgang 1985,
no. 4 (Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1985) commits the same error.
24 Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,” 21.
330
330 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
25 The phrase is Wolf’s (!) and is cited and translated in Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s
Method, 71– 72.
26 Compare Trovato’s ininitely more sophisticated account: “The most commonly adopted
procedure for singling out these errors— often inaccurately described by computer- assisted
editors— is the following. We begin by setting as our term of comparison an apparently com-
plete manuscript, one that is traditionally regarded as authoritative, or a randomly chosen
one for want of a better alternative. We give it a label, such as A, and proceed to compare the
irst verse or, in the case of a prose text, the irst line of A with the corresponding text portion
of B, the second verse or line of A with the second of B, and so on, accurately recording any
substantial diferences. Once we have gone through all the diferences between A and B, we
go on to compare A with C, D, etc., until we have examined all the witnesses (manuscripts or
printed editions, thus called because they bear witness to the content of the original text). The
technical terms used for the action of comparing and the manuscript used for the comparison
are respectively to collate (French collationer, It. collazionare, from the Latin collatio [comparison])
and collation text (It. esemplare di collazione). All the diferences thus observed can be called, in a
broad sense, readings or variants.” Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s
Method, 52–5 3. Note that this procedure yields in the irst instance only a list of variants and not
yet of errors as compared with the collation text— which of these variants must be considered
an error cannot be established without further analysis.
27 Witzel’s procedure runs into the same objection as we found of Grünendahl’s “one recen-
sion” edition, namely, that the identiication of errors, like the selection of the best manu-
script, presumes a Lachmannian analysis. Contini expresses it best: “An objective deinition,
developed in the Neo-L achmannian milieu, of the best manuscript as the one which has
been so resistant to banalization as to ofer the highest percentage of lectiones singulares to be
preserved presupposes a Lachmannian edition. Indeed, only a Lachmannian editor, such as
Bédier was for quite a long time, can point out the best manuscript, or even merely a good
one.” Gianfranco Contini, “Filologia (1977),” in Frammenti di ilologia romanza: Scritti di ecdotica
e linguistica (1932– 1989), vol. 1, ed. Giancarlo Breschi (Florence: Edizioni del Galluzo, 2007),
34 (italics in original). He is equally persuasive on the concept of a latent error: “Stemmata are an
objective and mechanical tool, invented to sort out, in the irst instance, the quarrel between
variants that are in themselves equally acceptable: […] variants that are pronounced erroneous
sever to brand as erroneous those that have remained equally acceptable.” Witzel’s procedure
may correct obvious errors, but it would miss an equally large or larger number of latent errors.
But here also it runs into a serious objection, which Contini voices thus: “Indeed, what does
purging the ‘obvious’ errors in a manuscript mean? What is more disputable than obvious-
ness, and the limits of the obvious?” Gianfranco Contini, “La ‘Vita’ francese ‘di Sant’ Alessio’
e l’arte di pubblicare i testi antichi (1970),” in Frammenti di ilologia romanza: Scritti di ecdotica e
linguistica (1932– 1989), vol. 2, ed. Giancarlo Breschi (Florence: Edizioni del Galluzo, 2007),
961 and 967 (all italics in original; all translations Trovato’s). Insofar as Witzel’s emendations
are not clearly signaled and entered into the body of the text, his procedure—u nder the pre-
text of restoring a historically more accurate version of the text— ends up creating a new,
composite edition. Olivelle’s criticisms are relevant here: see Patrick Olivelle, “Unfaithful
Transmitters: Philological Criticism and Critical Editions of the Upaniṣads,” Journal of Indian
Philosophy 26 (1998): 173– 87.
28 Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,” 22.
29 Ibid., 23.
30 Michael Witzel, Katḥ a Ar̄an ̣yaka: Critical Edition with a Translation into German and an Introduction
(Cambridge, MA: Department of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, Harvard University, 2004).
This is a reprint of the partial print of his 1972 dissertation published as Das Katḥa- Ar̄an ̣yaka,
textkritische Edition mit Uebersetzung und Kommentar (Erlangen: Nepal Research Centre, 1972).
31 Witzel, Katḥa Ar̄an ̣yaka, xxiv.
331
CONCLUSION 331
32 See ibid., xxiv (boldface in original): “The fragmentary character of the only extant manuscript
containing the major part of the text required an exact representation of destroyed passages
as well as of lines or Akṣaras, of which only the upper or lower part, or even less, has been
preserved. In the edition, such passages (and uncertain readings in general) have been indi-
cated by italics. […] The approximate number of broken of Akṣaras has been suggested by x,
occasionally a missing vowel sign by ə, especially when the original accent was still discernible.”
Emendations, especially when Witzel’s own and not supported by any manuscripts, appear to
be only occasionally noted in the endnotes. This is perhaps at the heart of his disputation with
Olivelle regarding the tenability of inserting emendations into the body of the text.
33 Ibid., xxi– xxii.
34 The expression “though they only contain parts of the mantra section (KaṭhĀ I)” is especially
infelicitous, since it is susceptible to misinterpretation: it might mean that these manuscripts
contain only parts of the mantra section or that they contain only parts of the mantra section; in
the latter case, the manuscripts would obviously be far more useful, and this seems to be what
is meant (though this is then contradicted by the observation that only one manuscript contains
the “major part of the text”).
35 Ibid., xxiv– xxv.
36 The absence of a stemma in an edition that calls itself a critical edition is especially puzzling,
given Witzel’s insistence elsewhere that a stemma is the deining characteristic of a critical
edition. See Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,” 49: “It is remarkable that over the past
200 years or so only about a dozen truly critical editions, with stemma, of Sanskrit texts have
been prepared” (Witzel’s italics); ibid.: “Older editions, including the fairly recent Poona efort
(T. N. Dharmadhikari, R. S. Shastri, N. P. Jain, S. S. Bahulkar, Vedic Texts: A Revision, [...]), are
semi- critical, i.e. without stemma”; ibid., 51: “They were by no means critical, as we now
understand, that is with a stemma”; ibid., 54: “The 19th century ‘Boehtlingk et al.’ semi-
critical type, worst perhaps Boehtlingk’s Bṛhadāraṇyaka and Chāndogya Upaniṣad. They give
some variant readings and may even briely discuss the origin of the MSS involved (‘from
Ahmedabad’) but they do not even try to establish a stemma. Most of the editions replicate
those done before Lachmann” (Witzel’s italics); ibid., 54, n. 245: “The RV editions of Aufrecht,
M. Müller, C. G. Kashikar, etc. are not critical in the strict sense as they do not give a complete
apparatus nor do they have a stemma”; and ibid., 58: “First of all, it shows that we could make
much more progress in the tracing the history [sic] of a particular text if we only had: (1) Proper
editions, preferably with stemma, or at least a record of all the variants of the MSS available to
an editor” (Witzel’s italics).
37 “The Katḥ A ̄has come down to us only in one rather lacuneous [sic] birchbark ms. This puts
certain limits to any sort of investigation and it added some additional constraints to my task
of translation. I had to supply, as is the case with the translation of most Mesopotamian and
Hittite texts on clay tablets, much of the lost text portions for consistency and continuity. I even
did not know [sic] exactly how my text began, and its end was even more uncertain. While this
certainly is not typical for Vedic texts, it presents some additional problems. Taking all of the
preceding into account, I irst had to establish a reliable edition, which is diicult with just one
ms. but can be established by carefully comparing the parallel traditions, ritual, style, and the
Vedic grammar of the period in question.” Michael Witzel, “How to Enter the Vedic Mind?
Strategies in Translating a Brāhmaṇa Text,” in New Horizons of Indological Research: Felicitation
Volume in Honour of Prof. P. C. Muraleemadhavan, ed. Dharmaraj Adat (Delhi: Kunjunni Raja
Academy of Indological Research and New Bharatiya Book Corporation, 2013), 25.
38 “As early as 1974, at the memorable round table of the congress of Romanists held in Naples,
supporters of Neo- Lachmannism (Segre) and Neo-B édierism (Lecoy) reached not too distant
conclusions, summarizable as the desirability that the critical text should not stray too far from
the text of one of the manuscripts (except in loci that were admitted of certainty, according
to Segre), whereas the critical apparatus should be the place for comparisons of readings and
332
332 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
reconstructive hypotheses.” Leonard Lino, “Il testo come ipotesi (critica del manoscritto-
base),” Medioevo romanzo 35 (2011): 8.
39 Witzel, Katḥ a Ar̄an ̣yaka, xxv and see also Witzel, “How to Enter the Vedic Mind? Strategies in
Translating a Brāhmaṇa Text,” 27: “One item that come [sic] to our rescue in following such
arguments and in our actual understanding of them, and indeed the most important one that
came to my rescue in restoring the partially damaged text, is the so-c alled Zwangsläuigkeit of
Brāhman ̣a style. The expression coined by K. Hofmann signiies the ‘inevitability of Brāhman ̣a
style.’ The argumentation in the texts almost always follows a certain ixed pattern.”
40 Along with Trovato (Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 251), we
acknowledge the necessity of emendation or, as Trovato elegantly puts it, “the ineluctability of
critical judgment.” But Trovato’s observation that “many conjectures born of iudicium— that
is, the competence and intelligence— of classical and modern philologists (or, more appropri-
ately: many working hypotheses) have been conirmed by early witnesses discovered at a later
date or fresh readings of wholly or partly illegible documents with new technologies, which
carry precisely the conjectured reading. Not unlike what happens in physics nowadays, the best
working hypotheses are later proved true” (ibid.) applies only to traditions in which much more
is known about the authors and of the scribes’ practice. In contrast, the history of Sanskrit
critical editions reveals an extraordinary overconidence on the part of the Indologists in their
ability to uncover “original” meanings— meanings that have not withstood the test of time.
Olivelle speaks of “philological hubris.” Olivelle, “Unfaithful Transmitters,” 177 and 183.
41 See Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,” 49: “Surprisingly, Indian (or South Asian texts in
general) texts have hardly seen any critical editions in the strict Lachmannian sense. What goes
under this name usually are editions that merely include a selection of variants. It is remark-
able that over the past 200 years or so only about a dozen truly critical editions, with stemma,
of Sanskrit texts have been prepared”; see also ibid., 25: “Well, it [a critical edition of the
Praśna Upaniṣad] has not yet been done or even tried! We do not have a critical edition of
the Upaniṣads”; ibid., 26: “In addition, Ś aṅkara’s commentaries have not been edited critically
either. (I have frequently impressed that fact on Indian visitors who asked me what to do in their
future work— to no avail.)”; ibid., 50: “Studies based on the present uncritical editions can, at
best, only be provisional and are, at worst, plainly wrong. […] It is nothing short of a scandal
that, after some 200 years of Indology, instead of preparing reliable texts and translations, a lot
of ink keeps being spilled in works based on inadequate materials”; ibid., 51: “As mentioned
(above §1.6.), the commentaries themselves have to be critically edited irst before actually
using them in a truly scholarly fashion”; and ibid., 51 (with a reference to an earlier work): “I
have criticized this approach nearly two decades ago (Witzel 1997: Introduction): ‘With
millions of Indian MSS in public and private libraries, only a fraction of the texts contained
in them— nobody knows how many— have been actually published or used for editions. So far,
we have only a handful of critically edited Sanskrit texts which are based on a stemma of the
manuscripts used”; ibid., 53: “I have criticized the ‘traditional’ Indological approach to editing,
described extensively above, more than two decades ago (1997)” (footnoted with a reference
to the same work and the same passage); ibid., 57: “Yet, a text such as the Ṛgveda cannot be
understood if one does not know something about cattle, the historical climate of the Panjab,
pre- state tribal societies and their social systems, about its complex system of Indo-E uropean
and Indo- Iranian poetics, about oral composition, canon formation and the techniques of crit-
ically editing Sanskrit texts” (italics added); and ibid., 62: “However, as mentioned, commentaries
have irst to be critically edited before we can fully rely on their testimony.”
42 See ibid., 22: “Housman, however, was of the opinion that ‘the truth or falsehood of a MS
reading can never be conirmed or corrected by a<n equally> decisive test […] [that] would
be the production of the author’s autograph.’ While he is right in principle, we can approach
a solution by using the stemmatic method if it is combined with paleography and other
Hilfswissenschaften”; ibid., 51– 52: “The main aim of Olivelle’s recent criticism of Upaniṣad
333
CONCLUSION 333
editions, however, remains controversial. He asks whether it is legitimate to incorporate
emendations in the body of the text. One would have thought that we have for long discussed
and acted on this question, for some 150 years in fact. It is clear that we can certainly insert
our emendations in the text if we can in fact show that they are justiied and if we properly
list all MSS variants in the footnotes, in the critical apparatus. (This is, however, not consis-
tently done even by current editors, leading to Olivelle’s complaint.)”; ibid., 22: “After these
initial steps of editing a text, higher textual criticism (emendatio) comes in. Based on our knowl-
edge of the grammar, style, parallel passages or typical expressions of the author concerned—
repeating here the Alexandrian model— we can scrutinize the archetype MS and propose
certain corrections to that text. Obviously, here we are in the realm of conjecture (emendatio).
The better one is as a philologist, the more one ‘employs one’s thought,’ and the more one uses
(by now also electronic) tools, the better the resulting text will be” (all italics Witzel’s).
43 Olivelle, “Unfaithful Transmitters,” 173– 87.
44 Though, as we know, the life of a conjecture is lamentably short. Böhtlingk’s reputation as a
philologist was established to a great extent on his conjectures in the Upaniṣads, though, as
Olivelle has shown, most of them are now considered erroneous. Perhaps this is why Witzel,
along with his “old friend” Bernhard Kölver, complains: “It was a nice two hundred years.”
Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,” 17, n. 39.
45 See ibid., 28: “It is well known that contamination is the rule in the (edition) of the Sanskrit
epics, which makes a true critical edition impossible (apart from the problems of oral bardic
transmission), as stressed by the Mbh. editor Sukthankar”; ibid., 35 (Witzel’s italics): “At the
time, Sukthankar could not yet fully appreciate the truly oral nature of the originally Bardic
text (as exempliied by M. Parry (1930– 32) and A. Lord (1991), which indicates that we will
never reach a true Mahābhārata archetype, just as little as an ‘original Homeric’ text for the
Greek epics”; ibid., 40– 41: “The situation is therefore comparable to that of other Bardic
texts (Mahābhārata, medieval Indian Bhakti texts, etc.). Obviously, a stemma with an arche-
type cannot be produced for such texts”; and see also ibid., 55: “An exception obviously is
the— ultimately futile— Winternitz- Sukthankar undertaking of establishing a stemma for
Mahābhārata MSS early in the 20th century.”
46 Ibid., 34 (all italics Witzel’s).
47 Ibid. (all italics Witzel’s).
48 See ibid., 39 (Witzel’s italics): “Contrarily, colonial dominance in India apart, western inlu-
ence on the theory and practice of Indian philology has been rather small. After some initial
adaptations, notably by R. G. Bhandarkar (1837–1 925) and his successors, the developments
of the 20th century are of a rather mixed nature. Leaving apart the ever-d iminishing number
of learned traditional Pandits, irmly moored in their religious or śāstric mindset, some
university-b ased scholars took over just some western methods of textual study. However many,
if not most, constantly mingle this approach with traditional attitudes: we ind mythical and
legendary ‘data’ (and dates) interspersed with minute and cogent observations on language,
grammar, texts or cultural background. All in all, a picture emerges of a mindset untouched
by the critical attitudes of the Enlightenment. Instead, the prevailing Hindu inclusivism super-
icially incorporates some ideas external to Indian culture, certain procedures, or preferably,
the latest technology, into a preexisting traditional framework. It does not see a contradiction.”
But what could be a bigger myth than the idea that we can reconstruct the tradition “from the
head,” because we know that an original heroic Aryan civilization must have existed in India?
49 Grünendahl, “Post- philological Gestures— ‘Deconstructing’ Textual Criticism,” 27 and 27,
n. 55: “But no matter which criteria we apply to an edition in order to call it critical we shall
soon come to the conclusion that textual criticism in Indology has only just taken of: there are
still preciously few critical editions of Sanskrit texts around, not to mention of texts in other
Indian languages,” a statement he footnotes with the words: “In my view, a stemma may con-
tribute substantially to what I consider the ultimate goal, viz., Nachvollziehbarkeit of the editorial
334
334 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
process, but it is not a sine qua non. If it was, Indologists would ind themselves without crit-
ical editions of the Sanskrit epics, where contamination precludes such pretensions. […] The
same holds for various other ields where serious reservations towards strict stemmatology have
been voiced; see, for example, J. Hanneder’s edition of Abhinavagupta’s Mālinīślokavārttika
1.1– 399 (Groningen 1998, p. 40–4 5), and the Groningen edition of the Skandapurāṇa by
R. Adriaensen et al. (Vol. 1. Groningen 1998, p. 39)”; Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,”
21: “Grünendahl (2008: 11) rightly stresses that a critical edition has the general goal of the
Nachvollziehbarkeit, that is, the replication by readers of the editorial process”; and see also ibid.,
74: “Yet, as Maas would point out, having a stemma (or we may add, an early version of a
Bardic text) is only the starting point for the processes of emendatio and producing a critical
edition.”
50 See Helmut Müller-S ievers, “Reading Evidence: Textual Criticism as Science in the Nineteenth
Century,” The Germanic Review: Literature, Culture, Theory 76, no. 2 (2001): 167: “Over the entirety
of Schleiermacher’s enterprise hovers the concept of the hermeneutic circle: that we cannot
understand the parts (for example, the manuscripts) without the whole (for example, the author,
or the ‘work’), and vice versa. Lachmann maintained that because textual criticism precedes
any interpretation, it is exempt from hermeneutic circularity—a nd this is why textual criticism,
if applied with the utmost rigor, can aspire to the dignity of the natural sciences and their
inductive- deductive procedures. Indeed, [Müller- Sievers continues] the attribute most often
evoked in conjunction with Lachmann’s method is rigor or severity (Strenge). No ‘reprehensible
clemency’ (sträliche Milde) should be allowed in securing all the evidence for a textual tradition.
The texts to be reconstructed have to be rigorously documentary (strengurkundlich); they must be
subjected to the strictest exam, and they follow no writing before them (Vorschrift). […] Apart
from imitating the natural sciences, this severity also served to recommend philology in gen-
eral, and textual criticism in particular, to the pedagogical institutions of the German state.”
51 “Before our text can be studied from a philosophical or religious studies [religionskundlichen]
perspective, it must be reliably edited. One cannot unseat this [fact] even though this truism
is gladly and repeatedly ignored in those circles [Does he mean Indians? Or Western students
of Indian philosophy?] that would rather [spiritually] elevate themselves with translations of
the Upaniṣad rather than taking the trouble to read and understand these texts philologically
and critically [philologisch- kritisch] in the original.” Wilhelm Rau, “Bemerkungen zu Ś aṅkaras
Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣadbhāṣya,” Paideuma 7, Festgabe für Herman Lommel zur Vollendung
seines 75. Lebensjahres am 7. Juli 1960 (1959–6 1): 299; “Philology […] is the fundament of our
science. It is the foundation on which we must build. The texts are our best source of testimony
about classical India […] in many ways the only window that we have on classical Indian society.
[…] [O] nly through the creation of edited texts […] can [we] begin to place these texts in their
proper context.” Richard Lariviere, Protestants, Orientalists, and Brāhman ̣as: Reconstructing Indian
Social History (Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, 1995), 16– 17.
52 In truth, the Indologists’ conidence in their ability to recover presumed “original” meanings
has depended entirely on their belief that they were capable of displacing themselves into the
conditions and/ or mindset of ancient Indians. This belief, the root delusion of the Indologist,
is manifest not only in the writings of Hermann Oldenberg, as discussed in The Nay Science, but
also in Witzel’s work. See, for instance, Witzel, “How to Enter the Vedic Mind? Strategies in
Translating a Brāhmaṇa Text,” 25 (the title itself is revelatory): “The most intriguing and dii-
cult part of this undertaking [producing an edition of the Kaṭha Āraṇyaka for his dissertation]
was to translate according to the original intent of the composers of the text. One has to enter the
Vedic mind in order to be able to achieve this aim” (all italics in original); ibid., 30: “The real task,
however, is how to enter the Vedic mind, the mind of those Brāhmins who composed poetry
and prose texts such as the Katḥ a Ar̄an ̣yaka”; ibid., 31: “In this fashion, and due to the large
number of texts available to us, we have a real possibility to ‘interview’ our Vedic ‘informants’
of three millennia ago and to enter their mind as well as any anthropologist can do”; and see
335
CONCLUSION 335
also the story narrated on the same page: “If it sounds unbelievable that we can actually enter
the Vedic mind and argue from the inside, following the thought pattern of the Vedic authors,
I invite the reader to try beginning [sic] of the Katạ Ar̄an ̣yaka [sic]. As the facsimile shows, it is
rather fragmentary. In order to restore and to translate the text, I had to study similar phrases
or occurrences of a few key words retained [sic] the fragment. The restoration was supported
[sic] the Zwangsläuigkeit of Brāhman ̣a style: the initial, half peeled of sentence is more or less
repeated by a later one. But how to be sure? Fortunately, the passage contains another clue the
frequently met with concepts of ‘thought-s peech-a ction’ (manas- vāc- karman), a collocation that is
found not only in the Veda but also in the closely related Old Iranian texts (manah- vacas- śiao ʋna,
Y 34.1– 2). Therefore, I was completely sure that I had restored the text incorrectly [correctly?
A Freudian slip?]. When I inally went to Tübingen University Library to check the original
ms. again (I had worked from a microilm), I found that a portion of my original lacuna was cov-
ered by a small, dislodged piece of birchbark that half overlapped with my text. When I lifted
the dislodged fragment, I found the text I had restored. If we can write Vedic texts that well,
we can also translate them.” The story is also repeated, with only slight changes of accent, in
Witzel’s 2014 article. The last line is updated to read: “If we can write Vedic Sanskrit texts that well,
we can also edit, translate and understand them.” Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology,” 75 (italics in
original).
53 We cite here the text of an exchange between Witzel and Grünendahl on the Indology list.
First, Witzel’s remarks: “This makes for an interesting discussion topic— without laming. In
my opinion the answer to most of A. Thrasher’s questions put must be airmative. To put
it in a few theses: 1. There are only a handful of critical editions of Sanskrit texts—i n the
strict sense, that is with STEMMA of the MSS. (Mbh., Ram., Koelver’s Rajatarangini work,
Lariviere’s Narada etc.). 2. All other ‘critical’ editions—i ncluding most of the often excel-
lent editions made in the 19th cent.— are only attempts at critical editions, based on the rather
limited MSS materials available then, and with occasional notes on their interrelation. MSS
variants are recorded well—t hough not always consistently and while leaving out many of the
important (regional) peculiarities of spelling (see below). Unfortunately this applies to Vedic
editions as well, with the additional drawback that the—f requently better—o ral tradition has
been used only three times in editing a text: twice in the late 19th cent. and once in 1967! See
below for an appreciation. 3. The bulk of the editions do not even mention variant readings of
their not/ badly reported MSS sources, or if they do so, they do so rather inconsistently. Take
any Anandasrama edition, for example. Thus, the reader never knows what he/ she is dealing
with in a particular instance. 4. The rest relects the ‘commercial’ editions A. Thrasher asked
about: editions made by someone (not always mentioned by name) on the basis of unreported
MS(S) in a manner to be ‘deciphered’ by the user after long exposure. Such editions (e.g.
Nirnayayasagara eds.) do not have more value than any MS (which also shows the hand<s>
of the scribe/r eader in its many corrections or ‘improvements’ of the text). Thus, in addition
to case (1), ALL others are useful for a critical edition but have to be treated with caution—
namely, as what they represent. Cases (3) and (4) can/ often do represent a local tradition and
are valuable as such: one should treat such editions on the same level as a MS: they relect
nothing more than the more or less educated guess at a ‘correct’ text— producing many a
lectio facilior. […]As far as I am aware, this kind of question is rarely raised even among
‘professional’ indologists (otherwise we would have critical editions of Sankara, all works of
Kalidasa etc. etc. by now!). Actually, I regard this neglect as nothing but scandalous. How can
one make valid statements on advaita if one does not even come close to the text Sankara may
have written? (The same applies, a fortiori, to Vedic editions made without using oral tradition.
A recitation of the Rgveda is, after all, a tape recording of c. 1000 B.C. and as such better than
any MS). Of course, the only way to achieve such an edition is long— tedious many would
say— but unfortunately it is the only one we have, short of direct inspiration by the ancient
Rsis or authors. It involves not only burning the midnight oil for a very long time when trying
336
336 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
to igure out the stemma, but it also involves the critical use of palaeography (where is one for
MSS of this millennium??) and of the knowledge of local pronunciation (again, not collected
anywhere!) and local orthography inluenced by it. […] In short, I think most students and
professors are ill prepared even to begin REALLY critical editions— should they indeed be
interested in doing such work (which often is called the death-k nell for a prospective PhD stu-
dent in North America, also in my University.) Still, we have to train a whole new generation of
students to begin a task that has long been achieved in Classical Greek, Latin, Celtic etc. studies.
[…] After all, texts are a large part, if not the largest, of the materials we are dealing with on
a daily basis and we should be sure of WHAT we are dealing with.” Grünendahl’s response
follows: “M. Witzel’s contribution highlights a few ‘critical’ aspects of editions: 1. What makes
an edition CRITICAL? If a stemma of the MSS used is the decisive criterion, then 200 years
of indology have not produced very much deserving that name. Contrary to Witzel’s opinion,
the critical editions of Mahabharata and Ramayana have to be dropped from the list (while
others, as e.g. Wilhelm Rau’s Vakyapadiya, may be added). What is usually taken in the BORI
and Gaekwad editions resp. do [sic] be a stemma of MSS is in fact a ‘pedigree of VERSIONS.’
[As to the term ‘version’ and its implications I may refer to my article ‘Zur Klassiizierung von
Mahabharata- Handschriften’ in Studien zur Indologie und Buddhismuskunde: Festgabe des
Seminars fuer Indologie und Buddhismuskunde fuer Prof. Dr. Heinz Bechert.’ Bonn 1993
(Indica et Tibetica; 22); Grünendahl’s insertion.] But why should a stemma be the decisive
criterion after all. This is a concept taken over from classical philology, and in my opinion,
it still stands to reason whether it can really be applied to Sanskrit texts, except perhaps in
a few cases with a very limited and rather ‘hermetic’ manuscript tradition, like perhaps the
Rajatarangini. By the way, B. Koelver did not publish a critical edition of the Rajatarangini,
but rather a study of its manuscript tradition with a lot of free advice for future editors. The
actual work of editing the text is still waiting to be done by someone undeterred by the sound
of the death-k nell. My own modest attempts in the ield have taught me that the relation even
of a limited number of MSS, even from a limited geographical area—l ike e.g. Nepal, is very
diicult to determine with any degree of certainty. Consequently, it takes a fair amount of
simpliication to press the often delicate interrelations into a stemma. It may be asked what
we can expect from such a stemma. 2. Personally, I very much appreciate any ‘attempt’ at a
critical edition. In all probability, it is a step forward, especially if the text in question has not
been edited before. I don’t see any fault in limiting your ‘manuscript materials,’ as long as you
do not leave the choice entirely to external circumstances. In view of the limitations of human
life, not to mention the necessities and absurdities of its academic derivate, choices have to
be made. Even if the result is not the type of DEFINITE edition some of us may expect to
achieve— Sukthankar, by the way, didn’t!—i t will help, if only in re-e xamining the MSS used,
should that turn out to be necessary, and perhaps in preparing a better edition on that basis.
Textual criticism is indeed a long and sometimes tedious process. But what can be more impor-
tant for our discipline than injecting fresh material? 3./4 . The same applies to the other types
of editions, although with considerable qualiications, as already pointed out by M. Witzel.
His appeal to overcome the ‘scandalous neglect’ of textual criticism has my whole-h earted
support.” http:// list.indology.info/ pipermail/ indology_ list.indology.info/ 1995- June/ 002673.
html and http:// list.indology.info/ pipermail/ indology_ list.indology.info/ 1995- June/ 002674.
html (both accessed March 28, 2015; all italics and uppercase letters the respective authors’).
54 Shillingsburg’s deinition “the result of any emendation is a critical text” is unacceptably wide.
It would have the consequence of including all medieval copyists’ editions under the deini-
tion of “critical text,” which can hardly be his intent. If the term is to have any meaning, it
must entail a distinction between a stemmatic, mechanical procedure and emendation either
ope ingenii or ope codicum (that is, with only occasional recourse to the manuscripts). Indeed, this
is how the term has been understood for much of the past century. Perhaps Shillingsburg
simply means any text in which an editor has exercised critical judgment, as his suggestion
337
CONCLUSION 337
that “the editor has a third choice: to edit a text that does for the authors what he expected to
have done for him [that is, by a publisher], but avoids the extraneous alterations imposed by a
publisher in his normal but misguided undertaking of the production process” indicates. Peter
L. Shillingsburg, Scholarly Editing in the Computer Age: Theory and Practice (Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press, 1996), 56. But this applies just as much to medieval copyists and Humanist
editors as to the Lachmannian or neo- Lachmannian editor.
338
339
EPILOGUE
In the world also, it is seen that the knower of the meaning is extremely adored (with money etc.) instead of a
person who is only a reader (waving his hands according to svara, etc.).1
— Sāyaṇa, Upodghāta to the R ̣gvedasaṃhitā
In two books now, we have found that whenever Indologists say that their work is sec-
ular, scientiic, philological, critical and the like, what they really mean is that they are
interested in a separation of the realia from the meaning of the text.2 This separation,
however, is anything but secular, since the emphasis on the realia over the text’s philo-
sophical meaning is a characteristic feature of neo-P rotestant theology, corresponding to
the belief that only a reconstruction of the historical conditions (not only the events and
personalities but also the moral and social codes) prevalent at the time the books of the
Old and New Testaments were composed can permit readers to represent to themselves
the respective authors’ state of mind at the time and hence, in an act of sympathetic
understanding or Einfühlung, feel or experience what the author felt or experienced when
writing the book in question. This task was all the more urgent in the case of those books
that were held to be divinely inspired, for at stake was nothing less than gaining access to
the true meaning of scripture, which had become contentious in the wake of challenges
to the authority of the church. Yet, if the realia truly hold the key to understanding the
text— indeed, if only they permit a correct understanding of the text, as the Indologists
contend3— then, in reading the German Indologists’ work, we also must focus on the
historical realia. If knowing about cattle is important to understanding the Vedic mind,4
how much more important is it to know about the Indologists’ religious and political
commitments, especially as these translated into positions of authority, state-s ponsored
salaries and the ability to make self-a uthenticating statements? In our next book, we plan
to do exactly this.
Notes
1 Sāyaṇa, Upodghāta to the R ̣gvedasaṃhitā, cited and translated in Saraswati Bali, Sāyan ̣a’s Upodghāta
to the Taittirnˉya Sa ṁhita and the R ̣gveda Sa ṁhitā: Introduction, English Translation of the Text and Notes
(Delhi: Pratibha Prakashan, 1999), 163.
2 See Andreas Bigger, “The Normative Redaction of the Mahābhārata: Possibilities and
Limitations of a Working Hypothesis,” in Stages and Transitions: Temporal and Historical Frameworks
in Epic and Purān ̣ic Literature. Proceedings of the Second Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit
Epics and Purān ̣as, ed. Mary Brockington (Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts,
2002), 24: “If, on the other hand, we accept the hypothesis of a normative redaction of the
MBh as a fact, we can go on to ask further questions. First of all, one has to ask if it is possible
340
340 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
to localise the normative redaction in what one might call the space– time continuum of Indian
history. […] We have two sets of evidences to date the normative redaction. The irst comes
from within the text; realia mentioned in certain passages permit us to assume a terminus post
quem for the passage in question. Since all the passages contained in the normative redaction
must have come into existence before or while the normative redaction was being compiled,
they also provide a terminus post quem for the normative redaction as a whole.” The search for the
Mahābhārata’s dates, however, is not advanced by arbitrarily removing passages, adding others
and generally reshaping the text to correspond to one’s prejudices about its Textgeschichte (an a
priori racist or anti- Semitic history), all the while arguing that this is what the “Brahmans” must
have done.
3 See, for instance, Michael Witzel, “How to Enter the Vedic Mind? Strategies in Translating
a Brāhmaṇa Text,” in New Horizons of Indological Research: Felicitation Volume in Honour of Prof.
P. C. Muraleemadhavan, ed. Dharmaraj Adat (Delhi: Kunjunni Raja Academy of Indological
Research and New Bharatiya Book Corporation, 2013), 21: “Before we can even attempt a
translation of Brāhman ̣a texts, there [are] a number of procedures that must be discussed and
several obstacles that must be overcome. Most of them can be taken care of by our old hand-
maiden, philology. It is well- known that to merely mention this word is already the kiss of death
in some circles, including Harvard. In fact, one of my colleagues here once explained philology
to me as ‘the study of a word.’ I rather prefer to deine it, as we did in s [sic] symposium some
ive years ago: as ‘kulturwissenschaft based on texts,’ or ‘the study of a civilization based on
texts.’ ”
4 See ibid., 27: “Furthermore, it goes without saying that we have to know a large amount of
the realia of the period [if we want to interpret the text], whether it is items of cattle herding,
local climate, tribal society, or ancient and beliefs [sic]”; and see also ibid., 24: “For example,
the great commentator Sāyaṇa (d. 1387 CE) was a citizen of the last great Hindu empire
of Vijayanagara, a medieval Hindu kingdom of South India with a full blown caste system,
Bhakti/ Tantric Hindu religion, a tipical [sic] climate dominated by monsoon, and an economy
based on rice, agriculture, crafts, and trade. This is quite diferent from being a member of
one of the small tribal, pastoral societies of the Enastern [sic] Panjab, without or with only an
incipient caste system, a Pre- Hindu religion, a cold winter, no real monsoon, without cities,
and with an economy based on cattle herding. While medieval commentaries can help us in
understanding the ritual and some of the grammar, syntax, and the general background of the
texts, they cannot be relied on for the exact interpretation of individual words, of Brāhman ̣a
sentences, and even less for the meaning of the archaic mantra- s of the original meaning of the
rituals, and of Vedic religion and myth in general.” The idea evidently has tremendous appeal
for Witzel, for it is repeated verbatim in Michael Witzel, “Textual Criticism in Indology and
in European Philology during the 19th and 20th Centuries,” Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies
21, no. 3 (2014): 32– 33. A few pages later, he again emphasizes: “A text such as the R ̣gveda
cannot be understood if one does not know something about cattle, the historical climate
of the Panjab, pre-s tate tribal societies and their social systems, about its complex system of
Indo- European and Indo- Iranian poetics, about oral composition, canon formation and the
techniques of critically editing Sanskrit texts— in other words: by a study of a culture through
its texts but making use of various Hilfswissenschaften.” Ibid., 57.
341
342
Martin Luther (1483–1516)
Fourfold sense of scripture
(quadriga)
Catholic intellectual tradition
and spiritual ministry
Karl Lachmann (1793–1851)
Sensus spiritualis (mysticus) Sensus litteralis sive historicus Gottfried Hermann (1772–1848)
Moriz Haupt (1808–74)
Seperation of the Traditional The institution of a new clergy
realia from the text canonical authority
Don Mabillon
(1632–1707) J. S. Semler (1725–91)
Bernard de Monfaucon C. F. Baur (1792–1860)
(1655–1741)
Recovery of the literal
Hermannn
meaning through the Rudolf von Roth (1821–95)
Oldenberg (1854–1920)
historical-critical method
Freedom to define new
The sense of rivalry with the tradition
ideals of scholarship
The wistful glance backward
The documentary impulse
at classical philology
GERMAN INDOLOGY
A genealogy of German Indology, illustrating how the discipline emerges in the wake of
Luther’s theology and also takes up nebulous—a nd barely understood—i mpulses from other
disciplines (especially classical philology)
343
Appendices
1. THE VOLUMES OF
THE CRITICAL EDITION
The Mahābhārata critical edition project had 11 editors, four of whom were also gen-
eral editors. The 11 editors (in order of the parvans or books edited) were Vishnu Sitaram
Sukthankar (Ādi and Āraṇyaka parvans), Franklin Edgerton (Sabhāparvan), Raghu Vira
(Virāṭaparvan), Sushil Kumar De (Udyoga and Droṇa parvans), Shripad Krishna Belvalkar
(Bhīṣma, Ś ānti, Āśramavāsika, Mausala, Mahāprasthānika and Svargārohaṇa parvans),
Parashuram Lakshman Vaidya (Karṇaparvan), Ramachandra Narayan Dandekar (Ś alya
and Anuśāsana parvans), Hari Damodar Velankar, Raghunath Damodar Karmarkar
(Āśvamedhikaparvan) and Vasudeva Gopal Paranjpe (Strīparvan). Vaidya also edited
the Harivaṃśa and the Pratīka Index to the Mahābhārata. The four general editors,
V. S. Sukthankar (1925– 43), S. K. Belvalkar (1943– 61), P. L. Vaidya (1961– 6) and R. N.
Dandekar (joint general editor, 1957– 61), also oversaw the other volumes completed
during their tenures.
The volumes oicial bore the title The Mah bh rata for the First Time Critically Edited by
ā ā
Vishnu S. Sukthankar, followed by the parvan name (for example, The diparvan) and the
Ā
addition: Being the First Book of the Mah bh rata, The Great Epic of India, for the First Time Critically
ā ā
Edited by Vishnu S. Sukthankar (the ordinal number obviously changing depending on the
book). The Ādiparvan appeared in six fascicules between 1927 and 1932, with the sev-
enth fascicule and complete volume appearing in 1933. It has since been reprinted in two
volumes making up volume 1, parts 1 and 2 of the critical edition. The Sabhāparvan was
irst published in 1944 as volume 2 of the critical edition. The Āraṇyakaparvan appeared
as the 11th fascicule in 1941 and the 12th fascicule in 1942. It has since been reprinted
in two volumes making up volumes 3 and 4 of the critical edition. The Virāṭaparvan was
irst published in 1936 as volume 5 of the critical edition. The Udyogaparvan appeared
in two fascicules in 1937 and 1940 and has since been reprinted as volume 6 of the critical
edition. The Bhīṣmaparvan appeared as the 15th fascicule in 1945 and the 16th fascicule
in 1947. It has since been reprinted as volume 7, the largest single volume of the critical
edition. The Droṇaparvan, the second-longest of the Mahābhārata’s books, appeared as
the 25th fascicule in 1953, the 28th fascicule in 1955, the irst half of second volume as
fascicule 29A in 1957 and the second half of second volume and introduction and pre-
liminaries as fascicule 29B in 1958. It has since been reprinted in two volumes making
up volumes 8 and 9 of the critical edition. The Karṇaparvan was published as the 20th
fascicule in 1950 and the 27th fascicule in 1954. It has since been reprinted as volume 10
of the critical edition. The Śalyaparvan appeared as the 30th fascicule in 1956 and the
31st fascicule 1961. It has since been reprinted as volume 11 of the critical edition. The
344
344 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Sauptika and the Strī parvans were irst published in 1948 and 1956 as parts 1 and 2 of
volume 12 of the critical edition, respectively. The Śāntiparvan, the Mahābhārata’s lon-
gest book, was published in several parts. Parts of its irst section, the Rājadharmaparvan,
were published as the18th and 19th fascicules in 1949 and 1950, whereas the complete
Rājadharmaparvan was published in 1961 as volume 13 of the critical edition. The
second part to appear was the Āpaddharmaparvan and the Concordance (titled Part II),
which appeared as the 21st fascicule in 1950 and the 26th fascicule in 1954. The com-
plete Āpaddharma and Concordance was published in 1954 as volume 14 of the critical
edition. The Sāntiparvan’s third part, the Mokṣadharmaparvan, was published in two
parts: Part III: Mok adharma, A and Part III: Mok adharma, B. The irst part appeared as
ṣ ṣ
the 22nd fascicule in 1951, the 23rd fascicule in 1952 and the 24th fascicule in 1953. It
was inally published as the complete Mokṣadharmaparvan, part A in 1954 as volume
15 of the critical edition. The irst part of the Mokṣadharmaparvan, part B appeared in
the 24th fascicule in 1953; the remainder appeared in the 25th fascicule in 1954. The
complete Mokṣadharmaparvan, part B was inally published in 1954 as volume 16 of
the critical edition. Belvalkar’s introduction to the volumes was published as a separate
volume in 1966 (as part 2 of volume 16 of the critical edition). The Anuśāsanaparvan
was irst published in 1966 in two volumes making up volume 17, parts 1 and 2 of the
critical edition. The Āśvamedhikaparvan appeared in two halves: as fascicule 32A in
1958 and as fascicule 32B in 1960. It now constitutes volume 18 of the critical edition.
The Āśramavāsika, Mausala, Mahāprasthānika and Svargārohaṇa parvans appeared in
1959 as parts 1–4 of volume 19 of the critical edition. The Harivaṃśa was published in
two parts: volume 1, containing the critical text, appeared in 1961, whereas the extensive
appendices were published as volume 2 in 1971. Both parts bore the title The Mah bh rata
ā ā
for the First Time Critically Edited by Vishnu S. Sukthankar† (August 1925–January 1943), S. K.
Belvalkar (April 1943–March 1961), P. L. Vaidya (since April 1961). The Hariva a, Being the
ṃś
Khila or Supplement to the Mah bh rata, for the First Time Critically Edited by Parashuram Lakshman
ā ā
Vaidya. The Pratīka index to the critical edition, an index of all the p ādas (verse-quarters)
included in the critical edition of the Mahābhārata whether the constituted text or the
critical apparatus (that is, the star and appendix passages), was completed in six volumes
between 1967 and 1972 under P. L. Vaidya’s editorship. Volume 6 also included a Pratīka
index of the Harivaṃśa, although restricted only to its constituted text.
345
2. EDITIONS BESIDES
THE CRITICAL EDITION
The principal editions of the Mahābhārata before the critical edition were the
Bombay, the Calcutta, the Kumbhakonam and the Chitrashala Press (Pune) editions.
A critical edition of the southern recension, published concurrently, has replaced the
Kumbhakonam edition as the principal representative of the southern tradition.1
The Bombay and Calcutta editions are of the vulgate. The Bombay edition addition-
ally includes Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary. It is in pothı ̄(horizontal) form and two editions
are known: an older edition published by Ganpat Krishnaji in 1863 and a newer one
published by Gopal Narayan in 1901.2 The Calcutta edition was the irst printed edition
of the Mahābhārata and hence constitutes the editio princeps. The Chitrashala Press
edition, also known as the Kinjawadekar edition after its editor, is widely used for the text
of Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary.
Atmaram Khadilkar, ed. Mahābhārata with Nıl̄akan ̣ṭha’s Commentary. Bombay: Ganpat
Krishnaji’s Press, 1863.
Vasudev Balacharya Ainapure, ed. The Mahābhārata with the Commentary Bhāvadıp̄ a of
Nıl̄akan ̣ṭha. 6 vols. Bombay: Gopal Narayan & Company, 1901.
The Bombay edition is supposedly based on Nīlakaṇṭha’s text, but Sukthankar, who exam-
ined the text, notes that it contains many readings and lines not found in the Nīlakaṇṭha
manuscripts. The text is printed in large font in the center (when the volume is held open) and
Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary is printed in smaller font on the upper and lower margins of the
open pages. The edition is available as a scan online.
The Mahábhárata, an Epic Poem Written by the Celebrated Veda Vyása Rishi. Vol. 1, edited by
the Pandits attached to the Education Committee. Calcutta: Education Committee’s
Press, 1834. Vol. 2, edited by Nimachand Siromani and Nanda Gopála. Calcutta: Baptist
Mission Press, 1836. Vol. 3, edited by Nimachand Siromani, Jaya Gopála Tirkalanka and
Ráma Govinda. Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press, 1837. Vol. 4, edited by Nimáichandra
Siromani, Rámagovinda and Rámahari Nyáya Panchánan. Calcutta: Baptist Mission
Press, 1839.
Sukthankar refers to this as the best edition of the vulgate. It is printed in Devanāgarī
characters. Volume 1 contains the Ādi, Sabha and Āraṇyaka parvans (the latter is called
Vanaparvan). Volume 2 contains the Virāṭa, Udyoga, Bhīṣma and Droṇa parvans. Volume 3
contains the Karṇa, Ś alya, Sauptika, Strī and Ś ānti parvans. Volume 5 contains the Anuśāsana,
Āśvamedhika, Āśramavāsika, Mausala, Mahāprasthānika and Svargārohaṇa parvans as well
346
346 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
as the Harivaṃśa. An index is included as volume 5 but no publication details regarding this
volume are forthcoming. The edition is available online.
T. R. Krishnacharya and T. R. Vyasacharya, eds. Sriman Mahabharatam. A New Edition
Mainly Based on the South Indian Texts with Footnotes and Readings. 19 vols. Bombay: Javaji
Dadaji’s “Nirṇaya- Sāgar” Press, 1906– 14.
Although published at the Nirnaya Sagar Press in Bombay, this edition was published for
T. R. Krishnacharya, the proprietor of the Madhva Vilas Book Depot, Kumbakonam, and is
therefore known as the Kumbakonam (or Kumbhakonam) edition. Sukthankar calls it a ine
representative of the composite Telugu edition but notes that it is now rendered superluous
and obsolete by P. P. S. Sastri’s edition. He also notes, of its third book, the Vanaparvan, that
it contains “a good number of speciic Northern passages unknown to the true Southern
recension.”3 Scans of this edition are partially available online.
Ramachandra Kinjawadekar, ed. Mahābhāratam with the Commentary of Nıl̄akan ̣ṭha. 6 vols.
Pune: Chitrashala Press, 1929– 36.
The French scholar Madeleine Biardeau (1922–2 010) used this edition exclusively. Curiously,
Sukthankar does not mention it in his survey of printed editions in the “Prolegomena.”4 Jean-
Michel Péterfalvi’s abridged translation into French (with Biardeau’s commentary) is based
on this edition.
Pandit Ramanarayanadatta Sastri Pandey, ed. Śrım̄ anmaharṣi Vedavyāsapran ̣ıt̄a Mahābhārata.
7 vols. (including Harivaṃśa). Gorakhpur: Gita Press, no date.
This edition, published by Gita Press of Gorakhpur, features a Hindi commentary (printed
beneath each śloka). Gita Press volumes typically do not feature the date of publication,
so no information is available on when this edition was irst published. The order of the
volumes is as follows: volume 1: Ādi and Sabhā parvans, volume 2: Vana and Virāṭa parvans,
volume 3: Udyoga and Bhīṣma parvans, volume 4: Droṇa, Karṇa, Ś alya, Sauptika and
Strī parvans, volume 5: Ś āntiparvan, volume 6: Anuśāsana, Āśvamedhika, Āśramavāsika,
Mausala, Mahāprasthānika and Svargārohaṇa parvans. Volume 7 is published under the title
Śrım̄ anmaharṣi Vedavyāsapran ̣ıt̄a Mahābhārata-K hilabhāg Harivaṃśa. Pandey does not mention the
manuscripts the edition is based on. The text is supposedly of Nīlakaṇṭha’s edition but with
additional verses from the southern tradition. Scans of all seven volumes are available online.
P. P. S. Sastri, ed. The Mahābhārata (Southern Recension) Critically Edited by P. P. S. Sastri.
18 vols. Madras: Ramaswamy Sastrulu & Sons, Madras, 1931– 33.
Sastri’s “southern recension” of the Mahābhārata is published in 18 volumes, but the count
does not match the Mahābhārata’s 18 books. The Ādi, Āraṇyaka, Droṇa and Anuśāsana
parvans are all in two parts, the Ś āntiparvan in three parts. The Ś alya, Sauptika and Strī
parvans are combined into one volume as are the Āśvamedhika, Āśramavāsika, Mausala,
Mahāprasthāna and Svargārohaṇa parvans. In spite of the name, it is not a true critical
edition. Sukthankar describes it as a true lineal descendant of the Mahābhārata manuscripts
of south India. The edition is no longer in print, but scans are available online.
347
3. ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS OF
THE MAHĀBHĀRATA
Scholars have made ive attempts to translate the entire Mahābhārata into English so
far.5 Kisari Mohan Ganguli inished the irst complete translation (of the vulgate) in
1896. Manmatha Nath Dutt issued a revised version of this translation, purging Ganguli
of many archaisms. Dutt’s main innovation was the addition of verse numbers. When
completed, the Chicago edition is likely to replace the Ganguli edition as the standard,
as it is based on the critical edition’s text and is the most rigorous in terms of speci-
fying the text it is based on, contextualization of the edition and citation of chapter and
verse numbers. This is the easiest edition to examine against the constituted text. The
second translation (and the only other besides the Chicago edition to translate the crit-
ical edition) is Bibek Debroy’s in 10 volumes. The Clay Sanskrit Library translation was
abandoned due to inancial problems. The existing volumes are inconsistent as regards
the discussion of their text and the editorial practices adopted. The edition translates
the vulgate, to avoid duplicating the Chicago edition. Finally, several abridgments and
adaptations of the Mahābhārata exist, but they are not listed here as they provide only a
glimpse into this complex and philosophically rich work.
P. C. Roy, ed. The Mahābhārata of Krishna- Dwaipayana Vyasa Translated into English Prose.
11 vols. Calcutta: Bharata Press, 1884– 96.
This is the oldest and at present one of only two complete translations of the Mahābhārata
into English. The edition is referred to either as the Roy edition (after its publisher) or as the
Ganguli edition (after its translator, K. M. Ganguli). The translator does not mention the
edition or manuscripts the translation is based on, but it is in all likelihood the editio princeps.
The translation reads well and luently and Ganguli provides extensive notes on some of the
more diicult terms or expressions (often based on Nīlakaṇṭha’s glosses). The edition was
reprinted in 12 volumes by Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi in 1990 and is still available
from this publisher.
Manmatha Nath Dutt, trans. A Prose English Translation of the Mahabharata (Translated
Literally from the Original Sanskrit Text). 8 vols. Calcutta: Elysium Press, 1895– 1905.
This translation cleaves very closely to Ganguli’s (see examples below), while attempting to
update the latter’s English. Dutt has been criticized for his obvious dependence on Ganguli,
but his purpose difered somewhat: whereas Ganguli’s translation is in running prose and
does not list the verse numbers, Dutt breaks up the text into numbered units to facilitate
comparison with the Sanskrit original (the reprint by Parimal Publishers, Delhi in 1988
348
348 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
further aided this goal by adding the Sanskrit text on facing pages). The edition features sum-
maries of the adhyāyas, but lacks interpretive aids such as an introduction or Ganguli’s exten-
sive notes. Dutt also provides no information on his text or how he tackled diicult passages
(in contrast to Ganguli, who almost always explains that he had recourse to Nīlakaṇṭha or
other works, etc.).
J. A. B. van Buitenen, trans. The Mah bh rata. 3 vols. Chicago: University of Chicago
ā ā
Press, 1973–7 8. Continued by: James L. Fitzgerald, trans. The Mahābhārata, vol.
7. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
This edition is also referred to as the Chicago edition after its publisher. Thus far, six
parvans of the Mahābhārata (and the irst part of a seventh) have appeared: the Ādi, Sabhā,
Āraṇyaka, Virāṭa and Udyoga parvans and the Strī and Ś ānti parvans (up to the end of the
Rājadharmaparvan). The translation is of the critical edition text and has largely replaced
the older Roy edition. Van Buitenen has been criticized for his “medievalizing” expressions,
and theological nuances or literary references are sometimes lost in his work. The remaining
volumes will appear from diferent translators: at the time of the writing of this book, Gary
Tubb had joined the project as associate general editor, and parvans 14– 18 were due to be
the next volume to appear (with Frederick M. Smith as translator). The following is a ten-
tative list of forthcoming volumes with their translators: Bhīṣmaparvan (David Gitomer),
Droṇaparvan (Gary Tubb), Karṇaparvan (Adam Bowles), Anuśāsanaparvan (David Brick)
and the remaining parts of the Ś āntiparvan (James L. Fitzgerald).
Bibek Debroy, trans. The Mahābhārata. 10 vols. New Delhi: Penguin Books India, 2010–1 4.
This edition, targeted at the nonacademic market, eschews the paraphernalia of a scholarly
edition such as diacritics, references to the Sanskrit text and an apparatus. Names are spelled
phonetically (for example, Souti instead of Sauti, Droupadi instead of Draupadī, etc.). The
same introduction repeats in all 10 volumes. The edition presents an accessible rendition of
the text, supplemented with a minimum of notes. Debroy makes his preference for the critical
edition text clear. Apart from the unconventional spelling, Debroy is scrupulously accurate in
the rendering of names (that is, he does not substitute one epithet for another).
Maha Bhárata. 15 vols. Clay Sanskrit Library. New York: New York University Press and
the JJC Foundation, 2005– 9.
No general editor is mentioned for this series, which was unfortunately abandoned after 15
volumes (of a projected 32) appeared in it. The text is based on the Kinjawadekar edition.
The individual translators emended the text in the case of unclear readings, but no gen-
eral principles were evolved (the emendations and the translators’ rationale for them are
listed at the back of the individual volumes). The critical apparatus and notes are minimal.
The unusual transliteration scheme, though intended to make the volumes easier for novice
readers, adds a further layer of diiculty. The following volumes are currently available:
Paul Wilmot, trans. Maha·bhárata Book II: The Great Hall. 2006.
William Johnson, trans. Maha·bhárata Book III: The Forest, volume 4 of 4. 2005.
Kathleen Garbutt, trans. Maha·bhárata Book IV: Viráta. 2007.
349
APPENDICES 349
Kathleen Garbutt, trans. Maha·bhárata Book V: Preparations for War, volume 1 of 2. 2008.
Kathleen Garbutt, trans. Maha·bhárata Book V: Preparations for War, volume 2 of 2. 2008.
Alex Cherniak, trans. Maha·bhárata Book VI: Bhishma, volume 1 of 2. 2008.
Alex Cherniak, trans. Maha·bhárata Book VI: Bhishma, volume 2 of 2. 2009.
Vaughan Pilikian, trans. Maha·bhárata Book VII: Drona, volume 1 of 2. 2006.
Vaughan Pilikian, trans. Maha·bhárata Book VII: Drona, volume 2 of 2. 2009.
Adam Bowles, trans. Maha·bhárata Book VIII: Karna, volume 1 of 2. 2007.
Adam Bowles, trans. Maha·bhárata Book VIII: Karna, volume 2 of 2. 2008.
Justin Meiland, trans. Maha·bhárata Book IX: Shalya, volume 1 of 2. 2005.
Justin Meiland, trans. Maha·bhárata Book IX: Shalya, volume 2 of 2. 2007.
Kate Crosby, trans. Maha·bhárata Books X & XI: Dead of the Night and The Women. 2009.
Alex Wynne, trans. Maha·bhárata Book XII: Peace (Part 2: The Book of Liberation), volume 3
of 5. 2009.
For comparison, excerpts of the irst few verses of the principal translations are reprinted
here. Every efort was made to retain the spelling, diacritic and punctuation conventions
of the original.
Kisari Mohan Ganguli: Manmatha Nath Dutt:
Om! Having bowed down to Narayana and Having saluted the Supreme Deity (Narayana), and the
Nara, the most exalted male being, and also to highest of all male beings (Nara) and also the Goddess of
the goddess Saraswati, must the word success be Learning (Saraswati), let us cry success!
uttered. 1– 2. One day when the great sages of hard
Ugra- srava, the son of Lomaharshana, surnamed austerities, who had been present at the twelve
Sauti, well- versed in the Puranas, bending with years’ sacriice of Kulapati Saunaka, were
humility one day approached the great sages of comfortably sitting in the Naimisharanya, Rishi
rigid vows, sitting as their ease who had attended Lomaharshana’s son, Ugrasrava, popularly
the twelve years’ sacriice of Saunaka, surnamed known as Souti— well-r ead in the Puranas—c ame
Kulapati, in the forest of Naimisha. [...] to them with all humility. [...]
The Rishis replied: “The Purana, irst The Rishis replied:
promulgated by the great Rishi Dwaipayana, 17. The Purana which was irst told by the
and which after having been heard both by the illustrious sage, Dwaipayana, and which was
gods and the Brahmarshis was highly esteemed, greatly esteemed by the celestials and Brahmarsis
which is the most eminent narrative that exists when they heard it,
diversiied both in diction and division, possessing 18. And which, being full of various dictions
subtile meanings logically combined and and divisions, is (undoubtedly) the most eminent
embellished from the Vedas, is a sacred work. narrative (amongst all narratives) that exist,
Composed in elegant language, it includeth containing (as it does) subtle and logically
the subjects of other books. It is elucidated by combined meanings, enriched with (the essences
other Sastras, and comprehendeth the sense of of) the Vedas, is a sacred work.
the four Vedas. We are desirous of hearing that 12– 21. It is composed in beautiful language,
history, also called Bharata, the holy composition and it includes all other works. It is explained
of the wonderful Vyasa, which dispelleth the by all Sastras, and contains the sense of the four
fear of evil, just as it was cheerfully recited by Vedas. (But Souti,) we desire to hear Bharata, the
the Rishi Vaishampayana, under the direction sacred history that drives away all fear— the holy
of Dwaipayana himself, at the snake- sacriice of composition of the great Vyasa— just as it was
Raja Janamejaya?” beautifully narrated at the great snake- sacriice
of Raja Janamejaya by Rishi Vaishampayana as
directed by Krishna Dwaipayana himself.
350
350 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
J. A. B. van Buitenen: Bibek Debroy:
The Bard shall intone the song of the Triumph after “Jaya” must be recited after having bowed in
having bowed to Nara and Nārāyan ̣a, supreme among obeisance before Narayana and also Nara, the
men, and to the Goddess Sarasvatı.̄ supreme human being, and also the goddess
1.1 The Bard Ugraśravas, the son of Sarasvati.
Lomaharṣaṇa, singer of the ancient Lore, once The great sages, performers of diicult
came to the Naimiṣa Forest, where the seers of austerities, were present at the twelve- year
strict vows were sitting together at the Twelve- sacriice of Kulapati Shounaka and were
year Session of family chieftain Ś aunaka. [...] comfortably seated in Naimisharanya.
The seers said: Ugrashrava, the son of Lomaharshana and the
15 Tell us that ancient Lore that was related by son of a suta, learned in the Puranas, and also
the eminent sage Dvaipāyana, which the Gods known as Souti, once approached them, bowing
and brahmin seers honored when they heard it! in humility. [...]
That divine language of the sublime Histories, The sages replied: “Tell us that ancient story
in all the varieties of words and books, the that was told by the supreme sage Dvaipayana,
sacred Account of the Bhāratas, that language that which was worshipped by the gods and the
of complex word and meaning, ruled by brahmarshis when they heard it—a nd that which
reinement and reinforced by all sciences, which is full of wonderful words and divisions and is
Vaiśaṃpāyana, at Dvaipāyana’s bidding, repeated the supreme of narratives, with subtle meanings
truthfully to the satisfaction of King Janamejaya and logic, adorned with the essence of the Vedas.
at the king’s sacriice. We wish to hear that Grand That sacred history of the Bharatas is beautiful
Collection, now joined to the Collections of the in language and meaning, and includes all other
Four Vedas, which Vyāsa the miracle- monger works. All the shastras add to it and that sacred
compiled, replete with the Law and dispelling all composition of great Vyasa has been added
danger of evil! to the four Vedas. We wish to hear that holy
collection, that drives away fear of sin, just as
it was recited at King Janamejaya’s sacriice by
Vaishampayana.”
351
4. HOW TO USE THE CRITICAL
APPARATUS
The critical edition comprises two parts: the constituted text and the critical apparatus.
The constituted text is running text and can be read like any other text. It is whole and
complete within itself and represents the editors’ best surmise of the text of the arche-
type (the source from which all present- day manuscripts examined for the edition are
descended). The critical apparatus consists of the variant readings (also called variae
lectiones) contained in one or more manuscripts, details of other changes (transpositions
of sections or passages, names of chapters and numbering) and sometimes details about
the manuscripts’ physical features (missing folios, change of hand, ink markings, mar-
ginal insertions and the like). The critical apparatus is primarily a record of the variants
found in the witnesses, but it is also a valuable tool to control and reconstruct the editors’
decisions. Since the editor will have explained his principles at the outset in the introduc-
tion (for example, when two manuscripts disagree, he will always prefer the reading of the
irst), the reader can in most cases understand why the editor selected the reading he did.
The Mahābhārata critical edition also features an expanded critical apparatus in
the form of an appendix: since the diferent Mahābhārata manuscripts vary not just
in terms of single readings or lines but sometimes by entire chapters and/o r narratives,
Sukthankar moved all such longer passages to an appendix at the end of the volume—a
practice all the later editors followed. In contrast, the shorter insertions were printed
along with the variant readings below the running text. These passages are marked with
asterisks (for this reason, they are often called “star passages”) and numbered sequen-
tially. Thus, 1* is the irst insertion in the Ādiparvan (the count resets in every volume
so one must specify the volume in question). Likewise, the longer appendix passages are
numbered sequentially and typically cited as App. 1, no. 1 and so forth (as with the star
passages, the count resets in every volume).
The Mahābhārata critical edition has a negative apparatus. That means the critical
apparatus only records the variants and not the manuscripts containing the reading
adopted for the constituted text. To know which manuscripts the reading of the consti-
tuted text is based on one must know the manuscripts collated for that section of the text.
Ideally, the editor will have provided this information in a table like Sukthankar’s table
of the manuscripts collated for the critical edition of the Ādiparvan (see later). If he has
not, the reader must glean this information from elsewhere. Merely reading the list of
manuscripts forming the critical apparatus for the edition or the volume is insuicient,
since many manuscripts were fragmentary and/o r were added or dropped throughout
the edition. Thus, the reader must check at the beginning of the chapter if the editor
352
352 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
has listed additional information about the manuscripts used for that section; occasion-
ally, she may need to leaf back several pages to see if the editor noted a change to his
manuscripts from some previous section onward. Once she has this information to hand,
she can proceed: she consults the critical apparatus for the manuscripts for which variant
readings are recorded, then eliminates these manuscripts from the list of manuscripts
used for this section of the text. In this way, she arrives at the manuscripts that are unac-
counted for in the critical apparatus. These must be the ones whose reading the editor
adopted for the constituted text. Explanations of the various abbreviations and diacrit-
ical marks used (for example, marg. for a marginal insertion) can be found by consulting
the respective editors’ tables (conveniently compiled in one table in Appendix 13).
For instance, lines 1.1.1 of the critical edition read: lomaharṣan ̣aputra ugraśravāḥ sūtaḥ
paurān ̣iko naimiṣāran ̣ye śaunakasya kulapater dvādaśavārṣike satre | | Consulting the critical
apparatus, the reader inds that the editor recorded the following variants for this line: K3
subst. for this passage lomaharṣan ̣aputrastu naimiṣāran ̣yavāsinaḥ. S rom˚ (T2 G6 śrır̄om˚). D10
˚pada for ˚putra. K0 sauti- ; K1.2.5 D7 sūta- ; K4.6 V1 B (B4 as in K0) D (except D14; D13
missing) T1 sautiḥ. D4 (by corr.).12 S Nīlp naimiśā˚. K2 ˚ran ̣ya(vā)nivāsinaḥ (for ˚ran ̣ye). D14
śaunakakula˚. D14 ins tu brahmarṣe vartamāne after ˚rṣike. D10– 12 S (except G1) ins. vartamāne
(G2 prava˚), while D14 ins. tatra after satre. From the table of manuscripts collated for this
section of the text, the reader knows that the editor had the following manuscripts before
him: K0– 6, V1, B1–4 , Da, Dn, Dr, D1–1 2.14, T1.2, G1–7 and M1–4 . To aid herself, the
reader may draw up the following scheme:
lomaharṣan ̣aputra ugraśravāḥ sūtaḥ paurān ̣iko naimiṣāran ̣ye śaunakasya kulapater dvādaśavārṣike satre | |
K0 sauti-
K1 sūta-
K2 sūta-
˚ran ̣ya(vā)nivāsinaḥ (for ˚ran ̣ye)
K3 Subst. for this passage the foll. line: lomaharṣan ̣aputrastu
naimiṣāran ̣yavāsinaḥ
K4 sautiḥ
K5 sūta-
K6 sautiḥ
V1 sautiḥ
B1 sautiḥ
B2 sautiḥ
B3 sautiḥ
B4 sauti-
Da sautiḥ
Dn sautiḥ
Dr sautiḥ
D1 sautiḥ
D2 sautiḥ
D3 sautiḥ
353
APPENDICES 353
D4 sautiḥ
(by corr.) naimiśā˚
D5 sautiḥ
D6 sautiḥ
D7 sūta-
D8 sautiḥ
D9 sautiḥ
D10 ˚pada (for ˚putra)
sautiḥ
ins. vartamāne after satre
D11 sautiḥ
ins. vartamāne after satre
D12 sautiḥ
naimiśā˚
ins. vartamāne after satre
D14 śaunakakula˚
ins. tu brahmarṣe vartamāne after ˚rṣike
ins. tatra after satre
T1 rom˚
sautiḥ
naimiśā˚
ins. vartamāne after satre
T2 śrır̄om˚
naimiśā˚
ins. vartamāne after satre
G1 rom˚
naimiśā˚
G2 rom˚
naimiśā˚
ins. pravartamāne after satre
G3 rom˚
naimiśā˚
ins. vartamāne after satre
G4 rom˚
naimiśā˚
ins. vartamāne after satre
G5 rom˚
naimiśā˚
ins. vartamāne after satre
G6 śrır̄om˚
naimiśā˚
ins. vartamāne after satre
G7 rom˚
naimiśā˚
ins. vartamāne after satre
M1 rom˚
naimiśā˚
ins. vartamāne after satre
354
354 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
M2 rom˚
naimiśā˚
ins. vartamāne after satre
M3 rom˚
naimiśā˚
ins. vartamāne after satre
M4 rom˚
naimiśā˚
ins. vartamāne after satre
Nīlp. naimiśā˚
Eliminating manuscripts for which variants have been entered, the reader can see that
no variants are entered for the K manuscripts except K3 and for V1, B and all the D
manuscripts except D10. The editor’s reading of lomaharṣan ̣aputra ugraśravāḥ must hence
be based on these manuscripts (that is, K [except K3], V1, B and D [except D10]).
Proceeding in the same way, the reader will see that the editor’s choice of sūtaḥ paurān ̣iko
must be based on the manuscripts K1, K2, K5, D7 and all the S manuscripts with the
exception of T1. By repeating these steps as often as is necessary, she can identify the
reading of the manuscripts for which no variants are entered. In fact, she can recon-
struct not only the reading of these manuscripts but also of those for which variants are
entered. For instance, the reading of the M group must be: romaharṣan ̣aputra ugraśravāḥ
sūtaḥ paurān ̣iko naimiśāran ̣ye śaunakasya kulapater dvādaśavārṣike satre vartamāne. Merely by using
the constituted text along with the critical apparatus, the reader can thus gain a complete
understanding of the entire manuscript tradition.
355
5. HOW EDITORS RECONSTRUCTED
THE READING OF THE ARCHETYPE
The Mahābhārata problem, Sukthankar famously remarked, is a problem sui generis.6
The canons of classical philology, developed to deal with the reconstruction of the
archetypes of texts that difered only in a handful of variants and whose copies are
more or less faithful transcripts of their sources, are strained to the breaking point in
the case of the Mahābhārata. The epic, as Sukthankar comments, is a text with “about
a dozen, more or less independent, versions, whose extreme types difer, in extent, by
about 13,000 stanzas or 26,000 lines; a work which, for centuries, must have been
growing not only upwards and downwards, but also laterally, like the Nyagrodha tree,
growing on all sides.”7 If he could nonetheless apply the genealogical- reconstructive
method and recover an archetype, it is because he had perfectly penetrated its under-
lying principle: in essence, he treated the expansions of the text as variant readings and
its interpolations as errors. The correct “reading” thus was always the text as preserved
in its most conservative, least ampliied witnesses,8 and the reading of this text (that is,
the text chosen as likely the most original) was always reconstructed on the basis of
the simple principle that two witnesses at a great distance from each other are likely to
have little or no possibility of communication and that, if they agree with each other
(and this agreement is such that it cannot be attributed to chance, that is, to polygenesis
of innovations), then their reading is likely the original.9 Figure 70 ofers insight into how
the editors, using the “simple rules and calculations of probability” Glenn Most speaks
of, reconstructed the reading of the archetype.10
356
ARCHETYPE READING OF N & S READING OF , , andM
lomaharaaputra ugrarav [crux] paur iko
naimi raye aunakasya kulapater dvdaavr
N satre
lomaharaaputraugrarav sauti paur iko
naimi raye aunakasya kulapater dvdaavrike
satre
lomaharaaputra**ugrarav sauti paur iko
naimi raye aunakasya kulapater
1.1.1A* lomaharaaputra ugrarav sta paur iko dvdaavrike***satre
naimi raye aunakasya kulapater dvdaavrike
satre
romaharaaputra ugrarav sta paur iko
naimi raye aunakasya kulapater dvdaavrike
S satre vartamne****
romaharaaputraugrarav sta paur iko
naimi raye aunakasya kulapater dvdaavrike
satre vartamne M
romaharaaputra ugrarav sta paur iko
naimi raye aunakasya kulapater dvdaavrike
satre vartamne
K0 sauti-; K1.2.5 sta-; K4.6 sauti
K3 subst.for this passage the foll. line:
lomaharaaputrastu naimi rayavsina
K2 ºraya(v)nivsina (for ºraye)
**D10 ºpdafor ºputra
*Mss. D7 sta-; V1 B (B4 as in K0) D (except D14; D13
collated for missing) sauti
this portion D4 (by corr.).12 Nlp. naimi º
of the text: D14 aunakakulaº
K06 V1 ***D14 ins tu brahmare vartamne after ºrike
B14 Da Dn D1012 ins. vartamne, while D14 ins.tatraafter satre
Dr D112.14 T2 G6 rromº
T1.2 G17 T1 sauti
M14 ****G2 pravaº(G1 as in N)
Figure 70 Reconstructing the reading of 1.1.1A
newgenrtpdf
357
6. HOW TO CITE THE MAHĀBHĀRATA
The Mahābhārata follows two or three diferent types of division. The broadest is
the articulation of the work into 18 parvans or books (24 in the southern recension).
Concurrent with this division, there is a second division into 100 upaparvans or sub-
parvans. Finally, the Mahābhārata also features adhyāyas or chapters. The chapters con-
tain verses or ślokas. When citing a verse, it is customary to specify the book, the chapter
and the verse number (for example, Mahābhārata 1.1.1, which represents the irst verse
of the irst chapter of the irst book of the Mahābhārata or the irst verse of the entire
epic). When citing a passage, it is customary to cite beginning and ending line num-
bers, occasionally with lowercase letters indicating the pāda or verse-q uarter (for example,
Mahābhārata 1.1.1– 15, Mahābhārata 1.1.1c– 2d, etc.)
The upaparvans play almost no role in citation, but as they form well- deined units
they are often mentioned in discussion (for example, “in the Aṇukramaṇiparvan” or “in
the Paulomaparvan”). By contrast, the adhyāyas, though used in citation, are rarely men-
tioned in discussion, as the divisions do not correspond to any one theme or narrative. For
instance, the Āstīkaparvan includes 40 adhyāyas, but many of its narratives extend across
several adhyāyas; their end also does not necessarily coincide with the end of an adhyāya.
As the book, chapter and verse numbers remain constant across translations of the
same edition, it is customary to cite only these igures even for translations (for example,
Mahābhārata 1.1.1 rather than the page number when citing from Van Buitenen’s trans-
lation of the Ādiparvan). Note that these igures are not constant across the diferent
editions so that Mahābhārata 1.45.10 might refer to a diferent line in the critical edition
than in the vulgate. For this reason, it is always important to specify at the outset of one’s
work which edition of the Mahābhārata one is relying on.
358
359
7. THE EXTENT OF THE
MAHĀ BHĀ RATA’S BOOKS
The traditional extent of the Mahābhārata is 100,000 verses, a igure that is computed
by adding the Harivaṃśa, the khila or appendix to the Mahābhārata, to its 18 books. This
igure is only approximate, as the diferent manuscripts and printed editions difer greatly
in extent. P. P. S. Sastri, who computed the extent of the diferent editions (and the four
manuscripts used for his edition), lists the following igures:
1. Bombay edition: 84,829 verses;
2. Calcutta, Telugu and Kumbhakonam editions: 84,836 verses;11
3. Grantha edition: 95,379 verses;12
4. Palm- leaf manuscripts क, ख, ग: 95,824 verses;13 and
5. Palm- leaf manuscript अ: 95,286 verses.14
The Kumbhakonam edition gives its own extent as 96,645, thus most closely approxi-
mating the 100,000- verse ideal.15 No igures are known for the vulgate, but it is possible
that, in some manuscripts at least, it approaches the canonical 100,000- verse mark. The
critical edition reduced the text’s length to 73,640 verses and 297 prose units arranged
in 1,995 adhyāyas or chapters (plus an additional 6,073 verses in 118 chapters in the
Harivaṃśa).16 The breakdown of these verses is as follows:17
Parvan Extent Number of adhyaˉyas
Ādiparvan 7,196 verses and 156 prose units 225
Sabhāparvan 2,390 verses 72
Āraṇyakaparvan 10,141 verses and 84 prose units 299
Virāṭaparvan 1,834 verses 67
Udyogaparvan 6,063 verses 197
Bhīsṃaparvan 5,406 verses 117
Droṇaparvan 8,112 verses 173
Karṇaparvan 3,871 verses 69
Ś alyaparvan 3,293 verses 64
Sauptikaparvan 772 verses 18
Strīparvan 730 verses 27
Ś āntiparvan, within which: 12,890 verses and 57 prose units 353
Rājadharmaparvan 4,512 verses 128
Āpaddharmaparvan 1,560 verses 39
Mokṣadharmaparvan 6,737 verses and 57 prose units 186
Anuśāsanaparvan 6,536 verses 154
360
360 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Parvan Extent Number of adhyaˉyas
Āśvamedhikaparvan 2,862 verses 96
Āśramavāsikaparvan 1,062 verses 47
Mausalaparvan 273 verses 9
Mahāprasthānikaparvan 106 3
Svargārohaṇaparvan 194 5
Harivaṃśa 6,073 verses 118
361
8. THE 18 PARVAN S AND 100 UPAPARVAN S
OF THE MAHĀBHĀRATA
Besides the division into 18 parvans, the Mahābhārata also features a second division,
namely, into 100 upa or sub-p arvans (sometimes also called antaḥparvans).18 These 100
upaparvans are mentioned at two places in the Parvasamg̣ rahaparvan of the Mahābhārata
(the second book of the Ādiparvan): once in the list of the 100 books from 1.2.34a–6 9c
and once in the summary of the books from 1.2.72a–2 34a.19 This division is clearly a
northern feature, for the southern manuscripts rarely, if at all, name the sub-p arvan in
their colophons.20 The names listed in the second column therefore rarely correspond to
the southern manuscripts.21 The adhyāya divisions given are those of the critical edition.22
Parvan Upaparvan1 Adhyāya(s)
Ādiparvan (1) Anukramaṇī 1
The Book of the Beginning The List of the 100 Books
(2) Parvasaṃgraha 2
The Summary of the Books
(3) Pauṣya 3
The Book of Pauṣya
(4) Pauloma 4– 12
The Book of Puloman
(5) Āstīka 13– 53
The Book of Āstīka
(6) Ādivaṃśāvataraṇa2 54– 61
The Descent of the First Generations
(7) Saṃbhava 62– 123
The Origins
(8) Jatugṛhadāha 124– 38
The Fire in the Lacquer House
(9) Haiḍimba3 139– 42
The Slaying of Hiḍimba
(10) Bakavadha 143– 52
The Slaying of Baka
(11) Caitraratha 153– 73
The Book of Citraratha
(12) Svayaṃvara4 174– 89
The Choice of a Bridegroom
(13) Vaivāhika 190– 92
The Wedding
362
362 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Parvan Upaparvan Adhyāya(s)
(14) Vidurāgamana 193– 98
The Arrival of Vidura
(15) Rājyalambha 199
The Winning of a Kingdom
(16) Arjunavanavāsa 200– 10
Arjuna’s Sojourn in the Forest
(17) Subhadrāharaṇa 211– 12
The Abduction of Subhadrā
(18) Haraṇahārika 213
The Fetching of the Nuptial Gift
(19) Khāṇdavadāha 214– 25
The Burning of the Khāṇḍava Forest
Sabhāparvan (20) Sabhā 1– 11
The Book of the Assembly Hall The Assembly Hall
(21) Mantra 12– 17
The Council
(22) Jarāsaṃdhavadha 18– 22
The Slaying of Jarāsaṃdha
(23) Digvijaya 23– 29
The Conquest of the World
(24) Rājasūyika 30– 32
The Royal Consecration
(25) Arghābhiharaṇa 33– 36
The Taking of the Guest Gift
(26) Śiśupālavadha 37– 42
The Slaying of Śiśupāla
(27) Dyūta 43– 65
The Gambling Match
(28) Anudyūta 66– 72
The Sequel to the Gambling
Āraṇyakaparvan (29) Āraṇyaka 1– 11
The Book of the Forest The Forest Teachings
(30) Kirmīravadha 12
The Slaying of Kirmīra
(31) Kairāta 13– 42
The Battle of Arjuna and the Mountain
Man
(32) Indralokābhigamana 43– 79
The Journey to the World of Indra
(33) Tīrthayātrā 80– 153
The Pilgrimage
(34) Jaṭāsuravadha 154
The Slaying of Jaṭāsura
(35) Yakṣayuddha 155– 72
The War of the Yakṣas
(36) Ājagara 173– 78
The Boa
(37) Mārkaṇḍeyasmāsya 179– 221
The Meeting with Mārkaṇḍeya
363
APPENDICES 363
Parvan Upaparvan Adhyāya(s)
(38) Draupadīsatyabhāmāsaṃvāda 222– 24
The Dialogue of Draupadī and
Satyabhāmā
(39) Ghoṣayātrā 225– 43
The Cattle Expedition
(40) Mṛgasvapnabhaya 244
The Deer in the Dream
(41) Vrīhidrauṇika 245– 47
The Measure of Rice
(42) Draupadīharaṇa 248– 82
The Abduction of Draupadī
(43) Kuṇḍalāharaṇa 283– 94
The Theft of the Earrings
(44) Āraṇeya 295– 99
The Fire Drilling Woods
Virāṭaparvan (45) Vairāṭa 1– 12
The Book of Virāṭa The Book of Virāṭa
(46) Kīcakavadha 13– 23
The Slaying of Kīcaka
(47) Gograhaṇa 24– 63
The Cattle Robbery
(48) Vaivāhika 64– 67
The Wedding of Abhimanyu and the
Daughter of Virāṭa
Udyogaparvan (49) Udyoga 1– 21
The Book of the Efort The Book of the Efort
(50) Saṃjayayāna 22– 32
The Coming of Saṃjaya
(51) Prajāgara 33– 41
The Sleeplessness
(52) Sānatsujāta 42– 45
The Book of Sanatsujāta
(53) Yānasandhi 46– 69
The Suing for Peace
(54) Bhagavadyāna 70– 137
The Coming of Kṛṣṇa
(55) Vivāda5 138– 48
The Quarrel
(56) Niryāṇa6 149– 52
The Marching Out
(60) Bhīṣmābhiṣecana7 153– 55
The Wonderful Installation of Bhīṣma
(58) Ulūkadūtagamana8 157– 60
The Arrival of the Messenger Ulūka
(57) Rathātirathasaṃkhyā 170– 69
The Warriors and the Greater Warriors
(59) Ambopākhyāna 170– 97
The Narrative of Ambā
364
364 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Parvan Upaparvan Adhyāya(s)
Bhīsṃaparvan (61) Jambūkhaṇḍavirmāṇa 1– 11
The Book of Bhīṣma The Creation of the Continent of Jambū
(62) Bhūmi 12– 13
The Earth
(63) Bhagavadgītā 14– 40
The Bhagavadgītā
(64) Bhīṣmavadha 41– 117
The Slaying of Bhīṣma
Droṇaparvan (65) Droṇābhiṣeka 1– 15
The Book of Droṇa The Installation of Droṇa
(66) Saṃśaptakavadha 16– 31
The Slaughter of the Sworn Warriors
(67) Abhimanyuvadha 32– 51
The Slaying of Abhimanyu
(68) Pratijñā 52– 60
The Promise
(69) Jayadrathavadha 61– 121
The Slaying of Jayadratha
(70) Ghaṭotkacavadha 122– 54
The Slaying of Ghaṭotkaca
(71) Droṇavadha 155– 65
The Slaying of Droṇa
(72) Nārāyaṇāstramokṣa 166– 73
The Casting of the Nārāyaṇa Weapon
Karṇaparvan (73) Karṇa9 1– 69
The Book of Karṇa The Book of Karṇa
Śalyaparvan (74) Śalya10 1– 16
The Book of Śalya The Book of Śalya
(75) Hradapraveśa 17– 28
The Entering of the Lake
(77) Sārasvata11 29– 53
The River Sarasvatī
(76) Gadāyuddha 54– 64
The Battle of the Bludgeons
Sauptikaparvan (78) Sauptika 1– 9
The Book of the Sleeping Warriors The Massacre of the Sleeping Warriors
(79) Aiṣīka 10– 18
The Aiṣīka Weapon
Strīparvan (80) Jalapradānika12 1– 8
The Book of the Women The Ofering of the Water
(81) Strī 9– 25
The Women
(82) Śrāddha 26– 27
The Funeral Oblation
Śāntiparvan (83) Ābhiṣecanikaṃ13
The Book of the Peace The Royal Consecration
(84) Cārvākanigrahaḥ14
The Subduing of Carvāka
(85) The Distribution of the Houses
365
APPENDICES 365
Parvan Upaparvan Adhyāya(s)
(86) Rājadharma 1– 128
The Law of the King
(87) Āpaddharma 129– 67
The Law of Emergencies
(88) Mokṣadharma 168– 353
The Law of Salvation
Anuśāsanaparvan (89) Ānuśāsanika15 1– 152
The Book of the Instructions The Instructions
(90) (Bhīsma)svargārohaṇa 153– 54
The Ascent to Heaven
Āśvamedhikaparvan (91) Āśvamedhika16 1– 96
The Book of the Horse Sacriice The Horse Sacriice
(92) Anugīta17
The Anugītā
Āśramavāsikaparvan (93) Āśramavāsa 1– 35
The Book of the Hermitage The Sojourn in the Hermitage
(94) Putradarśana 36– 44
The Encounter with the Sons
(95) Nāradāgamana 45– 47
The Arrival of Nārada
Mausalaparvan (96) Mausala 1– 9
The Book of the Clubs The Battle of the Clubs
Mahāprasthānikaparvan (97) Mahāprasthānika 1– 3
The Book of the Great Journey The Great Journey
Svargārohaṇaparvan (98) Svargārohaṇa 1– 15
The Book of the Ascent to Heaven The Ascension to Heaven
Harivaṃśa (99) Harivaṃśa
The Appendix of the Genealogy of Hari
(100) Bhaviṣyat
The Book of the Future
Notes:
1 The list of sub- parvan names follows the northern recension; the southern recension list difers. As a
rule, the southern recension manuscripts do not give the sub-p arvan names in the colophons; an over-
view of the southern sub-p arvans must rely on the Parvasaṃgraha lists of those manuscripts.
2 This sub- parvan is referred to as the Ādivamṣá ̄vataranạ parvan at 1.2.34, but this name does not occur
in the summary of the Ādiparvan given in the Parvasamg̣ rahaparvan from 1.2.72– 94. It is likewise not
mentioned in the colophons of any of the manuscripts collated for the critical edition.
3 Hiḍimbavadhaparvan in the critical edition.
4 Draupadīsvayaṃvaraparvan in the critical edition.
5 This name is not found in the critical edition, which calls this section the Karṇopanivādaparvan.
6 This sub-p arvan is called the Abhiniryāṇaparvan in the critical edition.
7 The order of the upaparvans hereafter difers in the critical edition. The Ambopākhyānaparvan is the last
upaparvan in the critical edition of the Udyogaparvan; the Bhīṣmābhiṣecanaparvan, number 60 in the
Parvasaṃgraha count, moves up, and the order of the Rathātirathasaṃkhyā and Ulūkadūtagamana
parvans, numbers 57 and 58 in the Parvasaṃgraha count, is inverted.
8 This sub-p arvan is called the Ulūkayānaparvan in the critical edition.
9 The critical edition refers to this upaparvan as the Karṇavadhaparvan throughout in its header (upper
right and upper left corners), though on whose authority is not clear as the colophon at the end of
chapter 69 refers to it as the Karṇaparvan.
366
366 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
10 The critical edition refers to this upaparvan as the Ś a lyavadhaparvan throughout in its header (upper
right and upper left corners), perhaps on the authority of the colophon at the end of c hapter 16,
which refers to it as the Ś alyavadhaparvan.
11 The Parvasaṃgraha (1.2.59c– 60a) does not list these books in their correct order: the order has
been inverted in this table. The colophon at the end of chapter 53 refers to the upaparvan as the
Tīrthayatraparvan.
12 The colophon at the end of c hapter 8 refers to this parvan as the Viṣokaparvan. This name is
adopted in the critical edition, both because all the editors after Sukthankar agreed with him that
very little weight was to be attached to the Parvasaṃgraha igures and titles and because all the
Strīparvan manuscripts were unanimous in referring to the parvan as the Viṣokaparvan. See Paranjpe,
“Introduction,” xxiii. Paranjpe refers to a tradition in Sanskrit drama of ofering characters water for
washing their eyes when they shed tears and suggests that jalapradāna may have been “an idiomatic
expression for consolation of grief, but when it fell out of use the term Viṣoka was substituted.” Ibid.,
xxiv. This explanation is not very convincing, since Paranjpe—i n agreement with all the other editors
of the Mahābhārata critical edition— considers the Parvasaṃgraha late; in fact, he rejects the view
that the Parvasaṃgraha divisions ought to be binding on the grounds that “the Viṣoka […] [would
have been] before the authors of adhys. 1 and 2 of the Ādiparvan.” Ibid., xxiii. If so, it is unlikely
that the author(s) of the Parvasaṃgraha used archaic expression, whereas, by the time the Strīparvan
was composed, this usage was forgotten and replaced by viṣoka instead.
13 No upaparvans are found corresponding to this name and the next two. The Rājadharmaparvan
is the irst sub-p arvan in the Śāntiparvan. However, there are three brief episodes that might be
intended: chapter 39, titled variously Cārvakavadha, Cārvakanigrahaḥ, Cārvakacaritakathanaṃ,
Cārvakacaritaṃ, Cārvakotpattiḥ and Cārvakotpattikathanaṃ, and chapter 40, titled variously
Yudhiṣṭhirābhiṣecanaṃ, Yudhiṣṭhirābhiṣekaḥ, Dharmaputrabhiṣekaḥ and Yudhiṣṭhirarājyābhiṣekaḥ,
and chapter 44, titled variously Gṛhapravibhāgaḥ (cp. pravibhāgo gṛhān ̣āṃ, 1.2.63c), Gṛhavibhāgāḥ,
Gṛhapraveśaḥ (or veśanaḥ), Bhīmādīnāṃ Gṛhanirūpaṇaṃ and Bhrātṛṇāṃ Gṛhapraveśaḥ. But note
that the order of the irst two chapters is the inverse of what we would expect from the Parvasaṃgraha
and, furthermore, that they are chapters rather than sub-p arvans.
14 See preceding note.
15 The text does not support this name. The critical edition adopts the name Dānadharmaparvan for
the irst sub- parvan of this parvan on the authority of the manuscripts. The adhyāya igures, accord-
ingly, apply to this name.
16 The critical edition does not support this name (which occurs in the Parvasaṃgraha). The crit-
ical edition of the Āśvamedhikaparvan contains only one upaparvan and this is called the
Aśvamedhaparvan. The editor does not clarify on whose authority he makes this decision. Neither
the initial colophons nor the inal colophon refers to the upaparvan name. Thus, all 96 chapters of the
Āśvamedhikaparvan are part of the same upaparvan.
17 The Āśvamedhikaparvan includes the poem called the Anugītā from chapters 16–3 0. The colophons
from 16– 30 support this name as the name of a separate upaparvan, though not unanimously (a
colophon is missing or omitted in chapter 27). From 28– 30, the name Anugītā competes with
Brāhmaṇagītā as the name of the sub- parvan; from 31– 35 it is more often Brāhmaṇagītā (occasion-
ally, also Anugītā). At chapter 36 it reverts to Anugītā (until 50), but the more important name for
this section appears to be the adhyāya name Guruśiṣyasaṃvāda (at least until c hapter 48 and then
again at chapter 50). The colophon for chapter 50 reads guruśiṣyasaṃvādonugıt̄ā ca [samāptā] (Ś1 and
K1.3); śiṣyānugıt̄ā [samāptā] (K2) and anugıt̄ā [samāptā] (T, G and M2–4 ). Thus, if there was ever a dis-
tinct sub- parvan called the Anugītāparvan, it would have been from adhyāyas 16– 50; the extent of the
Anugītā itself, however, is much less clear: it may be considered the portion from 16–2 6, since the
adhyāya name for 27 reads brahman ̣agıt̄ā. See also the editor’s comment that “Adhyāyas 16– 50 contain
the episode of the Anugītā (containing the Anugītā proper, the Brāhmaṇagītā and the Guru-S ́iṣya-
saṃvāda),” but without trying to distinguish between these three sections more closely. Karmarkar,
“Introduction,” xxiv. The critical edition does not feature Anugītā as the name of an upaparvan, in
contradiction to the Parvasaṃgraha list.
367
9. THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE PARVAN S
IN THE SOUTHERN RECENSION
As mentioned earlier, the division of the Mahābhārata into 18 parvans and 100 upaparvans
applies only to the northern recension. The southern recension has its own division.23
While the southern manuscripts feature the list of 100 upaparvans in the Parvasaṃgraha
(in surprising agreement with the northern manuscripts), the books themselves do not
rely on this division. For this reason, the attribution of the upaparvans to the parvans in the
preceding table is only approximate in the case of the southern recension. This problem
is further compounded by the fact that there is little clarity about where the southern
parvan divisions occur.24 The printed editions of the southern recension uniformly follow
the northern division into 18 parvans and are hence unilluminating. In the following table,
we reconstruct the southern recension division using the critical apparatus (these remarks
are only approximate, as the regional recensions and even individual manuscripts within
the recensions difer in their divisions).25
Because the editors of the critical edition make no efort to mark out the divisions in
the southern recension, this list is only provisional. The situation is further complicated
by the fact that often the editors list the southern parvan names as sub- parvan names, even
though certain details (for example, the fact that the adhyāya count has reset, indicating
that it is a case of a parvan rather than a sub-p arvan) suggest that the southern manuscripts
read a (major) parvan here. The critical edition does feature a parvan at the beginning of
the Strīparvan called the Viṣokaparvan, but the editor considers this a sub- parvan of the
Strīparvan, rather than an independent parvan in its own right. We did not ind any evi-
dence of a diference in the adhyāya count of the southern manuscripts (all of them read
the exact same adhyāya number as in the critical edition) that might suggest a break here.
It is, of course, entirely possible that the editor of the parvan (H. D. Velankar) overlooked
this fact, but only a look at the manuscripts will settle the question.
In any case, it is clear that, contrary to A. C. Burnell’s views, there is no division char-
acteristic of the southern recension as a whole.26 The Telugu and Grantha manuscripts
read 23 or 24 parvans, but their evidence is not unanimous. Whether the manuscripts
that do not read 24 parvans do so because of contamination with northern manuscripts
or whether they do so because they preserve an earlier division is impossible to settle.
The Malayālam manuscripts explicitly do not read the Gādaparvan (as a major parvan)
after the Ś alyaparvan. Their parvan count is closer to the northern igure. Possibly, the
practice of writing the Mahābhārata in 24 parvans arose in the Grantha manuscripts
(typically, the largest) and was introduced into the Malayālam manuscripts thence, albeit
only partially and unsuccessfully. Sukthankar’s statement hence requires revision— if
368
368 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
“the South has never completely assimilated the (Northern) division of the epic into the
conventional eighteen parvans,”27 it is equally true that the South has never fully assim-
ilated the “southern” division into 24 parvans either. There is every reason for preferring
the northern division.28 By way of comparison, the overviews of parvans and adhyāyas in
the southern editions (P. P. S. Sastri’s Madras edition and T. R. Krishnacharya’s older
Kumbhakonam edition) are reproduced in Figures 71, 72 and 73–77.
Parvan Adhyāya(s) Changes in the southern recension
Ādiparvan 1– 12 This is the irst parvan in the southern count.
13– 53 Some manuscripts begin a new parvan (the Āstīkaparvan)
here; the parvan count is now two.
G3.6 and M insert a colophon after 13.4.
The adhyāya number (at the end of chapter 13) is listed as
2 (G3.6 and M1– 5) (M2 sup. lin. sec. m. 1).
In the colophon (after chapter 13), G3 omits ādiparvan ̣i (in
ādiparvan ̣i astık̄e) and interpolates instead parvan ̣i after āstık̄e.
M reads iti āstık̄e.
54– 225 The southern recension (that is, T2, G1– 5 and M) begins
a new parvan (the Saṃbhavaparvan) here; the parvan count
is now three.
The adhyāya number (at the end of chapter 54) is listed
as 1.
Sabhāparvan 1– 72 This is the fourth parvan in the southern count.
Āraṇyakaparvan 1– 299 This is the ifth parvan in the southern count.
Virāṭaparvan 1– 67 This is the sixth parvan in the southern count.
Udyogaparvan 1– 197 This is the seventh parvan in the southern count.
Bhīsṃaparvan 1– 117 This is the eighth parvan in the southern count.
Droṇaparvan 1– 173 This is the ninth parvan in the southern count.
Karṇaparvan 1– 69 This is the 10th parvan in the southern count.
Śalyaparvan 1– 53.37 This is the 11th parvan in the southern count.
54.1– 2 After the inal colophon, T 2.4, G1, G2.3 conclude with
śalyaparvaṃ samāptaṃ. G2.3 add gadāparvan.
S (except M1; T3 damaged) reads 1– 2 after 9.53.37.
54– 64 T and G begin a new parvan (the Gadāparvan) here; the
parvan count is now 12.
T (T3.4 missing) G read the adhyāya number (at the end of
chapter 54) as 1; M2– 4 as 57.
T (T3.4 missing) G read the adhyāya number (at the end of
chapter 64) as 11.
After the colophon at the end of chapter 63, M1.2 4 add
śalyaparvaṃ samāptaṃ.
M reads chapter 64 as the irst adhyāya of the
Sauptikaparvan.
After the inal colophon, T1 concludes with gadāparva
samāptaṃ. Hereafter, TG and M will be listed separately.
369
APPENDICES 369
Parvan Adhyāya(s) Changes in the southern recension
Sauptikaparvan 1– 9 This is the 13th parvan in the TG count (12th in the M
count). T G1– 3 read the adhyāya number (at the end of
chapter 1) as 1. T G1– 3 read the adhyāya number (at the
end of chapter 9) as 9. After the inal colophon, G2 adds
sauptikaparvaṃ samāptam.
In the colophon (at the end of chapter 1), M1 reads
the (major) parvan as Śalyaparvan; the adhyāya number
is 67 (of Śalyaparvan). M2– 4 read the adhyāya number
(at the end of chapter 1) as 2. In the colophon
(at the end of chapter 9), M1 reads the (major)
parvan as Śalyaparvan; the adhyāya number is 75 (of
Śalyaparvan). M2– 4 read the adhyāya number (at the
end of chapter 9) as 9. M3.4 add samāpta after the sub-
parvan (?) or adhyāya name, while M1 adds samāpta after
śalya + sauptika.
10– 18 T G1.2 begin a new parvan (the Aiṣikaparvan) here; the
parvan count is now 14.1 T G1.2 read the adhyāya number
(at the end of chapter 10) as 1. After the inal colophon,
T2 concludes with aiṣık̄aparvaṃ samāptam.
M (M4 om.) begins a new parvan (the Aiṣikaparvan)
here; the parvan count is now 13. M (M4 om.) reads the
adhyāya number (at the end of chapter 10) as 1.
Strīparvan 1– 27 This is the 15th parvan in the TG count (14th in the M
count).2
Śāntiparvan 1– 167 TG and M refer to this parvan as the Rājadharmaparvan;
the parvan count is now 16 (15 in M). The
Āpaddharmaparvan, a sub-p arvan of the Śāntiparvan
in the critical edition, is considered part of the
Rājadharmaparvan in the southern manuscripts and
the colophons consistently read rājadharma for the parvan
name.
168– 353 TG and M introduce a new parvan (the
Mokṣadharmaparvan) here; the parvan count is now 17
(16 in M). T1 G1.3.6 read the adhyāya number (at the
end of chapter 168) as 1; T2 G2 as 15. After the inal
colophon, G3 concludes with mokṣadharmaḥ samāptaḥ.
M1.5– 7 read the adhyāya number (at the end of
chapter 168) as 1. After the inal colophon, M1
concludes with śāntiparva samāptaṃ; M7 with mokṣadharma
samāptaṃ.
Anuśāsanaparvan 1– 154 This is the 18th parvan in the TG count (17th in the
M count).
Āśvamedhikaparvan 1– 96 This is the 19th parvan in the TG count (18th in the
M count).
Āśramavāsikaparvan 1– 47 This is the 20th parvan in the TG count (19th in the
M count).
370
370 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Parvan Adhyāya(s) Changes in the southern recension
Mausalaparvan 1– 9 This is the 21st parvan in the TG count (20th in the
M count).
Mahāprasthānikaparvan 1– 3 This is the 22nd parvan in the TG count (21st in the
M count).
Svargārohaṇaparvan 1– 15 This is the 23rd parvan in the TG count (22nd in the
M count).
Notes:
1 G3 is discarded as it does not contain the Aiṣīkaparvan.
2 Contrary to Burnell’s comments, we found no evidence that the Sauptikaparvan was divided into
three parvans: the Sauptika, Aiṣīka and Viṣoka parvans. Lüders’s comment that the Viṣokaparvan is,
rather, the irst part of the Strīparvan did not help either. The critical edition features a sub-p arvan
called the Viṣokaparvan from 11.1–8 , but the count of adhyāyas does not reset thereafter in any of
the southern manuscripts, as we would expect if the Viṣokaparvan was a major parvan rather than a
sub-p arvan. There are also none of the usual concluding statements such as viṣokaparva samāptam, etc.
371
APPENDICES 371
Figure 71 P. P. S. Sastri’s scheme of adhyāyas from his critical edition of the southern
recension
Source: Sastri, ed., The Mahābhārata (Southern Recension), xviii.
372
372 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Figure 72 P. P. S. Sastri’s scheme of ślokas from his critical edition of the southern recension
Source: Sastri, ed., The Mahābhārata (Southern Recension), xix.
373
APPENDICES 373
Figure 73 Parvan divisions and ́loka counts of the Kumbhakonam recension
Source: Krishnacharya and Vyasacharya, eds., Sriman Mahabharatam, 4.
374
374 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Figure 74 Parvan divisions and ́loka counts of the Kumbhakonam recension
Source: Krishnacharya and Vyasacharya, eds., Sriman Mahabharatam, 5.
375
APPENDICES 375
Figure 75 Parvan divisions and ́loka counts of the Kumbhakonam recension
Source: Krishnacharya and Vyasacharya, eds., Sriman Mahabharatam, 6.
376
376 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Figure 76 Parvan divisions and ́loka counts of the Kumbhakonam recension
Source: Krishnacharya and Vyasacharya, eds., Sriman Mahabharatam, 7.
377
APPENDICES 377
Figure 77 Parvan divisions and ́loka counts of the Kumbhakonam recension
Source: Krishnacharya and Vyasacharya, eds., Sriman Mahabharatam, 8.
378
379
10. OTHER NARRATIVE DIVISIONS
In addition to the divisions listed earlier—p arvan, upaparvan and adhyāya— the
Mahābhārata also features several well-d eined narrative units, usually known by their
own name, which coincide with neither the upaparvan nor the adhyāya divisions. These
units are known as upākhyānas or subtales,29 and they are crucial to the epic’s narrative
texture as they provide glosses on the main narrative. Many of them are narrated in
response to the ethical dilemmas of the main protagonists, thus giving a story-w ithin- a-
story weave to the text. Counting all the units called upākhyānas, either in the text or in
the Parvasaṃgrahaparvan or in the colophons and/o r the running heads for units in the
critical edition, Alf Hiltebeitel arrives at the following list:30
1. Ś akuntalā- Upākhyāna 1.62– 69
2. Yayāti- Upākhyāna 1.70– 80
3. Mahābhiṣa- Upākhyāna 1.91
4. Aṇimāṇḍavya- Upākhyāna 1.101
5. Vyuṣitāṣva- Upākhyāna 1.112
6. Tapatī- Upākhyāna 1.160– 63
7. Vasiṣṭha- Upākhyāna 1.164– 68, 173
8. Aurva- Upākhyāna 1.169– 72
9. Pañcendra- Upākhyāna 1.189
10. Sunda- Upasunda- Upākhyāna 1.201– 4
11. Ś ārṅgaka- Upākhyāna 1.220– 25
12. Saubhavadha- Upākhyāna 3.15– 23
13. Nala- Upākhyāna 3.50– 78
14. Agastya- Upākhyāna 3.94– 108
15. Ṛśyaśṛṅga- Upākhyāna 3.110– 13
16. Kārtavīrya/ Jāmadagnya- Upākhyāna 3.115– 17
17. Saukanya- Upākhyāna 3.122– 25
18. Māndhātṛ- Upākhyāna 3.126
19. Jantu- Upākhyāna 3.127– 28
20. Ś yena- Kapotīya- Upākhyāna 3.130– 31
21. Aṣṭāvakrīya- Upākhyāna 3.132– 34
22. Yavakrīta- Upākhyāna 3.135– 39
23. Vainya- Upākhyāna 3.183
24. Matsya- Upākhyāna 3.185
25. Maṇḍūka- Upākhyāna 3.190
380
380 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
26. Indradyumna- Upākhyāna 3.191
27. Dhundhumāra- Upākhyāna 3.192– 95
28. Pativratā- Upākhyāna 3.196– 206
29. Mudgala- Upākhyāna 3.246– 47
30. Rāma- Upākhyāna 3.257– 76
31. Sāvitrī- Upākhyāna 3.277– 83
32. Āraṇeyam upākhyānam yatra dharmo ‘nvaśāt sutam 3.295– 99
33. Indravijaya- Upākhyāna 5.9– 18
34. Dambhodbhava- Upākhyāna 5.94
35. Ambā- Upākhyāna 5.170– 93
36. Viśva- Upākhyāna 6.61– 64
37. Tripura- Upākhyāna; Tripura- Vadha- Upākhyāna 8.24
38. [Karṇa- Ś alya- Saṃvāda] Haṃsa- Kākīya- Upākhyāna 8.28
39. Indra- Namuci- Upākhyāna 9.42
40. Vṛddha- Kumārī- Upākhyāna 9.51
41. Ṣoḍaśarāj[ik]a- Upākhyāna 12.29
42. Nārada- Pārvata- Upākhyāna 12.30
43. Rāma- Upākhyāna 12.48– 49
44. Mucukunda- Upākhyāna 12.75
45. Uṣṭragrīva- Upākhyāna 12.113
46. Daṇḍa- Utpatti- kathana- (Upākhyāna) 12.122
47. Ṛṣabha- Gitā/ Sumitra- Upākhyāna 12.125– 26
48. Kapota- Upākhyāna 12.141– 45
49. Kṛtaghna- Upākhyāna 12.162– 67
50. Jāpaka- Upākhyāna 12.189– 93
51. Cirakāri- Upākhyāna 12.258
52. Kuṇḍadhāra- Upākhyāna 12.263
53. Nārāyaṇīye Hayaśira- Upākhyāna 12.335
54. Uñchavṛtty- Upākhyāna 12.340– 53
55. Sudarśana- Upākhyāna 13.2
56. Viśvāmitra- Upākhyāna 13.3– 4
57. Bhaṅgāśvana- Upākhyāna 13.12
58. Upamanyu- Upākhyāna 13.14– 18
59. Mataṅga- Upākhyāna 13.28– 30
60. Vītahavya- Upākhyāna 13.31
61. Vipula- Upākhyāna 13.39– 43
62. Cyavana- Upākhyāna 13.50– 51
63. Nṛga- Upākhyāna 13.69
64. Nāchiketa- Upākhyāna 13.70
65. Kīṭa- Upākhyāna 13.118– 20
66. Ut[t] aṅka- Upākhyāna 14.52– 57
67. Nakula- Upākhyāna 14.92– 96
381
APPENDICES 381
Several units are discussed in the edited volume Argument and Design.31 The
Mahābhārata also employs several other terms for narrative units such as saṃvāda
(dialogue), carita (adventure), kathā (story) and ākhyāna (story or legend), the latter
often interchangeably with upākhyāna. No count or overview of these units exists, as
far as we could discover.
382
383
11. SUKTHANKAR’S TABLE OF
THE MANUSCRIPTS COLLATED FOR
THE Ā DIPARVAN
This table shows the manuscripts collated for diferent portions of the text.32 It is only
approximate and especially does not note the many minor lacunae in Ś1. It should there-
fore be supplemented with the table on the next page.
384
Adhyāya & Śloka Northern Recension Manuscripts Southern Recension
Manuscripts
1.1– 204 K0– 6 V1 B1– 4 Da Dn Dr D1– 12.14 T1.2 G1– 7 M1– 4
1.205– 2.39 K0– 6 V1 B1– 4 Da Dn Dr D1– 14 T1.2 G1– 7 M1– 4
2.40– 191 K0– 4.6 V1 B1– 4 Da Dn Dr D1– 14 T1.2 G1– 7 M1– 4
2.192– 243 K0– 4.6 V1 B1– 4 Da Dn Dr D1– 14 T1.2 G2– 7 M1– 4
3.1– 44 K0– 4 Ñ1.2 V1 B1– 5 Da Dn D1– 7 T1.2 G2– 6 M1– 5
3.45– 13.45 K0– 4 Ñ1.2 V1 B1– 5 Da Dn D1– 7 T1.2 G1– 6 M1– 5
14.1– 26.9 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1– 5 Da Dn D1– 7 T1.2 G1– 6 M1– 5
26.10– 43.13 Ś1 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1– 5 Da Dn D1– 7 T1.2 G1– 6 M1– 5
43.14– 47.19 Ś1 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1.3– 5 Da Dn D1– 7 T1.2 G1– 6 M1– 5
47.20– 53.36 Ś1 K0– 2.4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1.3– 5 Da Dn D1– 7 T1.2 G1– 6 M1– 5
54.1– 4 Ś1 K0– 2.4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1– 5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
54.5– 55.3a Ś1 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1– 5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
55.3b– 60.61b K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1– 5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
60.61c– 61.84a Ś1 K0- 4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1– 5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
61.84b– 62.2 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1– 5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
62.3– 68.19 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1.2.4.5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
68.20– 74a Ś1 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1.2.4.5 T1.2 G1- 6 M3.5– 8
68.74b– 69.41c Ś1 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1.2.4.5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
69.41d– 51 Ś1 K0– 2.4 Ñ1– 3 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1.2.4.5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
70.1– 71.17c Ś1 K0– 2.4 Ñ1– 3 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1– 5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
71.17d– 72.8b Ś1 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1- 5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
72.8c- 22 Ś1 K0– 2.4 Ñ1– 3 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1– 5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
72.23– 74.4 K0– 2.4 Ñ1– 3 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1– 5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
74.5– 76.35 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1– 5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
77.1– 78.20b K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1.2.4.5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
78.20c– 90.88 Ś1 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 B1.3– 6 Da Dn D1.2.4.5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
90.89– 92.13d Ś1 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 B1.3.5.6 Da Dn D1.2.4.5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
92.13c– 96.37b Ś1 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1.3.5.6 Da Dn D1.2.4.5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
96.37c– 127.21a Ś1 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 B1.3.5.6 Da Dn D1.2.4.5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
127.21b– 181.40 Ś1 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1.3.5.6 Da Dn D1.2.4.5 T1.2 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
182.1– 225.19 Ś1 K0– 4 Ñ1– 3 V1 B1.3.5.6 Da Dn D1.2.4.5 T1.3 G1– 6 M3.5– 8
newgenrtpdf
385
12. EXTENT OF THE S ́Ā RADĀ CODEX
FOR THE Ā DIPARVAN
The Śāradā codex contains the irst three parvans, but only fragments of the Ādi and the
Āraṇyaka parvans are preserved. Sukthankar notes that the beginning of the Ādiparvan is
“particularly fragmentary; a continuous text begins only from fol. 63 (our adhy. 82).”33 We
have therefore examined the critical apparatus only up to adhy ya 82 (81 was complete), but
ā
it is possible that minor lacunae may also be revealed in the remaining chapters on a closer
inspection.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50
51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75
76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100
101102103 104 105106107108109110111112113114115116117118119120121122123124125
126127128 129 130131132133134135136137137139140141142143144145146147148149150
151152153 154 155156157158159160161162163164165166167168169170171172173174175
176177178 179 180181182183184185186187188189190191192193194195196197198199200
201202203 204 205206207208209210211212213214215216217218219220221222223224225
Key: White indicates that the Ś āradā codex is not extant for these sections; light gray indicates that it is extant
but contains lacunae (see notes); and darker shading indicates that it is fully extant.
Notes:
Adhy āya 26: Ś1 commences with 26.10; lacunae at 21b–35d and 46ab–27.13a.
Adhy āya 27: Ś1 has lacunae at 1–13a and from 24d (from ya śasvini)–28.5b.
Adhy āya 28: Ś1 has lacunae at 1–5b.
Adhy āya 37: Ś1 has a lacuna at 15.
Adhy āya 43: Ś1 has a lacuna at 11cd.
Adhy āya 47: Ś1 has a lacuna from 1–1b (up to mantribhi ḥ) and from 12b–48.4b.
Adhy āya 48: Ś1 has lacunae at 1–4 b (up to n ām ān īha) and from 15c–49.3d.
Adhy āya 49: Ś1 has lacunae at 1–3d and from 14a–28b.
Adhy āya 50: Ś1 1 has lacunae at 1.50.9 (from vini ścita ṁ)–1.51.2b.
Adhy āya 51: Ś1 has lacunae at 1–2b and from 1.51.9 (from pyanuga)–1.53.27a (up to va).
386
386 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Adhy āya 53: Ś1 has a lacuna at 1–27a (resumes from va).
Adhy āya 54: Ś1 has a lacuna at 1–18ab.
Adhy āya 55: Ś1 has a lacuna at 3b–60.61b.
Adhy āya 60: Ś1 has a lacuna at 62abc (a portion is missing).
Adhy āya 61: Ś1 has a lacuna at 1a (from ca)–12a (up to ketum ā) and is partly damaged from 40–43; it also
has a small lacuna at 45a (from k la)–45b (up to nar dhip ) and a longer one from 61.84b–68.19.
ā ā āḥ
Adhy āya 68: Ś1 has lacunae at 1–19 and from 35d–46 and 64 (from pras ūto’ya ṁ)–75c (up to tayorapatya ṁ).
Adhy āya 69: Ś1 has lacunae at 13d–22b (up to ca) and from 38–47ab (the lacuna begins with the latter half
of 678*, inserted after 37 in all N manuscripts).
Adhy āya 70: Ś1 has a lacuna at 10b–20a.
Adhy āya 71: Ś1 has lacunae at 16c (from pure)–25cd (up to buddhv
ā
d ā) and from 39 (from śi ṣya ṁ)–45 and
57 (from brahmabh ta )–72.7a.
ū ḥ
Adhy āya 72: Ś1 has lacunae at 1–7b (up to bh ārga-) and from 23a (from karma)–78.20ab.
Adhy āya 78: Ś1 has a lacuna at 1–20ab (resuming from bhart
ā
hi in 20c) and is partly damaged from 21–24;
the irst ive letters of 35 and all of verse 37 are lost on a missing portion; there is also a lacuna from
38–79.9b (up to puna ).
ḥ
Adhy āya 79: Ś1 has lacunae at 1–9b and from 23–80.2.
Adhy āya 80: Ś1 has lacunae at 1–2 and from 20b–27.
387
13. ABBREVIATIONS AND DIACRITICAL
SIGNS USED IN THE CRITICAL EDITION
This list of abbreviations and diacritical signs is based largely on Sukthankar’s list in the
irst volume of the critical edition. Additional signs later editors introduced were added
at the appropriate place without noting these insertions. Where Sukthankar’s informa-
tion is outdated (for example, his note on Sastri’s edition, not completed at the time of
the release of the Ādiparvan), his annotation has been updated without comment; where
there is a conlict between the editors’ conventions, both variants are given. Thus, this list
is a complete reference to all the abbreviations, diacritical signs and other markers used
in the critical edition.
add. = adding.
addl. = additional.
adhy. = adhyāya(s).
App. = Appendix.
Arj. = Arjunamiśra.
B. = Bombay edition of the Mbh. (Śaka 1799).
BG. = Bhagavadgītā.
B., Bom. or Bomb. = Bombay (edition).
C. = Calcutta edition of the Mbh. (editio princeps).
C., Cal. or Calc. = Calcutta (edition).
chap. = chapter(s).
comm. = commentary/ commentaries.
cont. = continue(s).
corr. = corrected, correction.
Crit. App. = Critical Apparatus.
Dev. = Devabodha.
ed. = edition.
ig. = igure(s).
fol. = folio(s).
foll. = following.
fragm. = fragment(ary).
hapl. = halographic(ally).
illeg. = illegible.
inf. lin. = infra lineam (below the line).
ins. = inserts.
int. lin. = inter lineas (between the lines).
interp. = interpolate(s).
introd. = introduction, introductory.
K. = Kumbhakonam edition of the Mbh.
388
388 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Kumbh. = Kumbhakonam (edition).
L. = Line.
M. = Madras edition of the Mbh. (of P. P. S. Sastri, 1931– 36).
Mad. = Madras (edition).
m or marg. = marginal(ly).
Mañj. = Bhāratamañjarī (Kāvyamālā 65).
Manu = Manusmṛti (ed. N. S. P.).
Mbh. = Mahābhārata.
Nīl. = Nīlakaṇṭha.
O.- J. = Old- Javanese.
om. = omit(s), omitting.
orig. = original(ly).
p. = pāṭhāntara (added to the abbreviation of the name of a commentator,
e.g. Arjp, Nīlp or to the symbol denoting a commentary).
post. = posterior.
pr. m. = propria manu (by own hand).
prob. = probably.
r. = repeat(s), repeated.
Rām. = Rāmāyaṇa (ed. N. S. P.)
ref. = refer(ence).
resp. = respective(ly).
sec. m. = secunda manu (by another hand).
st. = stanza(s).
subst. = substitute(s).
Suparṇ. = Suparṇādhyāya (ed. Grube).
suppl. = supplementary.
sup. lin. = supra lineam (above the line).
transp. = transpose(s), transposition.
v. = verse.
(var.) = (with variation).
v. l. = varia(e) lectio(nes).
❀❀ (in the critical footnotes) enclose citations from commentators.
[ ] besides their normal uses, enclose additions to MS readings.
( ) besides their normal uses, enclose superluous letters, which should be
omitted from MS readings.
* (superior star) in the text indicates an emendation.
** (in the MS readings) indicate syllables lost through injury to MS.
printed below (or along the side margin of) any part of the constituted
text indicates that the reading of it is less than certain.
ʗ denotes a “Commentary,” preixed to the abbreviation of the
name of a commentator; thus, ʗd = Commentary of Devabodha;
ʗa.d.n.v = Commentaries of Arjunamiśra, Devabodha, Nīlakaṇṭha and
Vādirāja. A “p” is added on to denote a “pāṭha”; thus ʗnp = a pāṭha
mentioned in the Commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha.
389
14. ABBREVIATED CONCORDANCE
OF THE PRINCIPAL EDITIONS OF
THE MAHĀ BHĀ RATA
The following table lists the number of adhyāyas (occasionally also the verses) found in
each parvan of the critical edition followed by the corresponding ranges for that parvan
in the Bombay, Calcutta and Madras editions. The concordance is not comprehensive
(for this the reader must consult the respective volumes of the critical edition; the com-
plete concordance runs into 400 pages) but provides a useful overview of the diferent
editions’ relative lengths.34 For instance, the critical edition frequently has a lower adhyāya
count than the other editions. The numbers, however, are only indicative, because what
is decisive is, of course, the length of the individual adhyāyas rather than their number. In
order to know which chapter in the critical edition, chapter 43 of book 1 of the Calcutta
edition corresponds to, the reader must consult the complete concordance.35 This abbre-
viated concordance adopts the following scheme: the irst row lists the irst line of the
respective edition (in the case of the critical edition, the irst line of the constituted text);
the second lists its last line.
Critical edn. Bombay edn. Calcutta edn. Madras edn.
Ādi1 1 1 1
225 234 218
Sabhā2 1.1ab 1.2ab 1ab 1.5
72.36 81.38cd, 39 2709 72.36 ½
Āraṇyaka3 1 1 1
299 315 2694
Virāṭa5 1 1 1
67.38 72.40cdef 67.57’– 596
Udyoga7 1 1 1
197 196 186
Bhīṣma 1.18 1.1 2 1.1
117.27– 34 122.32– 39 5849– 5856 118.30– 379
Droṇa10
Karṇa 1.1 1.111 1– 312 1.1– 2013
69.43cd14 96.61– 6515 5043– 504716 110.52– 5917
Śalya 1.1– 8ab 1.1– 8ab18 1– 8ab19 1.1– 8ab
64.39– 4320 65.42– 46 3667– 3671 59.42– 46
Sauptika 1.1abc 1.1ac21 1abc22 1.1abc
18.1– 26 18.1– 26 786– 811 18.1– 6
390
390 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Critical edn. Bombay edn. Calcutta edn. Madras edn.
Strī 1.1– 6abcd 1.1– 6 1– 6 1.1– 6
27.24cd23 27.30ef 828 27.31 ½cd
Śānti24
Rājadharma 1.1– 22 1.1– 2225 1– 2226 1.1– 22
128.49ef 130.50cd 4778cd 120.51
Āpaddharma 129.1ab 131.1ab27 4779ab 121.1ab
167.24 173.26 6456 148.163 ½
Mokṣadharma 168.1– 5 174.1– 528 6457– 6461 149.1– 5
353.1– 9 366[5] .1– 9 13935– 13943 162.1– 9
Anuśāsana 1.1– 5abcd 1.1– 529 1– 530 1.1– 5
154.32– 34 169(68).35cdef– 37 7794– 7796 156.35 ½– 37 ½
Āśvamedhika 1.1– 10 1.131 1– 1032 1.1– 10
96.12cd– 1533 92.50cd– 53 2897cd– 2900 100.12cd– 15
Āśramavāsika 1.1– 7cd 1.1– 734 1– 735 1.1– 7
47.25– 2736 39.25– 27 1102– 1104 42.45 ½– 47 ½
Mausala 1.1– 6ab 1.1– 6ab37 1– 6ab38 1.1– 6ab
9.38cd 8.38ef 292cd 8.43cd
Mahāprasthānika 1.1– 11 1.1– 1139 1– 1140 1.1– 11
3.28– 36 3.30– 38 101– 109 3.30– 38
Svargārohaṇa 1.1– 2ab 1.1– 2ab 1– 2ab 1.1– 2ab
5.5441 5.6842 211 5.5343
Notes:
1 Sukthankar does not give a concordance for the Calcutta edition. His editions for comparison are the
editions of Ganapat Krishnaji (Ś aka 1799) and of P. P. S. Sastri (1931).
2 Edgerton’s Bombay edition probably refers to the edition of Ganapat Krishnaji, but he does not
say so.
3 Sukthankar does not give a concordance for the Calcutta edition. His editions for comparison are the
editions of Ganapat Krishnaji (Ś aka 1799) and of P. P. S. Sastri (1931).
4 269 in the Madras edition corresponds to 298 in the critical edition; 270 is transposed to the
Virāṭaparvan to be the irst chapter there.
5 Raghu Vira does not give a concordance for the Calcutta edition. His Bombay edition refers not to
the edition of Ganapat Krishnaji but to the Gujarati Printing Press edition of 1915.
6 These last verses are printed as *1174 and *1176 of the critical edition; the last line of the Madras
edition corresponding to the constituted text is 67.56 (corresponding to 67.38 of the critical edition).
7 S. K. De’s Bombay edition refers to the edition of Ganapat Krishnaji (cited with a date of Ś aka
1798). His Madras edition refers to the Sastri edition (1932).
8 This is the irst passage in the constituted text corresponding to the other editions; 1* is the irst
passage in the critical edition as a whole corresponding to the other editions (1 in the Bombay and
Calcutta editions; the passage is not in the Madras edition).
9 The Madras edition also includes another four verses (118.38– 42) but these do not have equivalents
in the critical edition.
10 S. K. De does not provide a concordance for the Droṇaparvan.
11 1.1 is the irst numbered line in the Bombay edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
12 1– 3 are the irst numbered lines in the Calcutta edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
13 1.1– 20 corresponds to 7* in the critical edition.
14 This is the last line in the constituted text, but there are also several star passages thereafter. 1219*,
1220*, 1221*, 1222*, 1223* have equivalents in the Bombay, Calcutta and Madras editions, while
1224*, 1225*, 1226*, 1228* are found in the Madras edition.
391
APPENDICES 391
15 96.61– 65 corresponds to 1221*, 1222* and 1223* in the critical edition.
16 5043– 5047 corresponds to 1221*, 1222* and 1223* in the critical edition.
17 110.52– 59 corresponds to 1224*, 65– 80 in the critical edition.
18 1.1 is the irst numbered line in the Bombay edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
19 1– 8ab are the irst numbered lines in the Calcutta edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered
line corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
20 This is the last line of the constituted text; the critical edition also includes an additional line there-
after: 403*, relegated to the critical apparatus.
21 1.1abc is the irst numbered line in the Bombay edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered
line corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
22 1abc is the irst numbered line in the Calcutta edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
23 This is the last line in the constituted text, but there are several star passages (81*, 82*, 83*)
corresponding to the texts of the Bombay and Madras editions.
24 The igures for the Śāntiparvan have been broken up into its constituent sections.
25 1.1 is the irst numbered line in the Bombay edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
26 1 is the irst numbered line in the Calcutta edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
27 131.1ab is the irst numbered line in the Bombay edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered
line corresponding to 301* of the critical edition.
28 The Bombay edition also contains an introductory mantra corresponding to 455* of the critical
edition.
29 1.1 is the irst numbered line in the Bombay edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
30 1 is the irst numbered line in the Calcutta edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
31 1.1 corresponds to 1* of the critical edition; the irst line that has an equivalent in the constituted text
is 1.2– 11 (corresponding to 1.1– 10).
32 1 is the irst numbered line in the Calcutta edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
33 This is the last line of the constituted text. There follow 198*, 199* and App. 1, no. 4. This last
passage corresponds to adhyāyas 101– 24 of the Madras edition (the conclusion of the parvan in that
edition).
34 1.1 is the irst numbered line in the Bombay edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
35 1 is the irst numbered line in the Calcutta edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
36 This is the last line in the constituted text, but the critical edition also includes a star passage (108*)
corresponding to 1105 of the Calcutta edition (the last line in that edition).
37 1.1 is the irst numbered line in the Bombay edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
38 1 is the irst numbered line in the Calcutta edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
39 1.1 is the irst numbered line in the Bombay edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
40 1 is the irst numbered line in the Calcutta edition; this edition also includes an unnumbered line
corresponding to 1* of the critical edition.
41 This is the last line of the constituted text; there follow three star passages— 60*, 61* and 62*.
42 5.68 corresponds to 60* of the critical edition; the last line with an equivalent in the constituted text
is 5.67 (corresponding to 5.54 of the critical edition).
43 This is the last line of the Madras edition, corresponding to 52*, lines 4–5 of the critical edition
(occurring after 5.43 of that edition).
392
393
15. STEMMATA FOR THE DIFFERENT
PARVAN S OF THE MAHĀ BHĀ RATA
A. C. Burnell produced the irst known stemma of the Mahābhārata in 1875. Burnell’s
stemma was based on a comparison of the Nāgarī and Grantha recensions but does
not mention the manuscripts involved (most likely, from the Tanjore Palace Library).
His stemma is reproduced here for historical interest (Figure 78). Sukthankar produced
the irst stemma based on an extensive survey of the principal versions in existence
(Figure 79). Its inluence on all subsequent editors (with the possible exception of
Edgerton) is palpable. Edgerton did not draw up a stemma for the Sabhāparvan. In con-
trast to Sukthankar, he felt that three traditions of the Mahābhārata existed, a western
(designated by W), an eastern (designated by E) and a southern (designated by S).
The western recension included the Ś and K manuscripts; E included the Ñ, V, B and
D manuscripts; and S included the T, G and M manuscripts. Edgerton also thought
VBD might be derived from a common secondary archetype that he called “E1” (Ñ,
in contrast, would have descended from E itself). Sukthankar also produced a second
stemma for the manuscripts of the Āraṇyakaparvan, the only other book he edited.
See Figure 80. Raghu Vira’s and S. K. De’s stemmata for the Virāṭa and Udyoga
parvans (reproduced here as igures 81 and 82) are essentially variations of Sukthankar’s
stemma. Belvalkar’s stemma of the Bhīṣmaparvan manuscripts is reproduced in
Figure 35 and is therefore not reproduced here. After the Bhīṣmaparvan, no editor
drew up a stemma. The only stemma to appear thereafter is Vaidya’s stemma of the
Harivaṃśa (Figure 83).
Original collection of ballads.
Eclectic text with episodes added to it.
A) N. Recension (Na¯gar¯ı), B) S. Recension (Grantha),
a revision of the longer an independent revision of the
books, settled finally by longer books.
N¯ılakantha’s Commentary.
··
Figure 78 A. C. Burnell’s stemma
Source: Reproduced from Burnell, On the Aindra School of Sanskrit Grammarians, 80.
394
394 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Vy rata
Ur-Mah bh rata
N S
rada K Nep l Maithil Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
(other than K)
Figure 79 V. S. Sukthankar’s “Pedigree of Ādiparvan versions”
Source: Reproduced from Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xxx.
Vy rata
Ur-Mah bh rata
N S
ν γ σ
rad K Bengali (Non-K) Telugu Grantha Malay lam
( ) (B) Devan gar (T) (G) (M)
(D)
Figure 80 V. S. Sukthankar’s stemma of the Āraṇyakaparvan manuscripts
Source: Reproduced from Sukthankar, “Introduction,” xiii.
395
APPENDICES 395
Vy rata
Ur-Mah bh rata
N S
γ σ
rad & K Bengali Devan gar Telugu Grantha Malay lam
(other than K)
Figure 81 R. Vira’s stemma of the Virāṭaparvan manuscripts
Source: Reproduced from Vira, “Introduction,” xvi.
Vy rata
Ur-Mah bh rata
Northern (N) Southern (S)
Recension Recension
ν γ
ε σ
rad K Bengali Devan gar (D) Telugu Grantha Malay lam
( ) (B) (other than K) (T) (G) (M)
Figure 82 S. K. De’s stemma of the Udyogaparvan manuscripts
Source: Reproduced from De, “Introduction,” xxiv.
396
396 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Ur Text of Hariva a
N S
NW NE C T G M
D
K V B M4
1 Dn Ds D6
Dn1.n2 Ds1.s2
Figure 83 P. L. Vaidya’s stemma of the Harivaṃśā manuscripts
Source: Reproduced from Vaidya, “Introduction [to the Harivaṃśa],” xxiv.
397
16. COMMENTARIES ON
THE MAHĀBHĀRATA
Surprisingly little is known about the Mahābhārata commentators, with the exception
of Nīlakaṇṭha.36 Sukthankar, in his discussion of Mahābhārata commentaries,37 lists 22
commentators, whose names are either known to us or whose works have survived,38 but
we possess manuscripts of only about a handful of these. There is unanimous agreement
that Devabodha is the earliest— and, by some measures, the most important— of the
Mahābhārata commentators,39 though opinions diverge about the precedence of
commentators thereafter.40
In his study of the Mahābhārata commentators, Sukthankar proposes the following
sequence: Devabodha, Vimalabodha, Sarvajña-N ārāyaṇa, Arjunamiśra and Nīlakaṇṭha
Caturdhara. Devabodha’s dates are not known. Christopher Minkowski assigns a date
of 1000 CE to him, which Basile Leclere revises to an upper limit of 1100 CE.41 Since
Vimalabodha is dated to 1150– 1300 CE and he cites Devabodha (once as Devabodha
and once as Devasvāmin), we have a lower threshold for his dates.42 This would suggest
that Minkowski is correct in asserting that a continuous tradition of Mahābhārata com-
mentary did not exist before the twelfth century.43
The earliest commentaries such as Devabodha’s Jñānadıp̄ ikā are little more than
glosses of the most diicult words or phrases, and this tradition continues in works such
as Vimalabodha’s Durghaṭārthaprakāśinı ̄or Viṣamaślokı.̄44 The practice of writing expansive
commentaries explaining either entire narratives or the symbolic meanings of certain
passages (for example, as Nīlakaṇṭha does in his Bhāratabhavadıp̄ a commentary) appears
of much later origin (though already Arjunamiśra’s Arthadıp̄ikā commentary is, in the
words of Sukthankar, “a revised and enlarged edition of the Jñānadīpikā”).45
Philosophical Ailiations and Milieu
Leclere in his recent study of Devabodha argues for identifying Devabodha the com-
mentator with Devabodha the medieval poet and dramatist (sometimes also called
Devabodhi).46 He describes Devabodha as a versatile author, possessing rich “poetical
skills” and familiar with the “codes of dramatic literature.”47 In his view, Devabodha
likely belonged to a “religious order of wandering ascetics” and was himself titled
paramahamṣ aparivraj̄akac̄ ar̄ ya, “Paramahamṣ a and Master of Wandering ascetics.”48 Leclere
locates Devabodha within a Vaisṇ ava devotional tradition. “The Jñan̄ adıp̄ ika ̄ and the
Satyavratarukma ṅ̄ gada betray the same devotion to Visṇ ụ as the Supreme Being. At the very
398
398 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
beginning of both works, the author invokes, in elaborate verses, the god under his cosmic
aspects of Nārāyanạ and Trivikrama, and even though he does not ignore other divini-
ties such as Śiva and Ganẹ sá , he undoubtedly gives preeminence to Visṇ ụ throughout his
texts.”49 He argues that Devabodha was a yogic adept, familiar with the Sāmḳ hya school
and its fundamental text, the Sam̄ ḳ hyakar̄ika ̄(cited in his commentary on the Ādiparvan).50
Devabodha’s work is “intended to facilitate the access to a meaning which can help people
purify and eventually save themselves. As Devabodha makes it clear elsewhere, the readers
can have thanks to these explanations an insight of the Inner and Supreme Self: ‘In order
to put before the eyes the internal man through the light of consciousness, the Lamp of
Knowledge [Jñan̄ adıp̄ ika]̄ is placed in the Assembly by Devabodha.’ ”51
Leclere’s study provides evidence not only for the Mahābhārata’s embedding in the
Sanskrit poetic tradition but also for a tradition of soteriological commentary in the
manner of Ānandavardhana. The epic itself appears, at least within a Vaisṇ ạ va milieu, to
have been regarded as a mystical work revealing the glories of Hari.52 Nīlakan ṭ̣ha’s much
later Bhar̄atabhavadıp̄ a also emphasizes that its aim is to illuminate the “internal, hidden
meanings” (antarnigu ̄dḥ ar̄tha) contained in the text.53
Aim in Reading the Mahābhārata
Valuable insight into the commentators’ exegetic concerns is provided by their commen-
taries on the Mahābhārata’s manġ aláloka, which Jahnavi Bidnur is currently translating.
The following excerpts from Devabodha’s and Nīlakan ṭ̣ha’s commentaries are reprinted
with her permission.
Here is the commentary on the Mahab̄ har̄ ata’s manġ aláloka. Devabodha begins thus:
iti namaskrṭya—jayah ̣ (word jaya) pauran̄ i ̣kan̄ am̄ ̣ rud̄ ḥ ya5̄4 (by the custom of the puran̄ ı ̣k̄ as)
bhar̄atam (the Bhar̄ ata) ucyate (is said to be); svapaksạ sthap̄ anaya ̄ (by establishing own paksạ )
parapaksạ pratyak̄ hyan̄ am ̣(overpowering the opposition) (is) jayah ̣(triumph, victory) iti (thus) (is
the) yogah ̣ (original meaning); iha ca (so here) dharmar̄thakam̄ amoksạ sthap̄ anaya ̄ (by establishing
dharma, artha, kam̄ a and moksạ ) adharman̄ arthak̄ am̄ abandhan̄ am̄ ̣ tatpratipaksạ n̄ a ̣ m̄ ̣ (opposition of
that—a dharma, anartha, akam̄ a and bandha) pratyak̄ hyan̄ am (overpowering) iti (this) yogah ̣(original
meaning) api (also) pratıȳ aman̄ ah ̣(implicated) na (not) hat̄um arhati (worthy to be denied); asya
(of this) sá s̄trasya (knowledge branch) preksạ vatpravrṭtyanġ avisạ yasambandhaprayojanan̄ i (part of the
wise beginning the subject matter, connection and purpose) jayasamj̣ñat̄a (from the term jaya)
upalabhyante (have been obtained); ata eva (therefore) adhikar̄ibhedat̄ (by the diference in seeker)
prayojanabhedat ca (by the diference in purpose) sá s̄trabhedah ̣(the subject matter difers).
I translate: The word jaya in the benedictory verse means bhārata by the paurān ̣ika
custom, but its original meaning is victory or triumph. So, one meaning of the word
jaya, that is, the original meaning here is: by establishing dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa,
overpowering the opposition of adharma, anartha, akāma and bandha. This meaning [that
is, the original meaning of victory as the overcoming of adharma, etc.], which is implied
by this word [jaya], is not worthy to be denied. As a part of the wise beginning, the sub-
ject matter, connection and purpose can be understood (obtained) from the word jaya.
Therefore, the subject matter difers according to the seeker and the purpose.
399
APPENDICES 399
Thus, according to Devabodha’s commentary, the text’s anubandhacatus ̣t ̣aya is as follows:
(1) sambandha (connection): the word jaya connects the text with the Bhārata and all the
four subject matters dharmārthakāmamokṣa; (2) adhikārin (seeker of knowledge): seekers of
dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa; (3) viṣaya (subject matter): dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa;
(4) prayojana (purpose): narrating the Bhārata, according to the paurān ̣ika custom; and,
by establishing dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa, overpowering the opposition of adharma,
anartha, akāma and bandha.
While writing a commentary on the Mahābhārata’s maṅgaláloka, Nīlakan ̣ṭha
begins with: iha (here) khalu (indeed) bhagavān (the revered one) pārāśaryaḥ (the son
of sage Parāśara, that is, Vyāsa) paramakārun ̣iko (superior among the compassionate)
mandamadhyamamatın̄ (to the dull- witted and the mediocre/ to the ignorant) anugṛahıt̄uṃ
(to bless or to favor) caturdaśavidyāsthānrahasyāni (14 lores of knowledge) ekatra (at one
place) pradidarśayiṣuḥ (desirous to reveal) mahābhāratākhyam itihāsaṃ (a lokavṛtta or his-
tory named the Mahābhārata) pran ̣eṣyan (establishing) prāripstitasya (of the initiated)
granthasya (text) niṣpratyūhaparipūran ̣āya (for accomplishment without any obstacle)
pracayagamanāya ca (and to achieve progress or growth) kṛtaṃ maṅgalaṃ (ofered bene-
diction) śiṣyaśikṣāyai (for the admonishment of the disciple) ślokarūpen ̣a (in the form
of verse) nibadhnan (composing) arthāt (that is to say) tatra (there) prekṣāvat (wise or
learned) pravṛttyaṅgam55 (part of the commencement) abhidheyādi (subject matter along
with prayojana) darśayati (points out) nārāyan ̣amiti.
I translate: Here, indeed, Lord Vyāsa, the son of Parā́ara, being superior among the
compassionate, to bless/ oblige the dull-w itted and the mediocre, desirous to reveal all
the 14 lores at one place, establishes the lokavr ̣tta (history) named the Mahābhārata. For
accomplishment of the initiated text, without any obstacle and to achieve growth or pro-
gress, he has ofered benediction, for the admonishment of the disciple, composing in the
form of a verse, that is to say, wise or learned part of the commencement, (and) points
out subject matter along with prayojana: nārāyan ̣amiti.
Thus, according to Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary, the text’s anubandhacatu ṣṭaya is
as follows: (1) sambandha (connection): the words caturdáavidyāsthānrahasyāni and
mahābhāratākhyam itihāsaṃ reveal the connection. The Mahābhārata is the itihāsa and it
connects itself with the domain of 14 knowledge branches; (2) adhik rin (seeker of knowl-
ā
edge): mandamadhyamamatın̄ (to the dull-w itted and the mediocre) anug ṛah ītu
ṃ
(to bless or
to favor)— here, the commentary mentions who the learners of this śāstra are. The words
used implicate the common people who might not be well-v ersed in any knowledge
branches; (3) viṣaya (subject matter): caturdaśavidyāsthānrahasyāni (14 lores of knowledge)
ekatra (at one place) pradidarśayiṣuḥ (desirous to reveal)— here, the commentary explains
what the text’s subject matter is; (4) prayojana (purpose): the same words in the commen-
tary also explain the text’s purpose. It is to ofer knowledge of all knowledge branches
in one place—s ́iṣyaśikṣāyai (for the admonishment of the disciple) ślokarūpen ̣a (in the form
of verse) nibadhnan (composing) arthāt (that is to say) tatra (there) prekṣāvat (the wise or the
learned) pravṛttyaṅgam (part of the commencement) abhidheyādi (the subject matter along
with the prayojana) darśayati (points out). These words also point out the prayojana of the
maṅgala as well as the text.
400
400 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Extent of the Commentaries and Published Editions
P. K. Gode refers to a list of manuscripts of the commentaries of the Mahābhārata
Sukthankar prepared.56 In its absence,57 the sole means to ascertain which manuscripts
of the Mahābhārata commentaries exist, whether they are complete, what portion has
been published and whether the commentaries themselves are complete was to consult
the editors’ introductions to the various parvans of the critical edition.58 A study of the
parvans revealed the following situation:
1. For the Ādiparvan, manuscripts exist of the commentaries of Arjunamiśra (two),
Nīlakaṇṭha (three), Ratnagarbha (four) and Devabodha (two).59 Of these, only
Devabodha’s commentary has been published separately,60 although Nīlakaṇṭha’s
is available in the printed vulgate editions.61 Additionally, Sukthankar notes that
fragments of Sarvajña- Nārāyaṇa’s commentary on the Ādiparvan are preserved.62
2. For the Sabhāparvan, manuscripts exist of the commentaries of Devabodha (two)
and Vādirāja (cited from the printed text in the Sastri edition; the latter is based
on two manuscripts63). Edgerton cites Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary from the printed
edition, but manuscripts may exist. In addition, Edgerton mentions two partial
commentaries only occasionally cited in the Addenda. The irst is an “incomplete
collation of the text of Arjunamiśra’s commentary, collated at the Visvabharati,
Santiniketan, from a Calcutta MS, Sāhitya Parishad Library no. 24”; the second is
“a copy of a commentary by Vimalabodha on a few (about twenty) scattered verses
in this book,”64 bearing the number 84 of 1869– 79 (of the Government Collection
deposited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute). He refers to this second
commentary as “the Viṣamaślokī.”65 Like the irst (which is cited as Ca), this manu-
script is also occasionally cited in the Addenda (as Cb) “when it seemed interesting.”66
Only Devabodha’s commentary on the Sabhāparvan has been published.67
3. For the Āraṇyakaparvan, only one copy of Arjunamiśra’s commentary turned up,
and it was in poor condition. It is unclear whether a tradition of commentary on
this parvan existed or only that the search failed to turn up manuscripts of commen-
taries on this parvan.68
4. Raghu Vira, the editor of the Virāṭaparvan, does not cite manuscripts for any of the
commentaries he references. He mentions the edition of eight Mahābhārata com-
mentaries (the commentaries of Vādirāja, Vimalabodha, Arjunamiśra, Caturbhuja,
Nīlakaṇṭha, Rāmakṛṣṇa, Sarvajña- Nārāyaṇa and another of unknown author-
ship, the Viṣamapadavivaran ̣a; of these Vādirāja’s was “fragmentary,” Vimalabodha’s
“too meagre”) published by Mahadeva Shastri Gangadhara Bhatta Bakre of the
Gujarat Printing Press, Bombay in 1915. He also notes that for the Virāṭaparvan
the number of commentaries is “not less than ifteen,” but mentions neither which
these 15 are (one of them must be Devabodha) nor the manuscripts in which they
may be found.69
5. For the Udyogaparvan, manuscripts exist of the commentaries of Devabodha
(one), Arjunamiśra (cited from the printed edition), Sarvajña-N ārāyaṇa (two) and
Nīlakaṇṭha (two). De notes that additionally two other commentaries for the Udyoga
401
APPENDICES 401
were available: the Durghaṭārtha- prakāśinı ̄of Vimalabodha and the Lakṣābharan ̣a by
Vādirāja, both in the second volume of the edition of Mahadeva Bhatta Bakre
(1920). The former was not used as it is “too meagre and deals occasionally only
with what it considers to be durghaṭa,” while the latter was not used as it “does
not represent the best South Indian version and comments generally on the T G
version.”70 Śaṅkara also wrote a commentary on the Sanatsūjātīya section of this
parvan. Only Devabodha’s commentary has been published.71
6. For the Bhīṣmaparvan, manuscripts exist of the commentaries of Devabodha (one),
Caturbhuja (one), Vādirāja (one),72 Arjunamiśra (two), Nīlakaṇṭha (two).73 Belvalkar
also mentions three other commentaries—V imalabodha’s Durghaṭārthaprakāśinı,̄
Yajña (or Sarvajña) Nārāyaṇa’s74 Bhāratatātparyasaṃgraha and Rāmānuja’s
Viṣamaślokaṭık̄ā also called the Bhāvārthadıp̄ ikā, the latter two available in two
manuscripts each— all of which, however, “are far too meager and have been drawn
upon only occasionally in the Critical Notes.”75 He later revised his ascription of the
commentary in the two manuscripts nos. 84 and 167 of the Deccan College Library
(deposited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute) to Vimalabodha.76 Only
Devabodha’s commentary has been published.77
7. For the Droṇaparvan, manuscripts exist of the commentaries of Arjunamiśra (two),
Caturbhuja (one), Nīlakaṇṭha (two) and Vādirāja (one). The parvan editor S. K. De
also mentions that “the commentary of Devabodha was available in a transcript
from MS. No. 482/ 5797, belonging to the Scindhia Oriental Institute, Ujjain,”78
but Dandekar’s comments in his introduction to the Śalyaparvan render the ascrip-
tion problematic.79 No published editions exist.
8. For the Karṇaparvan, manuscripts exist of the commentaries of Arjunamiśra
(one), Caturbhuja (one), Nīlakaṇṭha (one) and Vādirāja (one). The parvan editor
P. L. Vaidya also cites “Vimalabodha’s commentary known as Viṣamaśloki or
Durghaṭārthaprakāśinī” and adds, “a complete MS. of this work is found in the
Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the BORI), No. 84 of 1869– 70,”80
but according to Belvalkar’s information the ascription is incorrect.81 No published
editions exist.
9. For the Śalyaparvan, manuscripts exist of the commentaries of Arjunamiśra (two),
Vādirāja (one) and Nīlakaṇṭha (four). No published editions exist.
10. For the Sauptikaparvan, manuscripts exist of the commentaries of Arjunamiśra
(two), Nīlakaṇṭha (one) and Vādirāja (one). Velankar also refers to Devabodha’s
commentary, available in “a transcript from the Scindia Oriental Institute, Ujjain,
bearing No. 482/ 5797.” He adds, “This happens to be the only MS. of Devabodha
available for this parvan.”82 Dandekar, however, questions the ascription. According
to him, the commentary is actually Arjunamiśra’s.83 No published editions exist.
11. For the Strīparvan, manuscripts exist of the commentaries of Arjunamiśra (two),
Nīlakaṇṭha (two) and Vādirāja (one). Paranjpe also mentions a “transcript of
Devabodha made at the BORI from No. 482/ 5797 of the Scindia Oriental Institute,
Ujjain,” which “was used for the present edition.”84 Dandekar, however, questions
the ascription. According to him, the commentary is actually Arjunamiśra’s.85 No
published editions exist.
402
402 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
12. It appears to have been the practice to hand down the Śāntiparvan only in its
subsections (that is, the Rājadharma, Āpaddharma and Mokṣadharma parvans) rather
than as a whole. Accordingly, the manuscripts of the commentaries are also speciic
to these subsections. For the Rājadharma and Āpaddharmaparvan, manuscripts
exist of the commentaries of Arjunamiśra (three; an additional two contain only the
Rājadharma, while a solitary copy contains only the Āpaddharma),86 Vimalabodha
(one) and Vādirāja (one).87 For the Mokṣadharmaparvan, manuscripts exist of
the commentaries of Arjunamiśra (three), Vimalabodha (one), Paramānanda
Bhaṭṭācārya (two),88 Vidyāsāgara (three)89 and Vādirāja (one). Manuscripts also exist
of Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary: one (Dn1) contains all three subsections; a second
(Dn2) contains only the irst; a third (Dn3) contains the second and third; and a
fourth (Dn4) contains the irst and third. In addition to these four, which were used
for the critical edition, another manuscript containing only the Rājadharmaparvan
exists.90 No published editions exist of either of the three sub-p arvans.
13. For the Anuśāsanaparvan, manuscripts exist of the commentaries of Arjunamiśra
(one), Nīlakaṇṭha (two). The ascription of a commentary to Vimalabodha on the
basis of two manuscripts in the Bombay Government Collection (nos. 84 of 1869–
70 and 167 of 1887– 91) is erroneous.91 In addition, an unidentiied commentary
exists in two manuscripts. No published editions exist.
14. For the Āśvamedhikaparvan, only a solitary manuscript of the commentary of
Vādirāja was used. Karmarkar cites Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary from the printed
edition, but, according to Belvalkar’s information, manuscript no. 29c of the
Bombay (now Maharashtra) Government Collection also contains Nīlakaṇṭha’s
commentary on this parvan. No published editions exist.
15– 18. For the Āśramavāsika, Mausala, Mahāprasthānika and Svargārohaṇa parvans,
manuscripts exist of the commentaries of Nīlakaṇṭha (two)92 and Vādirāja (one). No
published editions exist.
Summing up, we can say that, for the principal Mahābhārata commentators
(Devabodha, Arjunamiśra, Vimalabodha, Vādirāja and Nīlakaṇṭha), we possess near
complete commentaries. Devabodha’s commentary is missing for the Āraṇyaka and
Virāṭa parvans93 and for the Droṇa through Svargārohaṇa parvans.94 It is preserved for the
Bhīṣmaparvan, but without the Bhagavadgītā.95 Arjunamiśra’s commentary is missing
for the Āśvamedhika through Svargārohaṇa parvans and is only partially available for
the Sabhāparvan.96 Vimalabodha’s commentary is missing for the Ādi through Bhīṣma
parvans, for the Droṇa, Śalya and Sauptika parvans and for the Āśvamedhika through
Svargārohaṇa parvans. Vādirāja’s commentary is the most complete and is missing only for
the Ādi and Āraṇyaka parvans (though it is possible that Sukthankar, who was the editor of
both these parvans, was unaware of Sastri’s transcript). Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary is also
missing for the Āraṇyaka and Anuśāsna parvans; it is cited from the printed edition in the
Sabhāparvan. From the fact that these commentators appear to have written continuous
commentaries, it seems likely that at one time commentaries existed on all the parvans
403
APPENDICES 403
of the Mahābhārata.97 Additionally, fragmentary commentaries exist on one or more
parvans or subsections of parvans by Ratnagarbha, Caturbhuja, Rāmakṛṣṇa, Rāmānuja,
Śaṅkara, Vidyāsāgara, Paramānanda Bhaṭṭācārya and two unidentiied commentators.98
Except for Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary, which has probably been continuously in print
in one or more editions since the nineteenth century, no complete edition exists of
any Mahābhārata commentary: the one that has been published most extensively is
Devabodha’s (Ādi, Sabhā, Udyoga and Bhīṣma parvans); additionally, published editions
exist for the Virāṭa and Udyoga parvans for the commentaries of Vādirāja, Vimalabodha,
Arjunamiśra, Caturbhuja, Nīlakaṇṭha, Rāmakṛṣṇa, Sarvajña- Nārāyaṇa and an uniden-
tiied commentator. No translations exist.
Finding Guide to the Commentaries
Given the Mahābhārata commentators’ importance in reestablishing the meaning of the
text after the German critics’ willful and destructive interventions, we include a inding
guide to the manuscripts here. The next task must be to edit and publish these com-
mentaries, and, thereafter, to translate them for a new readership. Only thus can we
revive a centuries-old tradition of literate reception and literary production based on the
Mahābhārata.
1. Ādiparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Arjunamiśra Da1 Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the
(Mahā)Bhāratārtha(pra) BORI), no. 30 of 1879– 90 CE. Folios 416, with about 7– 10
dıp̄ika or lines to a page; size 15½” x 6¾”. Devanāgarī characters. Old
Bhāratasaṃgrahadıp̄ikā. Indian glossy paper. Text with commentary of Arjunamiśra;
Version probably an ofshoot written neatly but extremely corrupt and unintelligible
of the Bengali version. in places, on account of the scribe’s inability to read the
exemplar correctly.
Da2 Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the
BORI), Viśrāmbāg I, no. 468. Folios 415, with about 10
lines to a page; size 15.7” x 6.6”. Devanāgarī characters;
dated V. Saṃ. 1676 (ca. 1620 CE). Indian paper. Text with
commentary of Arjunamiśra.1
Nīlakaṇṭha Dn1 MS belonging to Sardar M. V. Kibe of Indore. Folios 446,
Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a with about 8– 10 lines to a page; size 18.2” x 7.3”. Devanāgarī
The text used or prepared characters. Thick Indian paper. Text with commentary of
by Nīlakaṇṭha is a smooth Nīlakaṇṭha. The MS is, on the whole, correct and very clearly
and eclectic but inferior written. Dated: Īśvara saṃvatsara, mārgaśīrṣa śuddha 13,
text, of an inclusive rather which cannot be identiied.
than exclusive type, with an
inconsiderable amount of
Southern element.
404
404 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Dn2 Mysore, Oriental Library, no. 1064. Folios 448, with about
22 lines to a page; size 15¼” x 6¼”. Devanāgarī characters;
dated V. Saṃvat 1864 (ca. 1808 CE). Paper. Text with
commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha.
Dn3 Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the
BORI), no. 234 of 1895– 1902. Folios 683, with about nine
lines to a page; size 15.2” x 7.2”. Devanāgarī characters.
Thick Indian paper. Text with commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha.
Bold and clear letters; generally correct; margins are almost
clean.
Ratnagarbha Dr1 Tanjore, Saraswathi Mahal Library, no. 1246. Folios
The critical notes contain 448, with about 11 lines to a page; size 15” x 6½”.
only specimen collations of Devanāgarī characters. Paper. Text with the commentary of
this version, which is a blend Ratnagarbha.
between the Northern and Dr2 Tanjore, Saraswathi Mahal Library, no. 1199. Folios
Southern recensions. Like 306, with about 10– 13 lines to a page; size 16” x 6½”.
the Telugu manuscripts Devanāgarī characters. Paper. Text with the commentary of
[…] it is eclectic, following Ratnagarbha.
now the Northern tradition, Dr3 Tanjore, Saraswathi Mahal Library, no. 1313. Folios 366,
now the Southern. It with about 11– 13 lines to a page; size 16” x 6¼”. Devanāgarī
seems to be an attempt to characters; dated Śaka 1623 (ca. 1701 CE). Paper. Text with
combine the two recensions the commentary of Ratnagarbha.
by superposition, like the Dr4 Tanjore, Saraswathi Mahal Library, no. 1339. Folios
Kumbhakonam edition. 108, with about 11– 22 lines to a page; size 16” x 6½”.
Devanāgarī characters. Paper. Text with the commentary of
Ratnagarbha. This fragment contains only about 90 adhyāyas
of this edition. The number of lines on each folio luctuates
with the amount of commentary each folio contains, and
which of course, varies considerably.
Devabodha Cd Baroda Central Library (Sanskrit Section), no. 11372.
The version of Devabodha Contains the commentary on Ādi only and is written in
is of the Śāradā– K type. Devanāgarī characters of about the seventeenth century.
The bulk of the MS is in a fair state of preservation, though
in many places the text is extremely corrupt. In our MS
the name of the commentary is given as Jñānadıp̄ikā; but,
according to Holtzmann (op. cit. vol. 3, p. 71), it is also known
as Mahābhārata- tātparyatı̣k̄ā. MSS. of this commentary are rare,
and no complete copy has yet been found.2
2. Sabhāparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Devabodha Cd Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the
BORI), no. 167 of 1884– 87. Devanāgarī; paper; no date.
Sabhāparvan alone, with commentary of Devabodha.
Complete: 115 folios, (1a and 115b blank; text ends on 114b);
11– 13 lines, 40– 46 akṣaras.3
405
APPENDICES 405
Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the
BORI), no. 74 of 1902– 7. Devanāgarī; paper; dated Saṃvat
1821 (ca. 1763 CE). Sabhāparvan alone, with Devabodha’s
commentary. Complete: 115 folios (1a and 115b blank; text ends
on 114b), average 10– 11 lines, 53– 55 akṣaras.4
Nīlakaṇṭha Cn Cited from the printed text of the Bombay edition, of which the
volume containing Ādi and Sabhā is dated 1807.
Vādirāja Cv Cited from the printed text of Sabhā in the Southern Recension, ed.
P. P. S. Sastri, being volume 3 of his edition (Madras, 1932).5
3. Āraṇyakaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Arjunamiśra None6 Government Sanskrit College Collection in Calcutta (no. 310)
4. Virāṭaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Arjunamiśra Ca
Caturbhuja Cb
Nīlakaṇṭha Cn
Rāmakṛṣṇa Cr
Sarvajña- Nārāyaṇa Cs
Commentary known as Cv
Viṣamapadavivaraṇa
5. Udyogaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Devabodha Cd no. 3399/ 4814 in Haraprasad Shastri’s Descriptive Catalogue v,
Undoubtedly the Purāṇa, pp. 151– 52. It contains folios 3– 119, with ive lines
oldest and deserv[ing] to a page, size 11½” x 1¾”, in clear bold Devanāgarī writing
of foremost in ink, using frequent pṛṣtḥ amātrās. The following folios are
consideration. In missing: 14, 39, 53– 54 (which, however, are replaced by a folio
the nature of brief without number), 62– 63, 81, 84, 86, 98, 100– 109 and 111.
running glosses There are several extra folios containing other matters.7
on diicult words
and phrases; but
the commentator’s
testimony, in striking
agreement with that
of Ś1 K, has been of
considerable value in
the constitution of the
critical text.
406
406 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Commentary of Ca Cited from the printed text of the Gujarati Press edition
Arjunamiśra of Mahadeva Shastri Gangadhara Bhatta Bakre (Bombay,
As a Bengali, he 1915).8
should represent the
Bengali version, but
his great admiration
for Devabodha
often makes his
commentary a direct
copy or ampliied
paraphrase of that of
his predecessor, while
his many divergences
from speciic Bengali
readings often raise
the suspicion that he
consulted other sources
as well.
Commentary of Cs Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the
Sarvajña- Nārāyaṇa BORI), no. 168 of 1884– 87. 309 folios, with about 11 lines
The exact provenance to a page; size 15½” x 6¾”. Devanāgarī characters. Modern
of this commentary paper. Text with Sarvajña- Nārāyaṇa’s commentary. Clear and
is not known, but fairly correctly written, with very few marginal corrections.
Sarvajña- Nārāyaṇa The pages are written in strips, with the original text in the
was undoubtedly a middle.9
Northerner; and his Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the
commentary shows BORI), no. 33 of 1879– 80 CE. 309 folios, with about 10 to
the direct inluence 13 lines to a page; size 15½” x 6¾”. Devanāgarī characters.
of Devabodha. […] Modern paper. Text with Sarvajña- Nārāyaṇa’s commentary.
Strangely enough, the Neat and clear writing, generally correct, the margins almost
text does not always clean.10
represent the readings
of the commentary.
[…] This makes it
diicult to determine
his provenance and to
assign, even tentatively,
any deinite version to
him.
407
APPENDICES 407
Śaṅkara (only on the Cś Unknown11
Sanatsujāta)
If he is identical with
the great Śaṅkara, his
text is undoubtedly
older than the
oldest of the extant
Mahābhārata MSS.,
but this does not
necessarily prove its
absolute authenticity;
for, his testimony
afects only the
authenticity of the
particular recension or
version used by him,
and nothing more.
Nīlakaṇṭha Cn Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the
Nīlakaṇṭha’s BORI), no. 29B of 1879– 80 CE. 255 folios, with about 17
preference for a to 19 lines to a page (being written in three strips, with the
smooth and eclectic original text in the middle, the number of lines varies); size
text leads him not 11¾” x 7¾”. Devanāgarī characters. Fine modern paper
only to indiscriminate with watermarks. Text with Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary, but
incorporation and the commentary begins here with the Sanatsujāta. The MS
athetization, but also is modern but some of the parvans copy, at the end, the date
to the avoidance of the original exemplars, one of the latest dates being Śaka
of the lectio diicilior 1680 (= ca. 1758 CE). Neatly written and fairly correct.12
or grammatical Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the
irregularities with a BORI), no. 271 of Viśrāmbāg II. 142 folios, with 19 to 20
view to simpliication lines to a page; size 17½” x 8”. Devanāgarī characters;
and normalization. dated Śaka 1666 (= ca. 1744 CE). Indian paper. Text with
In this way authentic Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary. The writing is clear and fairly
archaisms are correct; and the margins are clean. As it is written in three
completely obliterated, strips, with the original text in the middle, the number of lines
but unskillful varies from page to page. The following folios are missing: 1–
conlation has often led 2, 24, 34, 42– 44, 86, 96, 100– 101, 107, 109, 111, 113– 24,
to fresh confusion and 129, 137– 40.13
obscurity.
408
408 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
6. Bhīṣmaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Version of Devabodha; Cd Baroda Oriental Institute MS no. 12982. Written on paper
the commentary called in Devanāgarī characters. Folios 1– 5 (folio 1a blank) carry
Jñānadıp̄ikā the text up to the Bhagavadgītā; and folios 1– 9 (written sec.
m., with fresh pagination; fol. 3b, 4a and 9a being left blank)
carry the text from 6.41.4 to the end of the parvan, there being
no commentary available for the Bhagavadgītā. The date of
completion of the MS is October 26, 1766.
Version of Caturbhuja; Cc Oriental Institute, Baroda; no. 13036. Old country paper,
the commentary called size 11¾” x 4”, slightly frayed at the lower right- hand corner.
Tātparyaprakāśikā (?) 42 folios, with 10 lines to a page and 48 letters to a line.
Written in Devanāgarī characters; not very correct. It gives
the commentary on the Bhagavadgītā only up to stanza 57 of
chapter 2, and remarks—a taḥ paraṃ granthābhāvānna likhitāni. The
commentary is again resumed at 6.41.3, and goes on to the end
of the parvan (fol. 40a, line 1). After this point, there are, in the
same handwriting, ive pages of what purports to be deva(ko)
bodhasya gıt̄ātı̣k̄ā; but its authenticity is uncertain. The MS is
undated, and looks not more than 150 or 200 years old. The
date of Caturbhuja lies between 1275– 1350 CE.
Version of Vādirāja; Cv Govt. Oriental Library, Mysore; no. C1577.
the commentary called An almost complete MS of Vādirāja’s commentary on the
Lakṣālaṃkāra Mahābhārata is available in the Mysore Oriental Library,
besides parts of the commentary on stray parvans in several
libraries of South India. For this edition, we were able to use
a Devanāgarī copy of the Mysore MS, bearing Library no.
C1577 and dated Śaka 1597 (1675 CE). The original MS was
written on paper in Devanāgarī characters. Its total extent is
folios 2– 104, 151– 445. The Bhīṣmaparvan covers folios 151–8 8,
with eight lines to a page, and 44 letters to a line. Vādirāja alias
Kavīndratīrtha was eighth in the succession-l ist of the High
priests of the Mādhva sect, and died Śaka 1261 (1339 CE).
Devanāgarī Version Ca Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the
of Arjunamiśra; the BORI), no. 482 of Viśrāmbāg I. Written in bold and legible
commentary called Devanāgarī characters in country paper, of size 16” x 7”. 285
Bhāratārthadıp̄ikā (or folios, with folios 114, 132, 133, 135 and 136 missing, and folios
pradıp̄ikā) 126, 130 and 137 partially torn. Gives about 11 lines to a page
and about 60 letters to a line. Not very correct, but corrections
made here and there by a later hand. Gives the text in the
center and Arjunamiśra’s commentary above and below the
text. For the Bhagavadgītā (which extends from fol. 34a– 125b)
the commentary given is the Subodhinı ̄of Śrīdhara. Not dated,
but seems about 300 years old. On the blank sides of the irst
and the last folios, the MS is said to have belonged to “saṃsthān
dṛaṃbal [?14].”15
409
APPENDICES 409
Baroda, Oriental Institute Library, no. 10801. The portion
up to the Bhagavadgītā covers folios 1– 33. Thereafter, the
Bhagavadgītā (text and comm.) is altogether omitted. After the
Bhagavadgītā, with a fresh pagination (1– 160), the parvan is
brought to an end. Devanāgarī characters. The commentary
of Arjunamiśra is written above and below the text as usual.
Size 13” x 5½”. In the same bundle, written on paper of
the same size but probably in a diferent hand, is the text
(without commentary) of the Āśramavāsaparvan, which is
dated V. Saṃvat 1753 (ca. 1697 CE). This may have been
the approximate date for the Bhīṣmaparvan also. Both the
MSS. are stated at the conclusion to have been the property of
Bhaṭṭa Śrī- Govindajita.16
Devanāgarī Version Cn Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the
of Nīlakaṇṭha; the BORI), no. 483 of Viśrāmbāg I. Country paper, Devanāgarī
commentary called characters. Size 16¼” x 6¾”. 336 folios, with 10– 12 lines to
the Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a (or a page and about 48 letters to a line. Clear and legible hand,
dıp̄ikā) fairly correct. A few corrections are noted in the margin (sec.
As this commentary m.). Gives the text in the center and the commentary above
is readily available in and below the text, as usual. Although the last colophon of the
print, and is the latest commentary reads: iti śrım̄ adarjunamiśrakṛtau bhāratārthadıp̄ikāyāṃ
of them, it was not bhıṣ̄maparvavivaran ̣aṃ samāptam, the commentary from beginning
thought necessary to go to end is actually Nīlakaṇṭha’s Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a. Not dated.17
into any critical details Indore, from the private collection of Sardar M. V. Kibe. Not
about the commentary numbered. Tough country paper, Size 16” x 6”. 338 folios,
proper beyond the data without about 11 lines to a page, and 50 letters to a line.
supplied in connection Devanāgarī characters; written in a neat and legible hand,
with the MSS. Dn1 and fairly correct. Gives the text in the center and the commentary
Dn2 already described of Nīlakaṇṭha above and below the text, as usual. No date is
on pp. xxxv– xxxvi above. given.18
Incidentally, it is worth
noting, however, that
Ganapat Krishnaji’s
edition of 1863 cannot be
said faithfully to present
the text underlying
Nīlakanṭ̣ha’s commentary
in every detail; and not
all the Cn MSS. agree
amongst themselves.
Commentary19 Sig. Manuscripts
Vimalabodha’s C Poona, Bombay Govt. Collection (deposited at the BORI),
Durghatạ ̄rthaprakāśinı?̄20 no. 84 of 1869– 70; dated Śaka 1724 (1802 CE).
Yajña (or Sarvajña) C Transcribed from MSS. Nos. R2169 and R1625 belonging to
Nārāyaṇa’s Govt. Or. MSS. Lib., Madras.
Bhāratatātparyasaṃgraha
Rāmānuja’s Viṣamaśl C As given in the India Oice Codices, nos. 470 and 1411.
okatı̣k̄ā also called the
Bhāvārthadıp̄ikā
410
410 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
7. Droṇaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Devabodha?21 Cd Scindia Oriental Institute, Ujjain, MS no. 482/ 5797. Written at
Kāśī in Śaka 1571 (= ca. 1649 CE). Appears to be the same MS
as was used for the Sauptika and Strī parvans. The commentary is
unaccompanied by the epic text.
Arjunamiśra Ca Benares Sanskrit College, MS no. 2278. Incomplete.
Caturbhujamiśra Cc Poona, Bombay Govt. Collection (now deposited at BORI), no. 495
of Viśrāmbāg (i). 339 folios. Indian paper. Size 16” x 6 4/ 5”.
Devanāgarī characters, with 11 lines to a page. Bold legible writing.
The MS, which is in good condition, contains the commentary of
Caturbhuja Miśra. The text is in the middle, and the commentary
runs above and below the text.22
Nīlakaṇṭha Cn Poona, Limaye Collection of the BORI, no. 377. 305 folios. Indian
paper. Devanāgarī characters, with 11– 13 lines to a page. Good
legible writing. The MS contains the commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha
and extends from the Droṇa to Rājadharma sub-p arvan of the Śānti
only.23
Bhor State Library, Bundle no. 1, unnumbered. 188 folios. Paper.
Size 14½” x 7”. Devanāgarī characters, with 16 lines to a page.
Dated Saṃvat 1846 (= ca. 1790 CE). Good and clear writing. The
MS gives the commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha written above and below
the text.24
Vādirāja Cv From a transcript from Madras (now with the BORI).25
8. Karṇaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Arjunamiśra Library of the Oriental Institute, Baroda, no. 12927. The
Arjunamiśra’s text of this commentary is identical with that found in Da1.
commentary on this The MS consists of 21 folios. It is dated Śaka 1605, the irst
parvan is less copious than of the dark half of Phālguṇa, corresponding to Saturday,
that of Caturbhuja, but 3rd March, 1683 CE. The copyist’s name is Sukhadeva
slightly more extensive Pandit.26
than that of Nīlakaṇṭha
and Vādirāja.
Caturbhuja Oriental Institute, Baroda, no. 12983. The MS consists of
24 folios. It is very corrupt at places, and was therefore used
wherever possible.
Nīlakaṇṭha Available in printed form in the Ganapat Krishnaji
and other editions. MS Dn1 contains the text of this
commentary, which generally agrees with the Vulgate. It is
very scanty and does not help much for text constitution.
Vādirāja’s commentary Unknown27
Lakṣālaṃkāra
Vimalabodha’s? Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the BORI),
commentary Viṣamaślokı ̄ no. 84 of 1869– 70.
or Durghatạ ̄rthaprakāśinı2̄8
411
APPENDICES 411
9. Śalyaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Arjunamiśra’s Ca Baroda, Oriental Institute Library, no. 12931. Folios 1– 8a.
commentary Bhāratārth The MS, which is dated Śaka 1736 (= 1814 CE), gives only the
apradıp̄ikā commentary without the text. It also contains Arjunamiśra’s
(ca. 1450– 1500 CE)29 commentary on the Sauptikaparvan and the Strīparvan
Not of any signiicant (beginning from folio 8a).
use for the constitution Ujjain, Scindia Oriental Institute Library, no. 482/ 5797. Folios
of the text. 1b– 9a. The MS, which is dated Śaka 1571 (= 1649 CE) and
which is said to have been written by one Nārāyaṇabhaṭṭa
Mahokṣa, gives only the commentary without the text. It also
contains the commentary on the Sauptikaparvan (beginning
from folio 9a). The colophons in this MS are generally very
brief. Curiously enough, however, there is, at the end of
the commentary on Crit. Ed. adhy. 28, a colophon, which
reads: iti śrıp̄aramahaṃsācāryaśrıd̄evabodhakṛtau bhāratadıp̄ikāyāṃ
śalyaparvavivaran ̣aṃ samāptam. The ascription of this
commentary, on the basis of this colophon, to Devabodha is
obviously a mistake. This MS was carefully compared with the
Baroda MS no. 12931 referred to earlier, and was found to be
identical with it.
Vādirāja’s Cv From P. P. S. Sastri’s transcript of the commentary of Vādirāja.
commentary The commentary on the Śalyaparvan consists of 67 adhyāyas
Lakṣālaṃkāra (30 for the Śalya and 37 for the Gadā).
(ca. 1571 CE)30
This commentary
is very scanty and
of little use for the
constitution of the
text.
Nīlakaṇṭha’s Cn Poona, Bombay (now Maharashtra) Government Collection
commentary (deposited at the BORI), no. 240 of 1895– 1902. 57 folios;
Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a written on Indian paper, in Devanāgarī characters, with 10–
(ca. 1680– 1693 CE)31 12 lines to a page and about 40 letters to a line; size 15½” x
7”; undated; text with Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary. Besides the
Śalyaparvan, the MS contains the Sauptika, the Aiṣīka and
the Strī, the folios of each parvan numbered separately. The
handwriting is uniform throughout. Though the MS contains
the entire Śalyaparvan, it is used here only for adhys. 1– 28 of
that parvan. It is also used as Dn1 for the critical edition of the
Sauptika (and Aiṣīka) parvans.32
Poona, Bombay (now Maharashtra) Government Collection
(deposited at the BORI), no. 506 of Viśrāmbāg I. 49 folios;
written on country paper, in Devanāgarī characters, with
about 12 lines to a page and about 50 letters to a line; size 15
1/3 ” x 6 7/ 8”. The handwriting is uniform and beautiful.
The MS contains only adhys. 1– 28 of the Śalyaparvan. The
commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha is given at the top and at the
bottom of the folios.33
412
412 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Poona, Bombay (now Maharashtra) Government Collection
(deposited at the BORI), no. 507 of Viśrāmbāg I. 65 folios;
written on country paper, in Devanāgarī characters, with about
12 lines to a page and about 50 letters to a line; size 16” x
6¾”. The handwriting is uniform and good. The commentary
of Nīlakaṇṭha is given at the top and at the bottom of each
page. The MS is undated and is in good condition. It contains
only the last two sub-p arvans of the Śalyaparvan. Presumably it
is the continuation of Dn2 used for adhys. 1– 28 of that parvan
and forms part of a complete codex of the Epic.34
Poona, Limaye Collection of the BORI, no. 375 and 376.
Folios 1– 49 for the adhys. 1– 28 and folios 1– 65 for adhys.
29– 64; written on Indian paper, in good legible Devanāgarī
characters, with about 12 lines to a page; size 15½” x 6 7/ 8”.
Besides the complete Śalyaparvan, the MS contains the Droṇa,
the Sauptika, the Strī and the Rājadharma sub-p arvan of the
Śānti. It is used as Dn3 for adhys. 1– 28 and as Dn2 for adhys.
29– 63 of the present parvan. The commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha
is given above and below the text. The MS is also used for the
Critical Edition of the Droṇaparvan (as Dn1).
10. Sauptikaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Commentary of Cd Scindia Oriental Institute, Ujjain; no. 482/ 5797. This is the
Devabodha?35 only MS of Devabodha available for this parvan. It is dated
Śaka 1571 (1649 CE), and the name of the scribe is given as
“mahokṣopanāmra nārāyan ̣abhatṭẹna.”
Commentary of Ca MS no. 12931, dated Śaka 1736 (1814 CE), of the Oriental
Arjunamiśra Institute Library, Baroda. It is not possible to know either the
scribe or the place of this MS, as this is not mentioned in the
colophon.
Commentary of Cn None36
Nīlakaṇṭha
Commentary of Cv Transcript of no. C1577 in the Mysore Oriental Library?37
Vādirāja
11. Strīparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Commentary of Cd Scindia Oriental Institute, Ujjain; no. 482/ 5797. The original
Devabodha?38 manuscript was written by Nārāyaṇabhaṭṭa Mahokṣa in Śaka
1571.
Commentary of Ca MS no. 12931, dated Śaka 1736 (1814 CE), of the Oriental
Arjunamiśra Institute Library, Baroda.
Commentary of Cn Unknown39
Nīlakaṇṭha
Commentary of Cv Unknown (possibly Sastri’s transcript?)40
Vādirāja
413
APPENDICES 413
12. Śāntiparvan, Rājadharma and Āpaddharma parvans
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Arjunamiśra’s Ca Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale, no. 379. Written on country
Bhāratārthadıp̄ikā or paper in Śāradā characters. Size 260 mm x 355 mm (10 2/
pradıp̄ikā 5” x 14 1/ 5”). Gives about 25 lines to a page and about 30
According to letters to a line. The original portion of the MS writes the
the editor, it is commentary in Śāradā characters on the margins all around
Arjunamiśra’s the text. The commentary is by Arjunamiśra, as is expressly
practice, when dealing stated on the top margin of folio 127b (iti śrıārjunamiśrakṛtāyāṃ
with a particularly mahā […] samāptaḥ) and on the lower margin of the same page
diicult passage from (natvā jagadguruṃ viṣn ̣uṃ tataḥ pitarameva ca | kriyate’rjunamiśren ̣a
the Mokṣadharma, to mokṣadharmapradıp̄ikā ||). The commentary seems to have been
give a modest preface written by a later copyist, who at times attempts to correct
or a conclusion to his the originally written text (inter. lin. or marg.) so as to make
commentary. it agree with the commentary.41 The copyist who wrote the
commentary seems to have been a diferent person from the
one who copied the smaller- sized folios, so that the MS before
us is the handicraft of three diferent persons more or less
separated from one another in time. The MS cannot be said to
be very old.42
Poona, Bombay Government Collection of MSS. (deposited at
the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, being part of the
old Vishram Bag Collection, I. 499). Written on country paper
in clear and legible hand. Size 15.4” x 6.4”, with 10 or all lines
to a page and about 48 letters to a line. The text is written
in the center and the commentary of Arjunamiśra written
above and below the text. Total number of folios 179. The MS
gives the Rājadharma and the Āpaddharma subsections only,
and is undated. The MS Da2, giving the Āpaddharma and
numbered Vishram Bag I. 500, seems to be a continuation of
the present MS.43
Poona, Bombay Government Collection of MSS. (deposited
at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, being part of
the old Vishram Bag Collection, I. 500). Written on country
paper in good legible hand with the text in the center and the
commentary of Arjunamiśra above and below the text. Folios
176; size 16” x 7”, with 10 lines to a page and 40– 42 letters
to a line. The MS contains only the Rājadharma and the
Āpaddharma subsections, the Mokṣadharma subsection being
absent. The MS is undated.44
Vimalabodha’s Cb An unnumbered Maithilī MS from the Rāja Library,
Durghtạ ̄rthaprakāśinı̄ Darbhanga.
414
414 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Nīlakaṇṭha’s Cn Bhor, State Library, Nos. 80, 81 and 82, the three numbers
Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a or giving respectively the Rājadharma, the Āpaddharma and
dıp̄ikā45 the Mokṣadharma subsections of the Śāntiparvan. Folios,
(1680 CE)46 respectively 186, 60 and 450. Size 16½” x 6¾”. Written on
country paper in Devanāgarī characters, with legible and
careful hand. There are, on average, 12 lines to a page with
48 letters to a line. The text is written in the center and the
comm. of Nīlakaṇṭha above and below the text. Dated Śaka
1691 (ca. 1769 CE) (in the Rājadharma and Mokṣadharma
subsections).47
(Only for the Rājadharmaparvan.)
Poona, Vishalgad Collection of the B. O. R. Institute, no. 245.
The MS was presented to the Institute by Vishalgad State.
It is now numbered 245, and contains the Rājadharma only.
Written on country paper in Devanāgarī characters in a good
and legible hand, with 12– 13 lines to a page and 40– 50 letters
to a line. Size 15.5” x 6.8”, giving text in the center and the
comm. of Nīlakaṇṭha above and below the text. It is dated ca.
1782 CE.48
(Only for the Āpaddharmaparvan.)
Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute) no. 241 of 1895–
1902. Written on country paper in Devanāgarī characters.
Size 14” x 5.6” with 10 lines to a page and about 50 letters
to a line. The text is written in the center and the comm. of
Nīlakaṇṭha above and below the text. Legible but somewhat
carelessly written; in tolerable condition. The MS contains
the Āpaddharma as well as the Mokṣadharma, but the latter
subsection is not used in the present edition. The MS gives
no date either at the end of the Āpaddharma or of the
Mokṣadharma.49
Vādirāja’s Lakṣālaṃkāra Cv As in a copy from P. P. S. Sastri’s library.
Mokṣadharmaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Arjunamiśra’s Ca Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale, no. 379 (Ś1).50
Bhāratārthadıp̄ikā or
pradıp̄ikā
Poona, Bombay Government Collection of MSS. (deposited
at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, being no. 476
of the old Vishram Bag Collection I). The MS has 433 folios,
size 15.5” x 6.5”, with 3 to 5 lines to a page and between 40 to
45 letters to a line. The MS contains only the Mokṣadharma
subsection, the text being written in the center and the comm. of
Arjunamiśra above and below the text. It is written on country
paper in a neat, careful and legible hand. The MS is undated.51
415
APPENDICES 415
Poona, Bombay Government Collection of MSS. (deposited at
the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute) no. 38 of
1879– 80 CE. Written on country paper in neat and legible
Devanāgarī characters. Size 15.5” x 6.7”. Total number of folios
433. The MS contains only the Mokṣadharma subsection of the
Śāntiparvan with the commentary of Arjunamiśra written above
and below the text. The MS bears no date.52
Vimalabodha’s Cb As in Bombay Govt. Collection (deposited at the BORI), NO.
Durghtạ ̄rthaprakāśinı̄ 167 of 1887–9 1. Undated.
Nīlakaṇṭha’s Cn Bhor, State Library, no. 82 (Dn1).53
Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a or Poona, Bombay Government Collection of MSS. (deposited at
dıp̄ikā the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute), no. 29c of
1879– 80 CE. Written on country paper in Devanāgarī
characters. Size 11.6” x 8.1”, with 17– 18 lines to a page
and about 40 letters to a line. The text is written in the
center and the comm. of Nīlakaṇṭha above and below
the text. At the end of the Mokṣadharma we read: śake
1670 bahudhānyanāmasaṃvatsare āṣāḍaśuddhe ṣaṣtḥ ı ̄cantravāsare
lekhakabhagavānbhatṭẹna likhitoyaṃ pustakam || The MS is dated ca.
1758 CE.54
Paramānanda Cp As in MS no. 12899 from the Oriental Institute, Baroda. Dated
Bhaṭṭācārya’s Śaka 1594 (ca. 1672 CE).
Mokṣadharmatı̣k̄ā The commentary of Paramānanda Bhaṭṭācārya was available
after 1360 CE55 only for the Mokṣadharma subsection, and that too in a rare MS
kindly lent by the Oriental Institute of Baroda: no. 12899. The
MS was written on old country paper, 10½” x 4½”. The date is
Śaka 1594 (ca. 1672 CE).
Vidyāsāgara’s Cs Poona, Bombay Government Collection of MSS. (deposited
Vyākhyānaratnāvali at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute), no. 39 of
(ca. 1350 CE)56 A 1879– 80. Written on yellowish country paper in Devanāgarī
characters with the text of the Mokṣadharma in the center,
and the commentary of Vidyāsāgara on the same, named
the Vyākhyānaratnāvali, above and below the text. 681 folios,
with about 10 lines to a page and about 36 letters to a line.
Undated.57
Tanjore, Saraswathi Mahal Library, no. 1141. Written on
country paper in Devanāgarī characters. Size 16½” x 6½”;
total number of folios 413, with text in the center and the
commentary of Vidyāsāgara called the Vyākhyānaratnāvali above
and below the text. Undated.58
Vādirāja’s Lakṣālaṃkāra Cv As in a copy from P. P. S. Sastri’s library.
416
416 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
13. Anuśāsanaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Viṣamaślokı ̄Ṭık̄ā of Cb Poona, Bombay (now Maharashtra) Government Collection
Vimalabodha?59 (deposited at the BORI), no. 84 of 1869–7 0. 88 folios; written
(a.k.a. on paper, in Devanāgarī characters, with 14– 15 lines to a
Durghatạ ̄rthaprakāśinı)̄ page and about 30 letters to a line. The handwriting is good
(1150– 1300 CE)60 and legible. The MS is dated Śaka 1724 (= 1802 CE).
Acknowledges his debt to Poona, Bombay (now Maharashtra) Government Collection
Devabodha (also referred (deposited at the BORI), no. 167 of 1887– 91. 67 folios;
to as Devasvāmin) written on paper, in Devanāgarī characters, with about 12
lines to a page and about 45 letters to a line. The handwriting
is bold and legible. The MS is undated.
Bhāratārthapradıp̄ikā Ca MS no. 2539 in the collection of the Raghunath Temple
of Arjunamiśra MSS. Library, Jammu. 4 folios; about 22 lines to a page and
(a.k.a. about 44 letters to a line; written on paper in Devanāgarī
Mahābhāratārtha(pra)dıp̄ikā characters. The MS is dated Vikrama Saṃvat 1707 (=1651
or Bhāratasaṃgrahadıp̄ikā) CE).
(1450– 1500 CE)
Commentary closely
follows the Viṣamaślokī
of Vimalabodha; has also
been deeply inluenced
by the Bhāratārthapradıp̄ikā
of Devabodha
Lakṣālaṃkāra of Vādirāja Cv MS no. C1577 in the Mysore Oriental Library.61
(1571 CE)
Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a of Cn Poona, Vishalgad Collection of the BORI, no. 241. 361
Nīlakaṇṭha folios; written on Indian paper, in Devanāgarī characters,
(1680– 93 CE) with 14 lines to a page and about 32 letters to a line; size
11½” x 6 7/ 8”. The MS, which is dated Śaka 1706 (= 1784
CE), is carefully written and in good condition.62
Poona, Bombay (now Maharashtra) Government Collection
(deposited at the BORI), no. 29C of 1879– 80. Written
on paper, in clear and legible Devanāgarī characters, with
16– 18 lines to a page and about 30– 35 letters to a line for
the text and 45– 48 letters to a line for the commentary; size
12” x 8¼”. The dates vary between Saṃvat 1810 (= Śaka
1675 = 1753 CE) and Saṃvat 1815 (= Śaka 1680 = 1758
CE).63
Unidentiied Cu Poona, Bombay (now Maharashtra) Government Collection
(deposited at the BORI), no. 61 of 1871– 72. 330 folios,
written on old Indian paper, in bold and clear Devanāgarī
characters, with 12– 13 lines to a page and about 45 letters to
a line; size 12½” x 5½”. The MS is dated Saṃvat 1717 and
Śaka 1582 (= 1660– 61 CE).64
Poona, BORI Mahābhārata Collection; not yet registered and
numbered. 327 folios; written on paper, in bold and legible
Devanāgarī characters, with 12– 13 lines to a page and about
48 letters to a line for the text and about 52 letters to a line
for the commentary. The MS is undated.
417
APPENDICES 417
14. Āśvamedhikaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts65
Commentary of Cn As printed in the vulgate edition.
Nīlakaṇtha
Commentary of Cv On the evidence of a transcript procured from Madras.
Vādirāja
15. Āśramavāsikparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Commentary Cn Jammu, State Library; no. 3732. Written on paper in
of Nīlakaṇtha Devanāgarī characters. Size 14½” x 8¾”, with 15 lines to a
(Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a page. Each line contains about 35 letters. Total number of
or –d ıp̄ikā) folios 28. The text is written in the center and the commentary,
Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a of Nīlakaṇṭha, above and below the text. It is
undated. The MS contains the four concluding parvans.66
Commentary of Cv On the evidence of a transcript procured from Madras.67
Vādirāja
16. Mausalaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Commentary of Cn Indore, from the private collection of Sardar M. V. Kibe;
Nīlakaṇtha unnumbered and undated. Written on paper in Devanāgarī
characters. Size 16” x 6”, with about 11 lines to a page and
50 letters to a line. The MS is written in a neat and legible
hand, and is fairly correct. It gives the text in the center and
the commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha above and below the text, as
usual. The MS seems to have formed part of a complete MS of
the Mahābhārata, of which 11 parvans are now available, those
wanting being Sabhā, Droṇa, Karṇa, Śalya, Sauptika, Strī and
Śānti.68
Jammu, State Library; no. 3975. Written on paper in
Devanāgarī characters. Size 15¼” x 7”, with 12 lines to a page
and 40–4 4 letters in a line. The text is written in the center and
the commentary, Bhāratabhāvadīpa of Nīlakaṇṭha, above and
below the text. Total number of folios 12. The MS begins from
fol. 1b and ends with fol. 13b. It is undated.69
Commentary of Cv Mysore Oriental Library; no. C 1577. Dated Śaka 1597 (ca.
Vādirāja 1675 CE).70
418
418 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
17. Mahāprasthānikaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Commentary of Cn Indore, from the private collection of Sardar M. V. Kibe;
Nīlakaṇtha unnumbered and undated. Written on paper in Devanāgarī
characters. Size 15.8” x 6”, with about 7– 10 lines to a page
and 50–5 2 letters in a line. The MS is written in a neat and
legible hand, and is fairly correct. It gives the text in the center
and the commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha above and below the
text. The MS seems to have formed part of a complete MS
of the Mahābhārata, of which 11 parvans are now available,
those wanting being Sabhā, Droṇa, Karṇa, Śalya, Sauptika,
Strī and Śānti. Total number of folios 6. The MS for the
Mahāprasthānika begins from fol. 1b and ends with fol. 6a.71
Jammu, State Library; no. 3976. Written on paper in
Devanāgarī characters. Size 15¼” x 7”, with 12 lines to a page
and 40–4 5 letters in a line. The text is written in the center and
the commentary, Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a of Nīlakaṇṭha, above and
below the text. Total number of folios 7. The MS begins from
fol. 1b and ends with fol. 7b. It is undated.72
Commentary of Cv Mysore Oriental Library; no. C 1577. Dated Śaka 1597 (ca.
Vādirāja 1675 CE).73
18. Svargārohaṇaparvan
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Commentary of Cn Indore, from the private collection of Sardar M. V. Kibe;
Nīlakaṇtha unnumbered and undated. Written on paper in Devanāgarī
characters. Size 15.8” x 6”, with about 7– 10 lines to a page
and 50– 52 letters in a line. Total number of folios 14. The
Svargārohaṇaparvan in the MS begins from fol. 1b and ends with fol.
14. It gives the text in the center and the commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha
above and below the text. For a detailed description of Dn1, see the
description of the same MS in the Mausalaparvan.74
Jammu, State Library; no. 3975. Written on paper in Devanāgarī
characters. Size 15¼” x 7”, with 11 lines to a page, and 42 letters
to a line. The text is written in the center and the commentary,
Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a of Nīlakaṇṭha, above and below the text. Total
number of folios 14. The MS begins from fol. 1b and ends with fol.
14. It contains the Mausala and the Svargārohaṇa parvans.75
Commentary of Cv Mysore Oriental Library; no. C 1577. Dated Śaka 1597 (ca. 1675
Vādirāja CE).76
Notes:
1 Sukthankar notes that this manuscript agrees “page for page, with Da1.” However, he also states that
“[as] there are many small diferences between them; neither can be a direct copy of the other; they
must go back to a more remote common source.” Of the two, he thinks Da1 is the older and less
corrupt manuscript. Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xvi.
419
APPENDICES 419
2 Sukthankar does not mention his source for the commentary of Devabodha in the “Prolegomena,” but
in his “Notes on Mahābhārata Commentators,” 197– 98. These details have been sourced from there.
Sukthankar also mentions “another MS of the commentary in the Asiatic Society of Bengal, which was
also consulted by [him],” but does not provide further details of this manuscript. See ibid., 197, n. 3.
3 This is the manuscript D1 used for the critical edition of this parvan. Edgerton additionally notes of
this manuscript that it is “written in a slovenly hand and not very correctly, but extensively corrected
[…] [The] [t]e xt of the commentary is far more corrupt, indeed extremely corrupt, and has not been
corrected. There is no regular correspondence between the readings of Devabodha and those of the
text given in this MS, which is deinitely not that of Devabodha. In general it is a relatively good D
version.” Edgerton, “Introduction,” xv (italics in original).
4 D2 of the critical edition of this parvan. Edgerton additionally notes of this manuscript that it is “very
well and clearly written; [and] the text is generally quite correct. […] The text of the commentary,
however, is in little better shape than D1, both being frightfully corrupt, though fortunately their
corruptions are diferent and independent of each other; by combining the two one can usually make
a reasonable guess as to what Devabodha wrote. As in the case of D1 the text found in the MS is
deinitely not that of Devabodha.” Ibid. (Edgerton’s italics).
5 Edgerton’s citations from Cv are actually a mix of two manuscripts. He notes that “The commentary,
titled Lakṣālaṃkāra, is described on p. xi of Sastri’s introduction, and the text of the single MS which
he then knew is printed on pages 597– 665. Before the book was printed, however, Sastri secured
another MS of this commentary, which often corrects corruptions in the irst MS; variants of this
second MS are cited by Sastri at the end, on nine pages numbered separately 1– 9. My citations often
make silent use of these corrections.” Ibid., xxiv.
6 Sukthankar does not assign a siglum to Arjunamiśra’s commentary, as the copy in his possession was
“found to be full of clerical errors, and was not exactly suitable for collation.” Sukthankar does not
make quite clear whether the manuscript was full of errors or the “rough copy” provided to him by
the principal of the College. Based on his reference to “clerical” rather than “scribal” errors, we
assume it was the latter. Two further copies of the commentary in the Sanskrit College at Benares
(MSS no. 2279 and no. ग 16 पु 34) were incomplete. However, Sukthankar did occasionally consult
the copy in his possession and he notes that “the text used by Arjunamiśra is, as usual, of a superior
type, and his commentary would repay careful study, if good manuscripts of the commentary could
be obtained.” Sukthankar, “Introduction,” xi.
7 The editor notes of this manuscript that it is “an old and much damaged Devanāgarī palm- leaf
copy belonging to the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, [and that it] is fragmentary and incomplete.
As the MS presents the commentary unaccompanied by the epic text actually commented upon,
the variants regarding stray words and phrases only, and not with regard to longer passages or the
entire text, could be found and collated. It is partly for this reason and partly because the MS is
fragmentary, [that] no inference would be safe regarding uncommented passages or omissions by
Devabodha.” De, “Introduction [to the Udyogaparvan],” xiii. Note that, according to De, the man-
uscript numbered 3398/ 5755 in Haraprasad Shastri’s catalog “ascribed to Devabodha in its inal
colophon […] is really Sarvajña- Nārāyaṇa’s commentary.” Ibid., xiii, n. 3.
8 T he editor notes that the genuineness of portions of the edition were veriied by comparing them
with “two Bengali MSS belonging respectively to the Calcutta Sanskrit College (no. 311) and
the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal (no. 3373/ 4035 B); […] it was found that the printed text,
though not critically edited, may be taken as reliable on the whole.” De, “Introduction [to the
Udyogaparvan],” xiv.
9 This is the manuscript Ds1 used in the critical edition of this parvan.
10 This is the manuscript Ds2 used in the critical edition of this parvan.
11 De does not mention his source for this commentary. It may have been the Gujarati Press edition
(we have been unable to examine this edition and therefore cannot conirm whether Ś aṅkara’s com-
mentary is part of it).
12 This is the manuscript Dn1 used in the critical edition of this parvan.
13 This is the manuscript Dn2 used in the critical edition of this parvan.
14 The relevant page of the critical edition is missing here and is replaced by a photocopy; our tran-
scription of the name may not be correct, as the Devanāgarī characters were blurred.
15 This is the manuscript Da1 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
16 This is the manuscript Da2 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
17 This is the manuscript Dn1 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
420
420 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
18 This is the manuscript Dn2 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
19 These three manuscripts were “far too meager, and have been drawn upon only occasionally in the
Critical Notes.” Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Bhīṣmaparvan],” xii. In addition to these three,
Belvalkar also notes that “commentaries passing under the name of Sṛṣṭidhara (MS. in the RASB of
Calcutta) and of Vidyāsāgara (MS. once reported as being in the Trivandrum Palace Library)” exist.
Belvalkar could not examine them, but thinks they are “presumably equally meagre.” Ibid.
20 The ascription is problematic. See the discussion of this manuscript in the preceding summary.
21 The ascription is problematic. See the discussion of this manuscript in the preceding summary.
22 This is the manuscript Dc1 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
23 This is the manuscript Dn1 used for the critical edition of this parvan (Dn3 in the critical edition of
the Ś alyaparvan).
24 This is the manuscript Dn2 used for the critical edition of this parvan (Dn1 in the critical edition of
the Karṇaparvan).
25 This must be P. P. S. Sastri’s transcript, used also by all the other editors.
26 The editor notes that the same commentary “abridged […] with a few additions and alterations
here and there” is also included in the manuscript D5. Its text “seems to be substantially the
same as found in [the] MSS Da1, D1 and D2.” He therefore considers these manuscripts
to represent “Arjunamiśra’s version of the Karṇaparvan.” Vaidya, “Introduction [to the
Karṇaparvan],” xxi.
27 Vaidya does not mention his source for the commentary. His sole note on it is: “Vādirāja’s commen-
tary called Lakṣālaṃkāra on the Karṇaparvan is also very scanty. It follows the text of the parvan as
found in the S recension.” Ibid.
28 The ascription is problematic. See the discussion of this manuscript in the preceding summary.
29 Dandekar cites P. K. Gode’s article in Indian Culture 2, 141– 46 as his source. Unfortunately, all
attempts to trace this journal have failed.
30 Dandekar cites Gode, “Dr. P. P. S. Sastri, and the Date of Vādirājatīrtha,” 203– 10 as his source.
Gode controverts the earlier dates ascribed to Vādirāja and suggests a date of 1571 CE for the
writing of his commentary.
31 Dandekar cites Gode, “Nīlakaṇṭha Caturdhara, the Commentator of the Mahābhārata— His
Genealogy and Descendants,” 146– 61 as his source.
32 This is the manuscript Dn1 used for adhyāyas 1– 28 only of the critical edition of this parvan.
33 This is the manuscript Dn2 used for adhyāyas 1– 28 only of the critical edition of this parvan.
34 This is the manuscript Dn1 (not an error; Dandekar uses the same siglum, but note that in the second
half of the parvan it refers to a diferent manuscript) used for adhyāyas 29– 64 only of the critical
edition of this parvan.
35 The ascription is problematic. See the discussion of this manuscript in the preceding summary.
36 The editor appears not to have used a manuscript at all for the commentary of Nīlakaṇtha, for he
notes: “The commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha is available in printed editions, and its basis is the Vulgate
text. Citations from it are merely for pāṭhāntaras, or where its readings difer from those of the
Vulgate.” Velankar, “Introduction,” xxiii.
37 The editor does not provide the manuscript particulars, but notes that “the commentary of Vādirāja,
called Lakṣābharan ̣a is available on the whole of the Mbh. in a manuscript copy which was used by
P. P. S. Sastri for the Madras edition.” Ibid., xxiii. This must be the same transcript the editors of
the other parvans used and therefore the manuscript in question must be no. C1577 in the Mysore
Oriental Library.
38 The ascription is problematic. See the discussion of this manuscript in the preceding summary.
39 Paranjpe does not provide any details of his source. See Paranjpe, “Introduction,” xix. He could be
using either Dn1 or Dn2 (Collection of the Raja of Bhor, no. 2152 with the com. of Nīlakaṇṭha;
D. A. V. College, no. 59, with Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary) or, if he is following the practice of the
editor of the preceding parvan, he may also be relying on one of the printed editions.
40 See preceding note. The editor’s source may be the Sastri transcript.
41 Belvalkar expressly airms this conclusion in his discussion of the commentary. “Regarding the
passages from Ca as given on the margins of the MS Ś1, it is to be noted that in several places Ca
explains text-r eading and star- passages which Ś1 does not give, thereby proving that Ca quotations as
supplied on the margins of Ś1 have no reference to the actual text as written in the centre.” Belvalkar,
421
APPENDICES 421
The Śāntiparvan: Introduction, cxxxix and see ibid.: “It is thus clear that Ca extracts in Ś1 have no nec-
essary relation to the text of Ś1.”
42 This is the manuscript Ś1 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
43 This is the manuscript Da1 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
44 This is the manuscript Da2 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
45 Belvalkar’s statements on the number of Nīlakaṇṭha commentaries used in the critical edition are
scattered and confusing. He notes that “The commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha, named the Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a
or dıp̄ikā, printed in the Vulgate edition of the Mahābhārata, was used, in the present edition of
the Ś antiparvan, from MS Dn1 which was available for all the three sub-s ections, as also from Dn2
which was available for the Rājadharma, Dn3 which was available for the Āpaddharma, and Dn4
which was available for the Mokṣadharma” (Belvalkar, The Śāntiparvan: Introduction, clv), but this is
incorrect, as a brief perusal of his account of these manuscripts shows. The correct state of afairs is
as represented in the following table:
Dn1 Rā. Āp. Mo.
Dn2 Rā.
Dn3 Āp. Mo. (not used)
Dn4 Rā. (not used) Mo.
Thus, the igures for the Rājadharmaparvan are four manuscripts (two used, one not used, plus the
additional D. A. V. College, Lahore manuscript, no. 2935); for the Āpaddharmaparvan two (both
used); and for the Mokṣadharmaparvan three (two used, one not used). The confusion in Belvalkar’s
statement is caused by the “available,” which suggests that these manuscripts were not available for
certain parts, when what he means is “used” or “used only for.”
46 Belvalkar cites Gode, Studies in Indian Literary History, vol. 2, 467f. as his source.
47 This is the manuscript Dn1 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
48 This is the manuscript Dn2 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
49 This is the manuscript Dn3 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
50 For details of this manuscript, see the comments in the preceding section under the Rājadharma and
Āpaddharma parvans.
51 This is the manuscript Da3 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
52 This is the manuscript Da4 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
53 For details of this manuscript, see the comments in the preceding section under the Rājadharma and
Āpaddharma parvans.
54 This is the manuscript Dn4 used for the critical edition of this parvan. Belvalkar notes of this man-
uscript: “Besides the Mokṣadharma sub- section used for the Crit. Ed., the MS [Dn4] contains the
Rājadharma sub- section (written by the same Bhagavānabhaṭṭa in Ś aka 1678, Caitra; not used in
the Śāntiparvan edition), as well as the Dānadharma sub- section of the Anuśāsanaparvan, copied
in Ś aka 1675, Śrāvaṇa, by a scribe named Rājeśvara (in the MS, the Dānadharma is said to belong
to the Śāntiparvan itself); the Aśvamedhaparvan (undated); theĀśramavāsikaparvan (written Ś aka
1677; Mārgaśīrṣa); the Mausalaparvan (Ś aka 1677; Mārgaśīrṣa); the Mahāprasthānikaparvan (Ś aka
1677; Pauṣa) and the Svargārohaṇaparvan (Ś aka 1677, Mārgaśīrṣa). The hand-w riting of the con-
cluding Books difers from that of the Rāja- and Mokṣa- sub-s ections, as well as from that of the
Dānadharma sub- section. It seems, therefore, to be a patch- work MS, not perhaps very reliable.”
Belvalkar, The Śāntiparvan: Introduction, lxxx.
55 The date is Belvalkar’s. He calculates it on the basis of the fact that “on fol. 52 [of the manu-
script], Paramānanda quotes – phalavyāpyātvamevāsya śāstrakṛdabhirnivāritam | brahman ̣yajñānanāśāya
vṛttivyaptiriheṣyate (= pañcadaśı,̄ 7.90cd, 92ab) ||.” Ibid., clviii.
56 Belvalkar notes that “according to Dr. V. Raghavan, the commentator lived under Kāmadeva, the
Kadamba ruler of Goa, one of whose inscriptions bears the date Ś aka 1315 (cir. 1393 CE).” Ibid.,
clix. According to Belvalkar, this places Vidyāsagara around 1350 CE. The reference is to
V. Raghavan’s article in The Annals of Oriental Research IV (part I, Sanskrit section) (1939–4 0): 1– 5.
We could not trace this source.
57 This is the manuscript Ds1 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
58 This is the manuscript Ds2 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
422
422 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
59 The ascription is problematic. See the discussion of this manuscript in the preceding summary.
60 D andekar cites Gode, “Date of Vimalabodha’s Commentary on the Mahābhārata,” 395–9 7 and
Gode, “New Light on the Chronology of the Commentators of the Mahābhārata,” 107 as his
source.
61 Dandekar does not describe the manuscript. He refers the reader to its description in the Descriptive
Catalogue of the library of 1922 (the manuscript is described on p. 155).
62 Dn1 of the critical edition of this parvan.
63 Dn2 of the critical edition of this parvan.
64 This manuscript is erroneously identiied as Dn3 of the critical edition of this parvan, but, on further
examination, it became clear that the commentary it contains is not Nīlakaṇṭha’s but an unnamed
commentator’s. Nonetheless the text of the manuscript substantially agrees with that of the version
of Nīlakaṇṭha. The editor does not mention whether the commentary bears a name.
65 The editor of this parvan, R. D. Karmarkar, does not provide any further information on these
manuscripts or on the commentaries/ commentators themselves.
66 The editor notes that Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary was used in “the present edition of the
Āśramavāsikaparvan, from MS Dn1 which was available for the four concluding parvans,” but this
must be an oversight. According to the detailed account of the manuscripts, the manuscript Dn1
(Poona, Bombay Govt. Collection [deposited at the BORI]; no. 233 of 1895–1 902) is “without the
commentary, but the text generally agrees with Cn.” The editor must mean Dn2, which does it his
description of Cn (the information above therefore has been sourced from the entry for Dn2). See
Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Āśramavāsikaparvan],” xxvii, xvii and xviii.
67 Karmarkar does not provide further details of this manuscript or of the text contained therein.
68 The editor notes that “the commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha, named the Bhāratabhāvadīpa or - dīpikā,
printed in the Vulgate edition of the Mahābhārata, was used, in the present edition of the
Mausalaparvan, from MS Dn1 which was available for the last four concluding Parvans.” Belvalkar,
“Introduction [to the Mausalaparvan],” xxiii. In this case, the editor’s Dn1 (that is, the manuscript
from the private collection of Sardar M. V. Kibe) does match the description, but, if it contained
the last four parvans, why was it not used for the Āśramavāsikaparvan? Or has Belvalkar wrongly
listed the Bombay Govt. Collection manuscript (no. 233 of 1895–1 902) as his Dn1 when he meant,
instead, the Kibe manuscript? We could not resolve the contradiction.
69 Contrary to the information in the “Detailed Discussion of the MSS” (see preceding note), in the
list of manuscripts constituting the critical apparatus (ibid., ix– xi), the editor notes that “Cn,” the
“Commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha,” has been used “as in Dn” (ibid., xi). In that case, the Cn must refer
not only to the commentary as contained in Dn1 but also in Dn2, which is fortunate, as this man-
uscript does contain the commentary. Consequently, the table above also lists this manuscript (that
is, Dn2).
70 The editor comments on this manuscript as follows: “Vādirāja’s Commentary on the Mahābhārata
in an almost complete form is available in the Mysore Oriental Library; no. C 1577. Dated Śāka
1597 (ca. 1675 CE). The late P. P. S. Sastri, the editor of the so- called ‘Southern Recension’ of the
Epic, got together a complete copy of Vādirāja’s Commentary in modern hand, which, after the
completion of that edition, was procured by the B. O. R. Institute for use in the Critical Edition. The
commentary is known as the Lakṣālaṃkāra on the strength of the commentator’s concluding stanza
of the Introduction to the Ādiparvan.” Ibid., xxiv. Note that this is the same manuscript as used for
Vādirāja’s commentary in the critical edition of the Āpnuśāsanaparvan and, in all likelihood, also
in the critical edition of the Āśvamedhikaparvan (cf. Karmarkar’s comment: “on the evidence of a
transcript procured from Madras”).
71 The editor notes that “the commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha, named the Bhāratabhāvadīpa or - dīpikā,
printed in the Vulgate edition of the Mahābhārata, was used, in the present edition of the
Mahāprasthānikaparvan, from MS Dn1 which was available for the four concluding Parvans.”
Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Mahāprasthānikaparvan],” xx. This is the same manuscript as the
one used in the Mausalaparvan (as Dn1).
72 Contrary to the information in the “Detailed Discussion of the MSS” (see preceding note), in the
list of manuscripts constituting the critical apparatus (ibid., ix– xi), the editor notes that “Cn,” the
“Commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha,” has been used “as in Dn.” Ibid., xi. In that case, the Cn must refer
not only to the commentary as contained in Dn1 but also in Dn2, which is fortunate, as this manu-
script does contain the commentary. Consequently, the foregoing table also lists this manuscript (that
is, Dn2).
423
APPENDICES 423
73 Belvalkar’s comments on this manuscript are almost identical with those in the introduction to the
Mausalaparvan and are therefore not repeated here. See ibid., xx.
74 The editor notes that “the commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha, named the Bhāratabhāvadīpa or - dīpikā,
printed in the Vulgate edition of the Mahābhārata, was used, in the present edition of the
Svargārohaṇaparvan, from MS Dn1 which was available for the four concluding Parvans.” Belvalkar,
“Introduction [to the Svargārohaṇaparvan],” xxv.
75 Contrary to the information in the “Detailed Discussion of the MSS” (see preceding note), in the
list of manuscripts constituting the critical apparatus (ibid., ix– xi), the editor notes that “Cn,” the
“Commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha,” has been used “as in Dn.” Ibid., xi. In that case, the Cn must refer not
only to the commentary as contained in Dn1 but also in Dn2, which is fortunate, as this manuscript
does indeed contain the commentary. Consequently, the foregoing table also lists this manuscript
(that is, Dn2).
76 Belvalkar’s comments on this manuscript are almost identical with those in the introduction to the
Mahāprasthānikaparvan and are therefore not repeated here (see also n. 12). See ibid., xxv.
424
425
17. COMMENTARIES ON
THE BHAGAVADGĪTĀ
Commentaries on the Bhagavadgītā signiicantly exceed those on the Mahābhārata, in
part because the text was considered— at least since Śaṅkarācārya’s eighth-c entury com-
mentary, the Gıt̄ābhāṣya— part of the prasthāna trayı ̄or the three canonical works (the other
two are the Upaniṣads and the Brahmasūtras) every orthodox (āstık̄a) philosopher in India
had to comment on. In contrast to the Mahābhārata commentators, the names of the
Gītā commentators are well known and the major commentaries have been consistently
in print.99 For this reason, this appendix does not devote a fuller discussion to either the
commentaries100 or the commentators’ dates and precedence.101 Only the commentaries
consulted for the critical edition are cited.102 Editions and sources are also mentioned
only where relevant.103
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Ānandavardhana’s comm. Cā As found in the Bombay Government Collection
called Jñānakarmasamuccaya1 (deposited at the BORI), manuscript no. 179 of 1883– 84.
Bhāskara’s comm. called Cb As found in a fragmentary MS, readings from which
Bhagavadāśayānusaran ̣a2 T. R. Cintamani reported in his edition of Ck, Madras,
1941.
Caturbhuja’s comm. called Cc As found in the MS no. 13036 of Baroda Or. Institute,
Tātparyaprakāśikā (?)3 already mentioned. The Gītā comm. in this MS covers
only the irst two chapters.
Abhinavagupta’s Cg Srinagar, MS belonging to the Shri- Rāma- Trika- Āshram,
comm. called Fateh Kadal, which Brahmachari Lakshman Raina used
Bhagavadgıt̄ārthasaṃgraha4 for his edition of the Bhagavadgītā with Abhinavagupta’s
commentary, Srinagar, 1933. The MS is written on very
old Kaśmīrī paper in Śāradā characters, and forms the
basis of the printed text.5
Rājānaka Rāmakaṇṭha’s (or Ck Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at
Rāmakavi’s) comm. called the BORI), no. 424 of 1875– 76. Written on Kaśmīrī
Sarvatobhadra6 paper in Śāradā characters and bound in a book- form.
581 folios, with 14– 16 lines to a page and 11– 16 letters
to a line. Size 7¼” x 4”. Written by at least two hands.
Occasional marginal additions and corrections in Śāradā
characters. The text and the commentary are written
continuously. If Laukika Saṃvat 85 in Ś1 corresponds to
1739 CE, the present MS may go back to 1754 CE. The
MS looks to be a couple of centuries old.7
426
426 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at
the BORI), no. 423 of 1875– 76. Written on Kaśmīrī
paper in Śāradā characters. The irst six chapters (folios
1– 64) written in upright book form, and the remaining
chapters, probably by the same hand, in oblong pothı ̄
form, numbered 1– 96. The MS is bound in leather. Size
12” x 7”. About 24– 27 lines to a page and 20 letters to a
line in the irst part; about 13– 14 lines to a page and 48
letters to a line in the second part. Occasional marginal
corrections. The text and the commentary are written
continuously, yellow pigment being used to diferentiate
the text. If the Laukika year is taken to represent the
cycle following the one intended in Ś1, the present MS
would be (15+27 =) 42 years younger than Ś1— that is, it
would belong to 1781 CE.8
Vallabha’s comm. called Cl As in the Gujarati Press edition (1935) of the BG. with 11
Sattattvadıp̄ikā (or Tattvadıp̄ikā)9 commentaries. The subcommentary of Puruṣottama on
Cl is at times cited.
Madhva’s comm. called Cm As in the Gujarati Press edition. The subcommentary of
Gıt̄ābhāṣya10 Jayatīrtha on Cm is also occasionally cited.
Nīlakaṇṭha’s comm.11 Cn Poona, Bombay Government Collection (deposited at
the BORI), no. 483 of Viśrāmbāg I. Country paper,
Devanāgarī characters. Size 16¼” x 6¾”. 336 folios, with
10– 12 lines to a page and about 48 letters to a line. Clear
and legible hand, fairly correct. A few corrections are
noted in the margin (sec. m.). Gives the text in the center
and the commentary above and below the text, as usual.
Although the last colophon of the commentary reads: iti
śrım̄ adarjunamiśrakṛtau bhāratārthadıp̄ikāyāṃ bhıṣ̄maparvavivara
n ̣aṃ samāptam, the commentary from beginning to end is
actually Nīlakaṇṭha’s Bhāratabhāvadıp̄a. Not dated.12
Indore, from the private collection of Sardar M. V. Kibe.
Not numbered. Tough country paper. Size 16” x 6”. 338
folios, with about 11 lines to a page and 50 letters to a
line. Devanāgarī characters; written in a neat and legible
hand, fairly correct. Gives the text in the center and the
commentary of Nīlakaṇṭha above and below the text,
as usual. No date is given at the end. The MS, however,
seems to have formed part of a complete MS of the epic
of which 11 parvans are not available, those wanting being
Sabhā, Droṇa, Karṇa, Śalya, Sauptika, Strī and Śānti.13
Rāmānuja’s comm. called Cr As in the Gujarati Press edition. The subcommentary,
Gıt̄ābhāṣya14 Tāparyaprakāśikā of Veṅkaṭanātha, is occasionally cited.
427
APPENDICES 427
Commentary Sig. Manuscripts
Śaṅkara’s comm. called Cś As given in the Ānandāśrama edition, Poona (1909), and
Gıt̄ābhāṣya15 other standard editions.16
Dhanapati’s subcommentary Cu As in the Nirṇaya- Sāgar Press ed. (1936) of the BG. with
on Śaṅkara’s Bhāṣya, called Eight Commentaries.
Bhāṣyotkarṣadıp̄ikā on Cś17
Vādirāja’s commentary18 Cv Govt. Oriental Library, Mysore; no. C1577.
Notes:
1 The text of this commentary is available in Belvalkar’s edition titled Śrım̄ ad- Bhagavad- Gıt̄ā with the
“Jñānakarmasamuccaya” Commentary of Ānanda[vardhana].
2 Bhāskara’s commentary is available in D. Subhadropadhyaya’s edition of 1965. Only the irst nine
adhyāyas of this commentary are preserved.
3 No printed editions of Caturbhuja’s commentary appear to exist.
4 Abhinavagupta’s commentary is available in Pansikar’s edition. The earlier edition by Lakshman
Raina (a.k.a. Lakshman Joo) is the source of Belvalkar’s text. The text has been translated twice: by
Arvind Sharma and Boris Marjanovic.
5 This is the manuscript Ś3 used for the critical edition of this parvan. Belvalkar notes that Raina also
used two other manuscripts, but as he only noted nine variant readings for the whole poem, “the
printed text can reasonably be taken to represent Raina’s best MS.” Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the
Bhīṣmaparvan],” lvi– lvii.
6 Rājānaka’s commentary is available in the editions by S. N. Tadpatrikar, T. R. Chintamani and
Madhusudan Kaul Shastri.
7 This is the manuscript Ś4 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
8 This is the manuscript Ś5 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
9 Vallabha’s commentary is available in the Sadhale edition. We could not determine whether it also
exists in an independent edition.
10 This commentary is available in the Sadhale edition and, with a translation, in Subba Rao, trans.,
Bhagavadgıt̄ābhāṣya by Madhvācārya.
11 Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary is available in both the Sadhale and Pansikar editions and also in the
Kinjawadekar edition (see Appendix 2).
12 This is the manuscript Dn1 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
13 This is the manuscript Dn2 used for the critical edition of this parvan.
14 The text of the commentary is available in the Sadhale edition and in the edition by P. B. Annang
aracariyar. At least two translations—by M. R. Sampatkumaran and Swāmī Ādidevānanda—exist.
15 Ś aṅkara’s commentary is probably the most widely published. Besides occurring in both the Sadhale
and Pansikar editions, it is also available in The Works of Sri Sankaracharya, 20 vols. Three English
translations—by A. G. Warrier, Swāmī Gambhīrānanda and Alladi Mahadeva Sastri—exist. A criti-
cally edited text by Dinkar Vishnu Gokhale also exists, but we could not examine this edition.
16 We could not properly identify this edition.
17 Dhanapati’s commentary is available in the Pansikar edition. We could not determine whether it also
exists in an independent edition.
18 No printed editions of Vādirāja’s commentary appear to exist.
428
429
18. THE USE OF VENN DIAGRAMS TO
DEPICT MANUSCRIPT RELATIONSHIPS
Thus the unfacts, did we possess them, are too imprecisely few to warrant our certitude, the evidencegivers by
legpoll too untrustworthily irreperible where his adjugers are semmingly freak threes but his judicandees plainly
minus twos.
—James Joyce, Finnegans Wake
In the major portion of this book we focused on the German Mahābhārata critics
because their work, as noted in the introduction, poses the greatest single obstacle to
the correct reception, interpretation and use of the Mahābhārata critical edition. This
book also focused on genealogical reconstructions, whether based on an explicit or an
implicit stemma. But what about other methods? And what about the contributions of
other scholars?
We would be misunderstood if readers thought we were concerned solely with the
genealogical- reconstructive method. Rather, our broader argument is that, even when
scholars evolved alternatives to the stemmatic method, they did so precisely in order to vali-
date the German Indologists’ of a heroic, bardic epic and its “Brahmanic” corruption. As
an example, this concluding appendix examines John L. Brockington’s work. We specif-
ically focus on his suggestion that, given the Mahābhārata’s luid, oral nature, the Venn
diagram is better suited to depict the relationships between manuscripts than a stemma
codicum. We irst reconstruct Brockington’s views of the Mahābhārata critical edition.
We then trace those views back to their German sources. Finally, we demonstrate how,
even though he does not grasp the concept of a Venn diagram, Brockington invokes the
concept to defend German prejudices about the epic.104
Brockington’s views on the Mahābhārata critical edition are scattered through diverse
writings, but his clearest statement yet occurs in a lecture delivered at the Collège de France,
Paris, on the occasion of the conference “Enjeux de la philologie indienne: Traditions,
éditions, traductions/ transferts” (December 2016).105 As the complete recording of this
lecture is available online, we address some of his criticisms of the edition here, especially
the suggestion that a Venn diagram may replace the stemma codicum.106 We irst quote
from the relevant portion of his presentation (all italics are ours):
[Fifty] years after completion of the Mahābhārata critical edition is an appropriate time to
review its success, its limitations and its impact on epic scholarship along with that of the
Rāmāyanạ critical edition, completed in 1975. I have myself studied the Rāmāyanạ more fully
and shall rely on that for much of what I present, but I hope to make my remarks relevant to
both epics, and more generally to the themes of this conference. Although they are classiied
430
430 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
by diferent names in the Indian tradition, for convenience I shall use the term epics to refer to
both texts together. The basic, much debated issue is whether and how far oral performance gave
way to manuscript transmission. External evidence is extremely meager and so internal evidence— for-
mulaic diction, repetition, duplication of episodes and the like—h as to be the prime source of information about
this process of transition. I start with external evidence, which is only relevant for the Mahābhārata.
Pānịni’s Asṭạ dhyaȳ i lists the addition of the suix ka to the names Vāsudeva or Arjuna, with the
meaning of “one who has bhakti towards them” and mentions both Mahābhārata and some
other names, while Patañjali mentions Yudhisṭ̣hira and Arjuna as older and younger brothers.
None of this, though, gives us much clue about what sort of text the grammarians knew, but in
[unclear word] date it must have been oral. […] The internal evidence has mainly been seen in
terms of formulaic diction under the inluence of the work of Parry and Lord on Homer and
on the south Slavic epics. Indeed, the name oral formulaic theory usually given to this approach
privileges formulae, perhaps unduly so. It is important to remember that while oral poetry is
characteristically formulaic, this does not automatically mean that all formulaic poetry is oral.
But what it means for us is that further markers of orality are needed before any text can rea-
sonably be regarded as oral. Berkeley Peabody, working on Hesiod, produced a set of criteria
at ive levels: phoneme, formula, enjambment, theme and song, and suggested that positive
indications were needed for each before a text could irmly be considered a direct product of
an oral tradition. While we must be aware of the limitations of extrapolating from one
language and culture to another, without allowing for the inevitable diferences, these tests
ofered me a convenient framework to assemble the evidence for the Sanskrit epics since they
cover a broader range of evidence than do other schemes and conirmed with varying degrees
of certainty the oral origins of both epics. Another feature which seems more characteristic of
oral poetry than written literature is ring composition. Its earliest signiicant application to
either epic was Renate Söhnen’s monograph on speeches and dialogues from the Rāmāyanạ .
She argues persuasively for frequent deliberate structuring of speeches by anaphora, refrains,
parallelism and the like but especially by means of ring composition. An oral origin for both
epics has major implications for the duration of their growth period, which then has
implications for issues about design and deliberate literary construction across their whole text
as well as for our assessment of the sociocultural and religious contexts in which they evolved.
The older view of this process of growth as essentially random has long been discarded by
scholars who take a diachronic approach, through retained by those who take a narrowly syn-
chronic approach as a stick with which to beat their opponents—d iscarded in favor of a more
nuanced view of it as a design modiied and adapted over successive periods. […] The publi-
cation of the critical editions has generated debate, focused mainly on the Mahābhārata, about
the validity of the criteria used for the selection of readings and even the value of these
editions. Some scholars, notably Madeleine Biardeau, have rejected the critical edition,
regarding it as in essence a iction, and prefer to use the vulgate text, in efect the text established
by Nīlakanṭ̣ha Caturdhara late in the seventeenth century when he wrote his Bhar̄atabhavadıp̄a
commentary. Often overlooked, though not by Biardeau herself, is that Nīlakanṭ̣ha explicitly
compared several manuscripts and was well aware of regional divergences. His comments to
this efect come prominently at the start of his commentary. His text is avowedly eclectic while
aiming at being comprehensive. Appeal to or preference for the vulgate as more authentic is
therefore misguided in my view. The critical editions are not only on the whole the best we
have, despite their limitations that I discuss next, but also permit further advances in our
understanding of them. Both critical editions are based on the readings of just a selection of
the vast number of manuscripts known. A larger number was initially examined, but then
431
APPENDICES 431
reduced to a manageable number. The principles followed were irst enunciated by Sukthankar
in his Prolegomena to the Ādiparvan of the Mahābhārata and were broadly followed by all
editors for both epics. These principles comprise grouping the manuscripts mainly by script into
versions, relying on agreement between these versions for accepting any passage into the text in
default of attestation in all manuscripts used, and accepting the two axioms of the textus
simplicior and the lectio diicilior. Sukthankar recognized the impossibility of constructing a
stemma codicum on the classical model and relied on grouping the script versions into primarily the
northern and southern recensions. Since these are too far apart to permit the establishment of
an archetype solely on the basis of manuscript readings, his—a nd the other editors’— consti-
tuted text is necessarily eclectic though based on careful judgment on the basis of the available
evidence and is an approximation to a written redaction of the text that became normative. The same
considerations apply mutatis mutandis to the Rāmāyanạ . The irst limitation that must be recog-
nized is the long period of transmission of the texts: around two millennia on Hiltebeitel’s view
that the Mahābhārata was composed between the mid- second century BC and the year zero
by a committee of “out-o f- sorts Brahmins”; more like two and a half millennia according to
various other scholars. That is to be set against the recent date of most manuscripts. The oldest
dated manuscript used for the Mahābhārata critical edition is dated 1261 CE while for the
Rāmāyanạ critical edition it is one dated 1020. However, for both epics, the majority of the
manuscripts used come from the sixteenth to nineteenth centuries. Most are essentially com-
plete, whereas many older manuscripts lack portions of their text. The editors’ understandable
tendency despite their good intentions to choose complete texts may well have resulted in the
use of younger manuscripts. Moreover, several scripts are not represented: Oriya, Kannada,
and Nandināgari. My own investigations into an Oriya script Rāmāyanạ manuscript and of
another one in Nevārī script shows that such further evidence leads to a reassessment of the
concept of script-b ased versions in favor of one based more on regional ainities. My investi-
gation of another one in Malayālam script in the Trivandrum collection necessitates a reassess-
ment of the manuscript M4, previously dismissed as contaminated. These two manuscripts
share features which indicate that they represent an alternative and probably older because
shorter Malayālam recension. The view that the various scripts generated relatively isolated
manuscript traditions with little contamination between them goes back as far as Lüders. It was
reairmed by Sukthankar in his Prolegomena. I quote: “The supericial diference of scripts
corresponds, as a matter of fact, to deep underlying textual diferences.” But he goes on to state
that in practice matters are never as clear- cut. Moreover, most literate Indians nowadays know
more than one script and there is no reason to think that such was not always the case. Besides
a scribe might have listened to an oral presentation of either epic or perhaps the reading aloud
of a text in an area or by an individual who was using a script he did not know and he could have
incorporated some episodes that remained in his memory into a subsequent manuscript copying. Certainly there
is ample evidence of scribes deliberately comparing manuscripts or at least checking one from
another, in particular through variant readings found in the margins or interlinearly, sometimes
even in a diferent script from the manuscript itself. The supposed barriers of scripts are in fact
highly permeable. We should, I submit, be thinking more in terms of regional groupings that
may cut across script diferences. The number of marginal or interlinear additions also shows
that the texts were commonly enlarged in successive copyings. Accidental loss is always a pos-
sibility but much less likely than accretion. This is of course what underlies the principle of the
textus simplicior which governs Sukthankar’s preference, followed by the other Mahābhārata
editors, for the Sá ̄radā script manuscripts and other closely related ones, despite their relatively
recent date. The Malayālam manuscripts also tend to contain a shorter text. Perhaps a feature
432
432 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
well known in linguistics that in language change the periphery tends to be more conservative
than the center also applies here. On the other hand, attestation in all manuscripts is not infallible
proof of a passage being part of the original text. It could have entered the tradition early on and then spread to
all extant manuscripts, assisted by this habit of comparing manuscripts. The tendency to include
everything found in the exemplars available may well account for the duplication of episodes
that we ind in both texts. The scribe found varying versions in two manuscripts before him
and, rather than choose one and reject the other, he incorporated both in an attempt at com-
prehensiveness at the expense of consistency. So the text even of the critical editions cannot be
regarded as a completely coherent whole. A well-k nown example is the dice game in the
Sabhāparvan of the Mahābhārata and Mehendale has collected multiple examples of
interpolations and internal contradictions. Such lateral transfer of passages or episodes, verses
between manuscripts is not the only complicating factor. Scribes did not or could not always
copy a single exemplar throughout quite apart from comparing with others. […] Whereas the
premise that manuscripts written in the same script belong together has signiicant limitations, then, the
broader diferentiation into northern and southern recensions has a greater measure of
validity. But even here we must recognize that a signiicant number of manuscripts combine
features of both. This is probably more often by conlation of the two at a relatively recent stage in the
chain of transmission but perhaps sometimes by retention of older features. Again I cite as my example my
research on the Trivandrum Malayālam script manuscript. Although it is close to M4 of the
Ayodhyākānḍ ạ of the Rāmāyanạ , neither could have copied from the other and their closeness is
marked by common absence of material rather than additions, suggesting a fairly early date. Neither
unfortunately is dated but may be of sixteenth century date. However, they both combine
features of the present northern and southern recensions. Within the northern recension, they
align particularly with two manuscripts D1 and [D]2 which are usually assigned to the western
subrecension within the northern recension and to a lesser extent with a third V1. The evi-
dence of these two manuscripts, especially when linked with that from another fragmentary
manuscript from Trivandrum, shows that they represent a deinite alternative tradition current
within Kerala difering markedly from that of M1– 3 and that it has clear links with the so-
called western recension. A related point is that the supposed uniformity of the southern
recension of the Rāmāyanạ has been overstated. All in all, the evidence of a large number of
Rāmāyanạ manuscripts shows that the simple opposition between the northern and southern
recensions, however useful it may once have been as a heuristic device, does not adequately
relect the complexities of the chain of transmission involved and consequently the question of
their relative value is a more complex issue than was recognized in the constitution of the crit-
ical edition text. The same is no doubt the case for the Mahābhārata too. […] So far I have
mainly been demonstrating limitations in the way that the critical editions of both epics classiied
the manuscript evidence into recensions and script-b ased versions, relying on what is only a modiication
of the stemma concept. Can we go beyond this in our understanding of manuscript
relationships? I will put forward two possible ways of doing so. Thirty years ago, I suggested
that the model of the Venn diagram could be borrowed from mathematics and logic as it had
already been borrowed into linguistics. This uses circles or ellipses overlapping as necessary to
represent a relationship between separate groups or sets of items. In the case of the manuscripts
I was studying this means that a circle or ellipse representing M4 and the Trivandrum manu-
script will partly overlap with others for the other Malayālam manuscripts with D1 and [D]2
and V1, in this way showing to some extent at least the multiple allegiances involved. The
drawbacks, as you will realize, are that this is a decidedly visual model rapidly becoming too
complex to describe verbally and that even visually the patterns soon become highly intricate
433
APPENDICES 433
and less easy to interpret. The other is not just a model but even more a new way of establishing
relationships between manuscripts developed for the Mahābhārata by Wendy Philipps-
Rodriguez. This uses phylogenetic algorithms based on the principles of cladistics taken from
biology to plot the degree of closeness between manuscripts, producing what she has called
unrooted trees. The length of the branch of each manuscript show[s] the degree of divergence
from the rest individually and collectively. This is a more objective way of identifying the actual
relationships involved and was, for example, the means of identifying the change of alignment
of the Sabhā manuscript D6 that I noted earlier. It is reassuring to ind that the Mahābhārata
critical edition is located near the center closer to the northern manuscripts, relecting both the
editorial preference for them and the general connectedness [correctness?] of the readings
chosen. Variant readings and new patterns of omission or addition are found in virtually every
manuscript examined. Many of course are trivial, but others are signiicant for building up a
truer picture of the complex relationship between the various recensions and versions. There
is therefore a continuing need for further examination of the manuscript evidence. However,
both the approaches just noted rely heavily on the information found in the apparatus of the
critical editions and this will inevitably be true of any other initiative. We can only go beyond
the critical editions of the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyanạ because of the irm basis that they
have provided for further research.107
Before we examine Brockington’s suggestion that the Venn diagram is an alternative
to the stemma codicum for representing manuscript relationships, let us irst con-
sider the sources of his other theories. Brockington does not provide citations, but
his work is clearly indebted to the German Mahābhārata critics. The assertion that
the editors grouped “the manuscripts mainly by script into versions” recalls Reinhold
Grünendahl’s claim in his 1993 article “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata-
Handschriften.”108 The statement “the premise that manuscripts written in the same
script belong together” paraphrases Grünendahl’s “Schriftartprämisse.” Indeed, this is
how the term has been translated in English-l anguage summaries of Grünendahl.109
The suggestion that “Sukthankar recognized the impossibility of constructing a stemma
codicum on the classical model and relied on grouping the script versions into primarily
the northern and southern recensions” reproduces Grünendahl’s claim “on the basis
of this theoretical fundament, which I in the following would like to characterize by
the term Schriftartprämisse[;] Sukthankar then groups the manuscripts included for his
edition of the Ādiparvan into ‘recensions’ and ‘versions’ in the Prolegomena published
in the 7th fascicule (of 1933).”110 In contrast, the latter half of Brockington’s claim
that the Mahābhārata editors “classiied the manuscript evidence into recensions and
script- based versions, relying on what is only a modiication of the stemma concept”
owes more to Andreas Bigger’s notion that “for the editors of the critical edition, the
Schriftartenprämisse [sic] replaces the stemma.”111 The notion that the “closeness”
between two manuscripts can be “marked by common absence of material rather than
additions” recalls Grünendahl’s argument that “the proximity of D2.5 to the K group
manifests precisely not in terms of shared textual additions that are present but in terms of
textual additions that are not present.”112 Except that Brockington translates “gemeinsam”
with “common” rather than “shared” and simpliies Grünendahl’s “nicht vorhandenen
Textzusätzen” to “absence of material” the sentences are equivalent. Like Grünendahl,
434
434 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
who argues that the similarities between K2 and K1 are “a case of not present textual
additions, which [...] permits us to once again infer a relationship between these two
manuscripts that reaches far back,”113 Brockington thinks that the circumstance that
the Trivandrum manuscript and the Āyodhyakāṇḍa manuscript M4 exhibit “common
absence of material rather than additions” suggests “a fairly early date.”
The circumstance that two manuscripts lack the same passages, however, does not
prove them closely related, since they need not owe this absence to an ancestor more
recent than the archetype or, indeed, the irst source of the tradition. Neither do we need
to assume the “inluence” of one manuscript on the other to explain this absence, as we
saw. Brockington erroneously thinks that if the Trivandrum manuscript and M4 lack the
same passages this means they derive from a more recent common ancestor than the one
they share with the manuscripts containing the passages. But this is false. If the passages
are insertions, the Trivandrum manuscript and M4 could be more closely related with
the manuscripts that contain them than with each other. The circumstance that they
both lack the passages could be coincidental. Only an evaluation of their readings and,
more speciically, of their shared errors of transcription will permit us to conclude their ili-
ation. Brockington does not address this issue. Like Grünendahl, he thinks that the cir-
cumstance that the two manuscripts lack the same passage justiies him in assuming “a
deinite alternative tradition current within Kerala,” even though, as yet, he only has two
groups of manuscripts—t he interpolated and the non-i nterpolated— and has not shown
that the latter constitute a family in the genealogical sense.
Whereas the idea that the Bhandarkar editors classiied manuscripts by script is owed
to Grünendahl, the idea that the critical edition reconstructs “a written redaction of the
text that became normative” is borrowed from Bigger. Bigger calls the Mahābhārata crit-
ical edition “a redaction that became normative” or “had a normative efect” (normativ
gewirkt hat).114 He also declares: “What makes it [the archetype reconstructed in the crit-
ical edition] so important is the fact that this redaction came to dominate the whole
written tradition of the Sanskrit MBh; it became normative for this part of the transmis-
sion.”115 Brockington’s source could be Oskar von Hinüber, who argues that “What has
arisen [in the critical edition] is not the Ur-t ext […] but a completely new normalized
recension.”116 But since von Hinüber himself draws on Bigger, it is likelier Brockington
is quoting Bigger.
The oral nature of Brockington’s lecture makes it diicult to provide exact references.
Most likely, his source is Bigger.117 At any rate, we ind no evidence he developed the idea
independently.118 Regardless of its source, the idea that the critical edition reconstructs
a “normative redaction” is false. Like Bigger, Brockington inds it convenient to suggest
that the “constituted text […] is an approximation to a written redaction of the text
that became normative” because this redeinition lets him rehabilitate the hypothesis
of a heroic Ḳatriya epic corrupted by Brahmans.119 Like the German critics he draws
on, Brockington identiies the task of textual criticism with recovering the oral, bardic
epic(s) he posits as the Mahābhārata’s (and the Rāmāyaṇa’s) source.120 His work consis-
tently seeks to legitimate the hypothesis of a heroic epic.121 He objects that “both critical
editions are based on the readings of just a selection of the vast number of manuscripts
known,” but eliminatio codicum descriptorum is well understood in textual criticism. There is
435
APPENDICES 435
no reason to include all manuscripts known if the majority can be eliminated as codices
descripti. Manuscripts that the editor discarded as inferior would only clutter the apparatus.
Brockington’s objection would carry weight if he could show that the editors overlooked
a signiicant manuscript, occurring high up in the text’s transmission. But he explicitly
negates this possibility.122 He claims that “attestation in all manuscripts is not infallible
proof of a passage being part of the original text. It could have entered the tradition
early on and then spread to all extant manuscripts, assisted by this habit of comparing
manuscripts,” but if all manuscripts agree in their reading, there is no debate between
them. Editorial judgment is not needed.123 To print a diferent reading in the face of their
unanimous testimony is to enter the realm of a subjective ars critica scarcely worth the
name. Brockington argues that “the text even of the critical editions [of the Rāmāyaṇa
and the Mahābhārata] cannot be regarded as a completely coherent whole,” but this is to
misunderstand what a critical edition can achieve. The circumstance that the constituted
text contains “multiple examples of interpolations and internal contradictions” is not
an argument against it.124 Neither should it mislead us into thinking that we can restore
a more original state of the text by purging the text of its perceived contradictions, as
Brockington, via a reference to Mehendale’s work, next suggests.125 Like his predecessor,
Brockington would only arrive at a modernized version of the text relecting contempo-
rary prejudices.126
Having considered Brockington’s sources, let us consider his suggestion that the “Venn
diagram” ofers an alternative to the stemma codicum. Before we look at his suggestion,
let us briely review the concept of a Venn diagram. A Venn diagram, named after its
inventor, John Venn, is used to express the logical relationship between classes or sets of
objects.127 The diagram uses closed- plane igures to denote sets, while the region they
enclose stands for the sets’ members or elements. Sets can be given either an intensional
deinition (for example, A is the set of the letters of the alphabet) or an extensional deini-
tion (in which case, the convention is to list its members within braces; thus: A = {a, b, c,
d…}). Once the sets under discussion are deined, the Venn diagram can be used to pro-
vide a graphical representation of all possible logical relations between them such as their
intersection, union, diference and complement. Brockington introduces the suggestion
as follows:
Thirty years ago, I suggested that the model of the Venn diagram could be borrowed from
mathematics and logic as it had already been borrowed into linguistics. This uses circles or
ellipses overlapping as necessary to represent a relationship between separate groups or sets
of items. In the case of the manuscripts I was studying this means that a circle or ellipse
representing M4 and the Trivandrum manuscript will partly overlap with others for the other
Malayālam manuscripts with D1 and [D]2 and V1, in this way showing to some extent at
least the multiple allegiances involved.128
Since these comments are not very illuminative, let us look at his earlier reference:
Perhaps I should at this point remark that the Critical Edition’s system of assigning
manuscripts to recensions or to script versions is nearly as limiting as the construction of
a stemma codicum (which does have the merit of corresponding on the whole to the way
436
436 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
that manuscripts are propagated). The drawback is that it still involves an either/o r situa-
tion, where a particular manuscript is assigned to a particular recension or version, or else
is dismissed as “contaminated” or a “Mischcodex,” descriptions which seem almost to have
become terms of opprobrium. Tentatively, I would like to propose that a better model might
be the Venn diagram (which has already been borrowed from mathematics into linguistics
to considerable advantage; see the sketch overleaf). Thus V1, which I was last considering,
might be represented by a circle or oval mainly overlapping with one representing the Ñ and
B mss but also partly overlapping with one representing the NW and W recensions. To a cer-
tain extent this is a reversion to the stemma codicum in that it attempts to depict the diferent
inluences or originals which have formed a speciic manuscript, while avoiding the impos-
sible task of constructing the entire chain of transmission involved.129
As an example, he presents the diagram shown in Figure 84.
There are several problems with Brockington’s proposal. Let us irst consider his
reasons for thinking a stemma codicum is unachievable for the Mahābhārata and then
evaluate his misconceptions about the Venn diagram.
NE
D4
~
N
NW + W
B
D1.2 V1
M4 + 14052
MI-3
S
Sketch of a Venn diagram of some manuscript relationships
Figure 84 Brockington’s “Venn diagram”
Source: Reproduced from Brockington, “Textual Studies in Vālmīki’s Rāmāyan ̣a,” 204. The same diagram
occurs in the handout accompanying Brockington, “Regions and Recensions, Scripts and Manuscripts.”
Brockington’s label is misleading since the diagram does not depict manuscript relationships, but only
common members (and only partially so, since he bases it on prominent features like interpolations).
Moreover, the graphic is not a Venn diagram. Brockington neither deines the sets nor populates them
with members (a problem he now acknowledges). Although not a Venn diagram, in the following we refer
to it as one and only gradually introduce corrections to bring it closer to a real Venn diagram.
437
APPENDICES 437
1. Manuscript Filiation: Brockington erroneously links manuscript iliation with
“alignment” and, from the observation that the manuscripts’ “alignment” changes,
concludes that a stemma codicum is unachievable.130 Both assertions are false. Agreement
in truth is not evidence of iliation and so a change in the manuscripts’ agreements
should not prevent us from identifying their true iliation, which will reveal itself in a small
albeit informative number of signiicant errors. Brockington is misled because he focuses
only on selected passages, above all, obvious features such as additions and omissions,
which just because of their itinerant nature will mislead us as to the manuscripts’ ilia-
tion.131 Moreover, the promiscuity of more recent and inferior manuscripts should not
prevent us from itting the older and better ones into a stemma.132 Brockington goes
astray because, rather than study the entire tradition or individual manuscripts within the
context of the larger tradition, he focuses on late and inferior specimens, and uses their
recidivism to claim that, as their iliation cannot be satisfactorily determined, the very
concept of a stemma codicum must be abandoned.133 He evidently confuses the stemma
codicum with the “real tree,” that is, “the unknowable, but certainly much larger and
more complex ensemble of all copies that ever existed.”134 From the circumstance that a
genealogical tree in this sense is unattainable, he falsely concludes that we should use Venn
diagrams, instead, to represent “the multiple allegiances involved.”135 Not only does this
misunderstand the stemma codicum’s function (to depict, as unambiguously as possible,
a manuscript’s descent from others, either surviving or hypothesized as having existed).136
It also overlooks that a Venn diagram cannot replace the stemma as it contains no genea-
logically relevant information.
From Brockington’s diagram, we could establish neither the ancestors of the
manuscripts listed nor the part of their shared text owed to a common ancestor. Indeed,
there is no place to locate an ancestor: unlike the stemma, which, though two- dimen-
sional, uses the illusion of a third plane to convey height and thus temporal succession,
a Venn diagram remains trapped within the plane of the paper. Brockington depicts
the northwestern and western traditions by one circle, the northeastern by another and
the southern by a third. But this is surely false, since the circles do not intersect and the
three groups of manuscripts do not contain completely diferent texts.137 If the diagram
is to have any sense, the intersecting regions must represent readings shared between
manuscripts and hence their inherited text. But which regions? In Brockington’s dia-
gram, some manuscripts are completely unrelated to the others, which must mean they are
not Mahābhārata manuscripts at all. Even discounting these outliers, between two intersecting
regions, which one indicates the manuscripts’ inherited text? Both cannot be original. If
M4 ∩ V1 ∩ Ñ ∩B represents their common text and M4 ∩ D1.2 ∩ V1 represents their
common text, one of the agreements must be secondary. More precisely, neither one can
be completely original. Both intersecting regions will include verses or readings that are
shared because they are inherited unchanged from the archetype and others that are
shared either because they are owed to a more recent common ancestor than the arche-
type or because they were transmitted horizontally by contamination. Brockington must
disambiguate between the part of M4 ∩ V1 ∩ Ñ ∩B owed to the archetype, that is, is a
subset of θ (since not all of θ’s reading will be transmitted unchanged to its descendants)
and the part owed to later sources; and likewise for M4 ∩ D1.2 ∩ V1. But since this is the
438
438 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
issue at stake, the Venn diagram cannot help him. Manuscripts such as M1– 3 must also
share in the “archetypal” inheritance. Brockington has not mapped the common text of
all manuscripts, but only selective ainities based on prominent characteristics.138
2. The Venn Diagram: Even if we grant Brockington that “variant readings and new
patterns of omission or addition are found in virtually every manuscript examined” and
they permit us to “build […] up a truer picture of the complex relationship between the
various recensions and versions,” the problems with his “Venn diagram” remain. For
starters, what is his set? If M4, V1, etc. denote sets whose members are the lines or words
contained in the respective manuscripts, how does he account for repetition of lines or
words given that every element of a set must be unique and that the order of elements is
irrelevant? He notes that the Mahābhārata contains many repetitions (he calls them “for-
mulaic expressions”).139 If we deine M4 as the set of lines contained in (the manuscript)
M4, Brockington must irst eliminate all repetitions from the manuscript. To understand
the implications, consider the following account from The Sanskrit Epics:
Pāda-l ength phrases comprising a personal name and an epithet are the commonest formulaic
expressions; however, they are not used just at random but fulil a deinite narrative function.
The other main types are introductions and conclusions to speeches, various verbal formulae
expressing emotion or emphasis, certain descriptive and hyperbolic phrases, stock expressions
for battle scenes, phrases of time, place and number, proverbs and similar expressions, and
stereotyped similes. Such formulae occur mainly in the second and fourth pādas, except those
used after the end of speeches, which for obvious reasons usually occur in the irst (or less
commonly the third) pāda; the metrical pattern of the śloka means, however, that there are reg-
ularly diferent sets of formulae for the odd pādas from those for the even pādas. It is also note-
worthy how often a phrase or passage is repeated within a short space of its irst occurrence.
In several instances this results from the exact wording of a message being repeated or some
event already described being narrated to another character. By contrast, the use of refrains,
which occurs mainly in speeches, has a deinite emphatic purpose, as has parallelism within
the verse, whereas another type of repetitiveness typiies certain didactic passages.140
Brockington could not preserve any of the elements that, in his view, demonstrate
the Mahābhārata’s “oral” origins. A line that repeats in the irst adhyāya and the sixth
may be listed only once, even if he considers the second occurrence signiicant for the
manuscripts’ “alignment.” He could partially circumvent the problem by deining the
verse as the smallest unit of analysis. He can now retain these lines despite their rep-
etition (though identical verses must still be eliminated). But what he gains in material
for comparison (that is, the number of elements in the set) he loses in accuracy, since
he can no longer consider partial matches. For instance, if M4 and V1 contain a verse
with an identical irst pāda, he cannot consider this pāda common to both sets, since their
members are the complete verses only. Inevitably, this eliminates the majority of gene-
alogically informative features such as shared signiicant errors. A smaller semantic unit
than the complete verse thus appears preferable. But consider what happens when we
deine the members of the sets as the words contained in the manuscripts. Except for
their irst occurrence, we must now eliminate all frequently occurring words, including
particles, proper nouns and common verbs. After elimination, we could identify elements
439
APPENDICES 439
common to M4 and V1. But not every shared word is genealogically signiicant. Many
shared words will be commonplace names or terms. Even if M4 and V1 deviate from the
other manuscripts in that they share not only common names but also words not found
in the other manuscripts, this may not matter. The common elements could occur in
diferent parts. Unlike a sequence, the order of elements in a set is irrelevant. Thus, the
set M4 = {a, b, c, d, e} is identical with the set V1 = {d, e, c, a, b}, which can be rewritten
as {a, b, c, d, e}. From a genealogical perspective, however, it is the occurrence of c in
the same position in V1 as in M4 that is signiicant. Set notation cannot preserve this
distinction and so we would consider V1 identical with Ñ = {a, b, c, d, e}, even though
its text is closer to M4’s than Ñ’s, which contains the same elements in a diferent order.
Brockington had a clariication for his diagram at the recent Dubrovnik International
Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas (DICSEP) 8.141 In a session on Venn
diagrams as a tool of analysis, he explained that when he proposed the Venn diagram,
it was “obvious” that the members of the sets were the manuscripts themselves. Thus,
the set M4 contains the manuscript M4, V1 contains the manuscript V1 and so on. We
must confess, this possibility did not strike us. If this is all Brockington means, some of
our criticisms are moot. But this explanation does not cohere with his diagram. Let us
irst address a basic problem. If the set M4 contains the manuscript M4, V1 contains the
manuscript V1 and so on, no circle should overlap. M4 contains only M4 and hence no
elements in common with V1 (which contains only V1). Their intersection is the empty
set: M4 ∩ V1 = { } or ∅. This also holds for the intersection of the remaining sets. Our
diagram would look like Figure 85.
Actually, the circles should all overlap, because the Venn diagram must indicate all
possible logical combinations of the sets, even if the containing intersections are empty
(in which case, they can be shaded to indicate that they have no members). Not only is
NE
D1.2
NW + W
V1
D4
M4 + 14052
S
B
Figure 85 A “Venn diagram” depicting sets whose members are individual manuscripts
440
440 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
NE
D1 D2
NW + W
V1
14052
D4
M1
M4 S
M2 M3 B
Figure 86 The corrected “Venn diagram”
this extremely diicult in the case of 10 sets; we also wish to remain with Brockington’s
understanding of “Venn diagrams” as we explore its problems, while gradually pro-
ceeding toward a real Venn diagram. But even as drawn, Brockington’s explanation does
not quite it the diagram. The set D1.2 contains two manuscripts (D1 and D2). The set
M4+14052 likewise contains two manuscripts (M4 and 14052), whereas the set M1–
3 contains three manuscripts (M1, M2 and M3). These three sets difer quantitatively
from the remainder. Although this may not make a diference, since the intersection of
D1.2 with any other set is also the empty set (and likewise for M4+14052 and M1–3 ),
it does raise the question: why are these seven manuscripts grouped into sets? Do they
have a common property? If not, and we interpret Brockington’s statement that each set
contains only the manuscript it is named for strictly, our diagram should appear as shown
in Figure 86.
This diagram is more accurate, but it does not solve the problem. If the sets’
members are the individual manuscripts themselves, what about NW+W, NE and S,
given that no manuscripts correspond to them? Either NW+W, NE and S are empty
sets, in which case we can eliminate them, or we must deine them diferently. If they
mean anything, NW+W must denote the set of all sets that contain manuscripts
belonging to the northwestern and western groups, NE must denote the set of all sets
that contain manuscripts belonging to the northeastern group, whereas S must denote
the set of all sets that contain manuscripts belonging to the southern group. Our dia-
gram will look like Figure 87.
NW+W remains an empty set. But we can now show that whereas NE contains six
members (NE = {Ñ, D4, V1, B, D1, D2}), S contains ive members (S = {M4, 14052,
M1, M2, M3}). We can, moreover, make logical inferences, for example, that NE and
S are disjoint sets (they have no elements in common). But what do we gain by deining
441
APPENDICES 441
NE
NW + W
D1 D2
D4
B
V1
14052
M4
S
M1
M2 M3
Figure 87 A “Venn diagram” of sets that contain manuscripts of the S and NE groups
NE as the set of all sets that contain manuscripts belonging to the northeastern group
and likewise S as the set of all sets that contain manuscripts belonging to the southern
group? It is senseless to place each manuscript in a set that contains no other manuscript
and then group those sets into other, larger sets. A more intuitive deinition is that NE
is the set of all manuscripts belonging to the northeastern group, whereas S is the set
of all manuscripts belonging to the southern group. We can update our diagram as in
Figure 88.
This diagram corresponds more to a standard Venn diagram and its uses. But it no
longer maps the resemblances or shared text between manuscripts. Rather, it represents
the grouping of manuscripts after their analysis into groups, that is to say, after we have
determined that Ñ, V1, B, D4, D1 and D2 belong to the NE group and so on. Most
important, it does not “show […] the multiple allegiances involved,” since every manu-
script either belongs to the set NE or does not belong to it; and likewise for S. Brockington
may object that, actually, his point was that certain manuscripts have features of the
northeastern and southern traditions, and hence should be considered members of both.
Similarly, D1 and D2 in his original diagram represent manuscripts occurring halfway
between the northwestern and northeastern traditions, rather than, as we have it, to the
northeastern group alone. He may therefore propose returning to a modiied version of
his original diagram (Figure 89).
442
NE
NW + W
D1 D2
D4
B
V1
14052
M4
S
M1
M2 M3
Figure 88 A “Venn diagram” of sets containing manuscripts of the S and NE groups
NE
NW + W
D1.2
D4
B
V1
M4 + 14052
S
M1
M2 M3
Figure 89 A modiied version of Brockington’s original “Venn diagram”
443
APPENDICES 443
NE
NW + W
D4
D1.2 B
V1
S
M1
M4 + 14052
M2 M3
Figure 90 The corrected “Venn diagram”
This is a valid objection, but the correct way to represent this situation is as shown in
Figure 90.
This is a “true” Venn diagram in contrast to Brockington’s. It shows that the sets
NW+W and NE and S and NE each have two common members, whereas NW+W and
S have no common members. Expressed in set notation, we have: NW+W ∩ NE = {D1,
D2}; S ∩ NE = {M4, 14052}; and NW+W ∩ S = { } or ∅. But contrary to Brockington’s
claim, this diagram does not let us analyze the relations between manuscripts. It only lets
us represent their relationships after analysis, that is, after we establish the universal set
(the set of manuscripts to be distributed) and determine which manuscripts belong in
which of our inite sets NW+W, NE and S. Although we can now see at a glance which
manuscripts are common to the sets, its advantages are not immediately apparent. We
can neither express our reasons for assigning a manuscripts to two sets, for instance,
that M4 has features of the S and NE groups, nor can we express the extent to which it
does so, for instance, that M4 is a composite of 40 percent of S and 60 percent of NE.
In set theory, an element is either a member of a set or not a member of a set. Venn
diagrams neither obey cardinality (their size does not indicate the number of members
in the set) nor can they be used to express ainities between members (for instance, by
placing certain members nearer others), whereas Brockington’s original diagram tried
to show precisely this, for instance, by displacing one manuscript toward another or by
making some circles larger than others. But this is not a valid use of the Venn diagram.
444
444 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
A Venn diagram is a schematic, that is, an abstract diagram. The size, shape and posi-
tion of circles or the location of elements within those circles, beyond the mere fact of
intersecting or containing common elements, is irrelevant to their relationships.
The real problem, however, is neither the Venn diagram nor that it cannot show
what Brockington wishes. Rather, Brockington himself has not thought through what he
wishes to show. Is it the manuscripts’ belonging to the regional groups? In that case, the
groups are the sets and the manuscripts their members. Or is it the text shared between
manuscripts? In that case, the manuscripts are the sets and their readings (words, lines
or verses) the members. Without clarity on this fundamental issue, Brockington cannot
make headway. If we now return to his original diagram, we see that all his problems
stem from a failure to conceptualize what is the class and what is the member. On one
hand, the diagram shows manuscripts contained either in one of the three regional
groups or spanning the region between two groups. On the other, it shows manuscripts
overlapping with each other such that their intersection subtends the extent of shared
text. These two alternatives, however, are mutually exclusive. We can use the Venn dia-
gram either to demonstrate the manuscripts’ membership of groups or to demonstrate
the readings’ membership of manuscripts, but not both. For instance, if we wanted to
show that 40 percent of M4’s text is shared with V1, we could populate their intersec-
tion with 40 percent of their members, speciically the elements actually common to
both. We could either list the verse numbers or use some other kind of notation to indi-
cate their members. But where should we place this intersection? If we placed it inside
D2
NE
NW + W
D1
D4
V1 B
14052
S
M4
M1
M2 M3
Figure 91 Expressing relations between two orders of sets
445
APPENDICES 445
S, M4 would be entirely an S manuscript, whereas Brockington seeks to show that it is
a composite of the S and NE traditions. Alternatively, if we placed the intersection of
M4 and V1 inside NE, M4 would be partly a member of S and partly not a member
of S, which cannot be. Every element is either a member of a set or not a member of
that set. Brockington must choose between the alternatives. Figure 91 clariies why we
cannot simultaneously express the relation between the sets NW+W, S and NE and
their members, the sets M4, V1, etc., and the sets M4, V1, etc. and their members, the
lines or words they contain.
This diagram returns to treating NW+W, S and NE’s members as sets that contain
the manuscripts M4, V1, etc. rather than as the manuscripts M4, V1, etc. themselves.
This is essential: unless M4, V1, etc. are themselves sets capable of containing members,
we cannot express the relationship between their members in turn (for instance, whether
they are common to the sets M4, V1, etc. or found in just one manuscript, etc.). Even
though the problem should already be evident, let us proceed. The region 14052 ∩ V1
indicates the elements common to 14052 and V1. The diagram displaces the circle
denoting S so that 14052 remains inside it (recall that 14052 can either be a member of
S or not a member of S, but it cannot be partly inside and partly outside S). The dia-
gram similarly displaces the circle denoting NE so that V1 remains inside it. This already
contradicts Brockington’s aim, since he wanted to show that 14052 was only partially
an S manuscript (it also features elements characteristic of the NE manuscripts). More
important, V1 is now partly contained inside S and partly outside it, whereas 14052 is
partly contained inside NE and partly outside it, despite our best efort not to contravene
the requirement that every element be either an element of a set or not an element of the
set. Neither outcome is permissible. V1 can be either a member of NE or a member of
S or a member of both. If it is a member of both, it must be so to the same extent, that
is to say, it must satisfy the conditions of being NE and being S equally. This also holds
for 14052. In this case, 14052 and V1 are members common to S and NE and we would
locate them in the intersection of S and NE (S ∩ NE = {14052, V1}). Brockington may
object that this is exactly what he wished to show. All we need do is shrink the circles
denoting S and NE so that 14052 and V1 it inside their intersection. But consider the
outcome (Figure 92).
Initially, this diagram appears to meet all Brockington’s requirements. It expresses the
intersection of 14052 and V1, while preserving their status as elements of S and NE. It
also apparently indicates their halfway position between S and NE. In truth, however,
the diagram does not show that 14052 is partly an S manuscript and partly an NE man-
uscript. Rather, it shows that 14052 is both an S manuscript and an NE manuscript. In
fact, it is an S manuscript to the same extent that it is an NE manuscript. Every line or
every member of 14052 is now a member of S and likewise a member of NE. Contrary
to Brockington’s aim, which was to show that 14052 owed part of its text to S and part of
it to NE, that is to say, that it was a composite of the two traditions, this diagram shows
that it owes all of its text to S and all of it to NE. There is simply no way that Brockington
can show what he hopes using the Venn diagram.
For the sake of argument, assume that Brockington discards the irst option. He
decides it is less important to show whether the manuscripts are members of one of the
446
446 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
D2
NW + W NE
D1
D4
14052
B
S
M4
M1
M2 M3
V1
Figure 92 The source of the error
three groups or of two or three. He only seeks to show the common elements of cer-
tain manuscripts. At this point, all the problems we identiied earlier with deining their
members resurface. What are the sets’ members— the verses, lines, pādas or words of the
manuscripts? What do we do with repetitions in a manuscript? Do we preserve as much
of its text as possible (in which case the elements must be as large as possible to elimi-
nate repetition, albeit at the price of iner resemblances between manuscripts), or do we
preserve as much nuance as possible? How useful is it to indicate crude percentages of
shared text, if they neither represent genealogical relationships nor indicate the extent of
inheritance from the archetype or, indeed, a more recent ancestor? To circumvent these
problems Brockington must irst deine the universal set: the set of passages (or elements)
to be distributed. He may specify that his examination is restricted to the starred and
appendix passages. Moreover, to avoid the problem of repetition (whether of words or
longer units such as pādas) he regards these passages in their entirety. He seeks to show
that, of x insertions, whereas M4 contains y and V1 contains z, w of their insertions are
common. This is a valid use of the Venn diagram. But it is limited precisely to a consid-
eration of genealogically irrelevant aspects. It is analogous to cataloguing the number of
shared frocks and ribbons the children in various families have after they have been iden-
tiied as members of their respective families and their genealogical descent established.
Although useful for certain kinds of investigations (for instance, if we wanted to estab-
lish that the children in family A had the most toys, but the children in family B also
owned 30 percent of those toys), it does not address the problem of iliation. It can only
447
APPENDICES 447
U = Interpolations listed in the critical
apparatus 16 20
U = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15 17 D4
13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20}
5
7
4 6 19
1
D1.2 V1 8 B
2 9
18 10
M4 + 14052
12
13 11
3
14
Figure 93 Mapping interpolations using a “Venn diagram”
be undertaken once we have assigned the children to families, so that, efectively, what
Brockington is doing is using information contained in the Mahābhārata’s appendices
to “regroup” the manuscripts by their interpolations. The only value of doing so is that
it provides a visual representation of the appendix passages diferent manuscripts share,
but it cannot tell us anything about their iliation. Figure 93 clariies what Brockington
most probably envisions when he proposes that we use the “Venn diagram […] to repre-
sent a relationship between separate groups or sets of items […] in this way showing to
some extent at least the multiple allegiances involved.”
This diagram comes closest to reconciling what Brockington envisions. But it does not
accurately represent the distribution of interpolations in the Rāmāyaṇa (remember that
although Brockington features the diagram in his assessment of the Mahābhārata critical
edition, the sigla actually stand for Rāmāyaṇa manuscripts). The diagram is limited to 11
manuscripts, which it groups into seven sets, so that it features only seven circles. It cannot
handle the full complexity of the tradition. Even if we limited its use to representing
interpolations, it would quickly break down. Granted that Brockington recognizes that
“this is a decidedly visual model rapidly becoming too complex to describe verbally
and […] even visually the patterns soon become highly intricate and less easy to inter-
pret.” But he does not realize that it cannot represent even the limited set of “patterns”
he wishes. This is where the inal failure of Brockington’s attempt at creating a “Venn
diagram” manifests. A Venn diagram must represent all possible logical combinations
between sets. Their number is given as 2n where n represents the number of sets in
the diagram. Thus, for seven sets, the required number of regions is 128, whereas for
Brockington’s original proposal, which featured 10 sets, the number is 1,024. Even our
corrected diagram is far from meeting this condition. D1.2 and M1–3 do not inter-
sect. D1.2 and Ñ likewise do not intersect. There is no region where only M4+14052
and Ñ meet. There is also no region where only V1 and B meet. Despite every attempt
to save his hypothesis, this inal diagram is also not a Venn diagram! Not only is it not
a Venn diagram; it also does not depict all possible combinations of interpolations in
manuscripts, but only those Brockington selectively identiies. Insofar as it represents
448
448 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
anything, the diagram is symbolic of his approach to textual criticism: presenting partial
information, selectively identifying ainities and using those ainities to draw erroneous
conclusions based on a lawed method.
Let us draw some conclusions:
1. The Venn diagram is useless as a tool of genealogical analysis.
2. It is also useless as a tool of analysis of the commonalities between manuscripts.
3. It can be used to represent manuscript groups, but not to analyze them. We can use
it only once we have undertaken an analysis.
4. The Venn diagram can be used to represent the distribution of interpolations, but
this presumes a prior stemmatic analysis to identify the interpolations as interpolations.
5. The Venn diagram cannot represent all interpolations, but only a limited number
in a small group of manuscripts at a time. We can thus use it to study a selection of the
evidence, but only if we clarify, in advance, our aims. Any conclusions we draw must be
contextualized vis- à- vis the complete manuscript tradition.
Finally, there is a possibility that what Brockington contemplates is not a Venn
diagram at all, but simply some kind of “graphical representation.” In our dialogue,
he admitted as much, saying that he merely wished to represent, in a rough way, the
manuscripts’ relationships, remembering, of course, that by “relationships” he means
not genealogical relationships but common features such as interpolations. The gen-
eral consensus that emerged was that his diagram was not a Venn diagram and many
confusions arose from his erroneous attribution of the term to it. Provided he no
longer calls his igures Venn diagrams, understands that they contain no genealogi-
cally relevant information and acknowledges that they are drawn on the basis of the
editors’ existing analysis of the manuscripts’ relations of iliation and presume their
labor in identifying and cataloguing interpolations, we see no objection to their con-
tinued use.
Brockington recommends the Venn diagram as permitting an initial, albeit crude,
sorting of manuscripts. But he overlooks the following:
1. Not all shared variants have the same value. Only some variants are genealogically
signiicant, whereas the great majority relect minor orthographic changes and the like.
2. Not all shared passages are evidence of a common inheritance. Some passages will
have been transmitted horizontally by contamination and hence will mislead us as to the
manuscripts’ true iliation.
3. The kind of resemblance— placement, repetition, extent, minor deviations and
changes to neighboring text— contains more genealogically relevant information than
the Venn diagram can capture. Set theory requires that we treat verses or variants
as identical members of their containing sets, which implies an unacceptable loss in
precision.
In his desire to “mathematize” the manuscripts’ relationships, Brockington needlessly
discards valuable information. His proposal is both excessive and insuicient: excessive
because it entails a drastic simpliication of the manuscripts’ contents beyond even that
he undertakes when he reduces their relationships to quantitative igures; insuicient
because it does not adequately conceptualize the sets’ elements. He neither deines his
sets nor explains how we should treat partial matches or repeated verses. His proposal
449
APPENDICES 449
is thus inadequate to the task. A Venn diagram based on grouping manuscripts by their
most visible diferences appears to be an easier alternative. It replaces careful study of the
manuscripts’ readings, above all, of their shared errors of transcription, with a handful
of prominent characteristics such as shared interpolations. But the move from a simple
quantitative relationship (for example, manuscript X shares 30 percent of the text of
manuscript Y) to its diagrammatic representation presents insurmountable obstacles. Do
placement and semantic order count? What about accidental identities? If M4 and V1
share a word or sequence of words not found in the other manuscripts, albeit in diferent
chapters or books, is this evidence of ainity? Or, rather, is it a coincidence, even though
M4 ∩ V1 will now contain more members than the manuscripts’ respective intersections
with the other manuscripts?
Brockington justiies his suggestion that editors use Venn diagrams “to represent a
relationship between separate groups or sets of items” on the grounds that it evades
“the impossible task of constructing the entire chain of transmission involved,” but he
has considered neither the nature of those relationships (intersection, union or com-
plement, or is their nature, rather, one of iliation?) nor the nature of the elements
involved (are they additions, omissions, words or verses?). He emphasizes that the
“Trivandrum manuscript” frequently omits the same passages as M4, even though the
Venn diagram is singularly unsuited to capture such information. No precedent exists
for deining a set in terms of members it does not contain. We could, at most, iden-
tify the set’s complement, but this would not contain all of the set’s members rather
than comprising a mixture of elements and omissions. Brockington also overlooks that
if the “entire chain of transmission” cannot be reconstructed, it is especially unlikely
that the relationship of the later and worse manuscripts can be stemmatized. Rather
than focus on the part of the transmission that can be reconstructed, his solution is to
map— imperfectly and with severe limitations— the extent of indiscriminate borrowing
between the deteriores. He then reduces this borrowing to quantitative relationships and
recommends using overlapping circles “showing […] the multiple allegiances involved.”
The method’s supposed advantages, above all, the ability to overlap diferent circles,
indicating a manuscript’s composite nature, are bought at the price of being unable to
represent its (true) descent.
Brockington’s approach is thus contrary to everything editors have attempted for the
past two centuries, when they sought to determine manuscript iliation based on a system-
atic recensio; counter also to the principle that an editor must irst establish the “vertical”
constants of the tradition before he can determine the extent of “horizontal” transmis-
sion. These errors are understandable insofar as Brockington has never edited a work
and never produced full collations of a manuscript. All his examples are drawn from the
* passages the editors identiied. Besides the questionable nature of drawing conclusions
about the Mahābhārata based on the Rāmāyaṇa, Brockington’s work exhibits, once
again, the tendency among Indologists to ignore readings for interpolations. His
statement that “the critical editions are […] on the whole the best we have” is baling
because if the stemma does not hold neither does the reconstruction based on it, and
Brockington does not think we can draw up stemmata for the Sanskrit epics. A crit-
ical edition difers from an edition based on the editor’s conjectures or the concord of
450
450 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
a majority of witnesses precisely in that it relies on a stemma for most of the sifting
between variants. Yet Brockington argues that,
Essentially the point at issue is that the Critical Edition’s system of assigning manuscripts
to recensions or to script versions is almost as limiting as constructing a stemma codicum
(which does have the merit of corresponding on the whole to the way that manuscripts are
propagated). The drawback is that this still involves an either/o r situation, where a particular
manuscript is assigned to a particular recension or version, or else is casually dismissed as
“contaminated” or a “mischcodex.” The reality is that script boundaries are by no means as
rigid as this scheme of classiication would suggest and that the only efective way of tracing
alignments is by plotting the shared features of speciic manuscripts.142
Although intended as his deinitive statement on the Rāmāyaṇa (and mutatis mutandis
the Mahābhārata),143 it is less conclusive than he imagines. Consider the following
problems:
1. The critical edition does not “assign manuscripts to recensions or script versions.”
It undertakes a genealogical analysis of their relations of iliation.
2. The stemma does not correspond “on the whole to the way that manuscripts
are propagated.” It is the best means yet found for representing manuscript iliation.
Brockington’s proposed alternative—t he Venn diagram—i s unequal to the task. We
await clariication of his statement that “a new way of establishing relationships between
manuscripts [has been] developed for the Mahābhārata by Wendy Philipps-R odriguez,”
but at the recent DICSEP 8 he did not elaborate.144
3. The “either/o r situation, where a particular manuscript is assigned to a particular
recension or version, or else is casually dismissed as ‘contaminated’ or a ‘mischcodex’ ”
does not arise from “the Critical Edition’s system of assigning manuscripts to recensions
or to script versions” (which it does not do). It is a relic of the fact that we can either
establish a manuscript’s descent with a degree of certainty or it resists stemmatization.
Ultimately, it is a consequence of whether vertical or horizontal transmission domi-
nated in the manuscript’s formation, and thus an unavoidable feature of manuscript
transmission. Brockington’s proposed solution cannot eliminate the problem. The
Venn diagram appears to cope better with this ambiguity, but only because it is less
sensitive to iliation. To argue that the Venn diagram is preferable as its blurry nature
corresponds to the blurring of manuscript boundaries is like suggesting we should look
at indistinct objects through a frosted lens because we will then not notice their indef-
inite boundaries.
4. The objection that “script boundaries are by no means as rigid as this scheme
of classiication […] suggest[s] ” relects a justiied anxiety that horizontal transmission
played a greater role in an exemplar’s formation than vertical transmission. But we must
irst establish this. The stemma is the best means for this.145 If all Brockington means by
the statement is that manuscripts rejected as late and inferior nonetheless contain good
readings, this principle is well known in textual criticism (recentiores non deteriores). But does
it repay to study the manuscripts for a few potentially superior readings? Brockington, at
any rate, appears to think not, since he has neither collated a manuscript completely nor
proposed a single conjecture that betters the editors’ readings.
451
APPENDICES 451
5. Finally, although it is true that the “only efective way of tracing alignments is by
plotting the shared features of speciic manuscripts,” this is to misunderstand the aim of
textual criticism. Agreements between manuscripts are the easiest way to sort them, but
ofer only a preliminary criterion. They do not reveal their genealogical relationships. If
two or more manuscripts agree against the rest, which of the two groups preserves the
correct reading? A table of agreements such as the one Brockington proposes cannot
eliminate what Paolo Trovato calls “the ineluctability of critical judgment.” “Plotting the
shared features of speciic manuscripts” will most likely provide the same information as
a simple observation.146
6. The proposal is also not new. Before Brockington, John Griith proposed a sim-
ilar approach, albeit in greater detail.147 Martin L. West provides a concise summary of
Griith’s procedure:
A more elaborate way of using such a table has recently been advocated by J. G. Griith.
It involves comparing manuscripts in respect of the whole numerical series of each one’s
agreement with the others; no distinction is made between primary and secondary readings,
though agreements that may represent coincidental innovation are excluded. Suppose manu-
script A shows the following numbers of agreements with the others:
B F G H J K L N O P R T U V Z
50 44 61 49 52 48 62 62 48 42 44 53 61 47 43
For each manuscript a similar series of numbers is found. The one whose series matches
that of A most closely is then grouped most closely with A. Finally the manuscripts are all
arranged in a “spectrum”: those with the most dissimilar patterns of agreement appear at
opposite ends, with a continuous gradation from one end to the other, while certain clusters
or “taxa” mark themselves of along the line.148
Griith’s tabulation of agreements is more systematic, but in essential respects it parallels
Brockington’s approach. His diagram on page 121 can be considered a precursor of
Brockington’s “Venn diagram” as it likewise aims to provide a graphic representation of
manuscript agreement. But whereas Brockington uses circles and ellipses to represent his
manuscripts and the points within the enclosed plane igures to represent their elements
(their intersections representing the common elements), Griith adopts a more elegant
solution: an array that lists manuscripts along the x and y axes and uses three kinds of
hatching to indicate either shared readings or the extent of sharing.149 What his approach
gains in being able to represent diferent kinds of agreement, it loses in not being able to
represent multiple coincidences, which must be read of from the array by considering
pairs of manuscripts at a time. Vice versa, Brockington’s approach cannot capture verse
position and order and remains completely abstract since he never populates his sets or
their intersections with members.
Diferences in representation aside, the two approaches share several features.
Brockington shares Griith’s emphasis on the “open” nature of the tradition,150 the
suggestion that the editors’ selection of manuscripts was random, that many exemplars
were ignored or not known, that attention should focus rather on identifying alignments
452
452 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
or ainities between manuscripts,151 and the idea that, beneath the confused mass of
contaminated exemplars resistant to genealogical classiication, statistical compila-
tion of similarities can reveal distinct patterns or groups of manuscripts.152 Griith
also echoes Brockington’s preference for arguing from agreement and his aversion
to evaluating readings when he writes: “It is essential to remember that the opera-
tion is conducted in terms of similarities and diferences between the several mss.
Thus there is no question of forming provisional judgments about the rightness or
wrongness of a reading which is open to doubt.”153 Like Brockington, he is skeptical
of the stemmatic method and considers it especially inadequate for open traditions.154
Like Brockington, Griith thinks a statistical approach has an advantage over the
latter in that it reduces manuscript iliation to quantitative terms, and hence is “free”
of its subjective and potentially circular nature.155 Griith also expresses a similar
distaste for complete collations.156 More important, he concurs with Brockington
that a stochastic sampling of data can replace “a true, continuous, and systematic
recension” (Wolf).157 Like Brockington, Griith does not diferentiate typological from
genealogical classiication. Again, like Brockington, he argues that “the taxonomic
process” can “disentangle the underlying relations of the interpolated mss. and pen-
etrate to the pattern of their ‘genetic histories’ latent beneath the over-b urden of
interpolation.”158 Both scholars propose graphical schemes that allegedly overcome
the stemma’s weakness in representing contaminated traditions. Griiths argues, “in
really complicated cases an admirable ingenuity is often displayed in adorning the
stemma with an elegant arabesque of dotted lines to show the presumed channels of
contamination.”159 But they overlook that the data they wish to capture are less rele-
vant for reconstructing the archetype than the data their schemes fail to capture. Even
discounting the problems with Brockington’s “Venn diagram,” West’s reservations
about Griith’s statistical approach are a serious objection:
The trouble with this kind of analysis is that it is not clear what useful conclusions can be
drawn from it. Two manuscripts may be grouped together just because they show no partic-
ular tendency to agree with any manuscript more than any other, in other words because they
are equally promiscuous, even if they have no special similarity with each other textually. In
some cases it is evident that the taxa relect real ainity- groups, in others it is not. In any case
we are given no guidance as to the distribution of ancient readings.160
Griith’s and Brockington’s work illustrates the limits of statistical approaches to man-
uscript classiication.161 A mere tabulation of agreements (in Brockington’s case, also
“omissions”) between manuscripts cannot replace a genealogical analysis. Above all, it
does not let us reconstruct earlier stages of the text, despite Brockington’s belief that
removing certain kinds of repetitions (those he considers “Brahmanic”) and collecting
others (those he considers remnants of “oral epic poetry”) lets him reconstruct a text
older than the archetype.
Criticisms of the Mahābhārata critical edition relect wider trends in textual crit-
icism, where the neo- Lachmannian edition has fallen out of favor. In an age when
few scholars have either the patience or the resources to create an edition based on
453
APPENDICES 453
an exhaustive survey of manuscript sources and a consideration of their readings,
ad hoc criticisms based on partial investigations are appealing. Yet, as this inal
section revealed, these criticisms are often based on an insuicient familiarity with
the material, or an insuicient knowledge of the principles involved, or both. The
charge that the “critical editions are based on the readings of just a selection of the
vast number of manuscripts known,” for instance, is relevant only if we can show
that it incorrectly discarded some higher- value manuscripts. Invoking “a new way of
establishing relationships between manuscripts” likewise requires that we irst demon-
strate we understand the principles involved.162 Before we raise unfounded and mis-
leading objections to the critical editions, let us irst learn to appreciate the editors’
achievements, remembering that they were men of great probity and dedication163
who worked untiringly for an inconsequential remuneration.164
We should also require scholars who criticize the available edition(s) to provide
alternatives or, at least, explain which text we should use.165 Brockington criticizes
“appeal to or preference for the vulgate” as “misguided,” but simultaneously argues
that “the text even of the critical editions cannot be regarded as a completely coherent
whole.” In fact, neither the receptus nor the constitutio textus should have binding value for
us. No less than Grünendahl, who has yet to produce his promised critical edition of
the Nepālī recension, Brockington must tell us what editorial approach he favors,
what manuscripts he proposes editing and how he plans to go about it. Until someone
proposes a better text, the objections to the existing editions stemming from higher
criticism are against argument and good sense.166 As Brockington’s work attests, spec-
ulative, a priori histories based on unprovable claims of “oral” transmission have led
only to grievous misunderstandings of the manuscript evidence. A responsible textual
criticism therefore must begin by rejecting the German scholars’ tendentious theory
of an original epic and its “Brahmanic” corruption.167 Only then can we ponder what
textual criticism is still called to do in relation to the Mahābhārata and what we, as
readers and critics, can contribute. In the hope that a younger generation of scholars
will take on this awesome responsibility, we now end this book.168 The inal word, how-
ever, is reserved for Nietzsche:
When we have words for something, we’ve already gone beyond it. In all speaking there is a
grain of contempt. Language, so it seems, was invented only for what is mediocre, common,
communicable. In language, speakers vulgarize themselves right away.169
Notes
1 This edition should not be confused with Sukthankar’s “S,” “the ultimate source from which
all versions of the Southern recension are, directly or indirectly, derived.” V. S. Sukthankar,
“Prolegomena,” in The Ad̄ iparvan for the First Time Critically Edited, vol. 1 (Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1933), xxx. Despite the name, Sastri’s edition is not a true critical
edition. It does not undertake a genealogical reconstruction of the ancestor of the southern
manuscripts, instead providing a composite text based on the southern sources. See ibid., cvi: “the
editor is avowedly aiming only at reproducing the text of one manuscript, categorically renouncing the
obligation of the textual critic to restore the text, as far as possible, to its original form”; “a true
lineal descendant of the Mahābhārata manuscripts of South India” (all italics Sukthankar’s).
454
454 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
2 The dates of these editions should be cited with caution. In many cases, the editions are no
longer in circulation and we were compelled to rely on secondary sources.
3 V. S. Sukthankar, “Introduction,” in The Ar̄an ̣yakaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited, vol. 1
(Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1942), xxxiii.
4 But see the brief remark in his introduction to the Āraṇyakaparvan that “The Bombay
edition, like the Calcutta, is based on the Nīlakaṇṭha version but (like yet other editions of the
Mahābhārata prepared in the same fashion, e.g., the Chitrashala Edition) does not represent the
Nīlakaṇṭha tradition very faithfully.” Ibid., xxxiii (italics added).
5 A sixth attempt, the 18- volume “transcreated” edition (author’s term) of Purushottam Lal (The
Mahābhārata of Vyāsa: Transcreated from Sanskrit, 18 vols. [Calcutta: Writers Workshop, 1968–
2008]), is not considered here as it does not claim to be a translation. The edition is not widely
available (most recently only directly from the website of the Writer’s Workshop) and we could
not examine the volumes.
6 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxxvi.
7 Ibid., lxxvii.
8 The role expansion played in the text’s transmission is often exaggerated, as we have seen
with Grünendahl. With the exception of the additional passages (which we can often easily
identify), the Mahābhārata tradition is remarkably conservative. Doubtless, scribal errors were
committed and their scope was magniied by frequent copying of the text (it has been estimated
that about 400–500 years is the normal limit for a palm- leaf manuscript in the Indian climate),
but a competent editor will often be able to identify the true reading (the one exception was the
Virāṭaparvan, a book that appears to have been shifting until a very late date).
9 Pasquali originally formulated this geographic criterion that innovations originate from the center
and radiate outward to the periphery as follows: “Just as in linguistics it is universally agreed
today that earlier stages are preserved for a longer time in peripheral areas, and that hence the
occurrence of the same phoneme, form, term or construction in two peripheral areas distant
from one another guarantees their antiquity, so the agreement of codices written in areas far
removed from the cultural center and from one another constitute an argument for the gen-
uineness of a reading. Often texts that were much read, both in antiquity and in the Middle
Ages, form a vulgate text which spreads, as fashions are wont to do, from the center towards the
periphery, but do not always reach the periphery.” Giorgio Pasquali, Storia della tradizione e critica
del testo (Florence: Le Monnier, 1952), xvi– xvii, cited and translated in Paolo Trovato, Everything
You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method: A Non- Standard Handbook of Genealogical Textual
Criticism in the Age of Post- Structuralism, Cladistics, and Copy- Text (Padua: Libreriauniversitaria, 2014),
72– 73. Sukthankar does not formalize the principle, but it is clearly present in his mind: “This
version [the Malayālam] has several striking agreements with Ś1, a fact all the more impressive,
because M, a Southern version, hails from the province at the opposite end of India from the
province of Ś1, a Northern version; for instance, Malayālam supports Ś1 (against TG) in omitting
the spurious parts of adhy. 128– 129 of the Bombay edition.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxiv
(Sukthankar’s italics).
10 Glenn W. Most, “Editor’s Introduction,” in Sebastiano Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s
Method, ed. and trans. Glenn W. Most (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 7– 8.
11 Sastri refers to an edition of the Mahābhārata printed in Telugu characters and published,
according to him, four times in Madras (1850, 1855, 1860 and 1929) as the “Telugu edition.”
See P. P. S. Sastri, ed., The Mahābhārata (Southern Recension) Critically Edited by P. P. S. Sastri, vol.
1, Ādi Parva, part 1 (Madras: Ramaswamy Sastrulu & Sons, Madras, 1931), v. Sukthankar
also referred to this edition in his “Prolegomena,” cv, but it was not examined for the critical
edition. No further details are forthcoming of this edition.
12 This is the edition A. Rangaswami Dikshitar printed in 1895 at the Veda Vyasa Press in
Sarabhojirajapuram. Sukthankar refers to it as the Grantha edition of Sarfojirajapuram 1896.
Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” cv. No further details are forthcoming of this edition.
455
APPENDICES 455
13 क is Burnell’s catalog no. 11838, Grantha, Tanjore Palace Library. ख is Burnell’s catalog
no. 11851, Grantha, Tanjore Palace Library. ग is Burnell’s catalog no. 11809, Telugu, Tanjore
Palace Library.
14 Burnell’s catalog no. 11860, Grantha, Tanjore Palace Library.
15 Sukthankar’s source is T. R. Krishnacharya, ed., A Descriptive Contents of Sriman Mahabharatam
(Kumbakonam: Madhva Vilas Book Depot, 1912), 4.
16 For the source, see John L. Brockington, The Sanskrit Epics (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1998), 60.
Brockington’s igures were checked, where possible, against the igures the editors supplied in
their respective volumes.
17 Debroy arrives at a slightly diferent breakdown. For the main text, he counts 73,784 verses
in 1,995 chapters (6,073 verses in 118 chapters for the Harivaṃśa); thereafter his count of the
verses in each adhyāya difers slightly from Brockington’s (though his count for the adhyāyas in
each parvan is the same). In contrast to Brockington, Debroy also provides verse counts for the
sub- units of each parvan (that is, the 100 upaparvans). See Bibek Debroy, The Mahābhārata, vol. 1
(New Delhi: Penguin Books India, 2010), xxiii–xxvi (the table repeats in all volumes).
18 The 18-p arvan division is a northern feature; the southern manuscripts are inconsistent in the
number of parvans they read. Curiously, their Parvasaṃgraha lists feature the northern division,
leading the editors of the southern editions to override the southern manuscripts when creating
their editions. See Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xxxiii. Thus, when reconstructing the southern
division, we had to have recourse to the critical apparatus, as we had no access to southern
manuscripts.
19 Both sections are called parvasaṃgrahaḥ (cf. Mahābhārata 1.2.33c and 71c), but the latter is more
in the form of a narrative summary, and hence, the divisions are referred to less consistently.
The list that follows takes the names from the irst section (1.2.34a–6 9c). The translations of
the titles are Van Buitenen’s.
20 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xxxiii.
21 Surprisingly, the Parvasaṃgraha list itself is extremely consistent in both the northern and
southern recensions. Except for a handful of words, no part of it features a wavy line, suggesting
that no efort was made to make the list conform to the southern contents.
22 As a matter of fact, the adhyāya counts cannot apply to the southern recension at all, since the
southern manuscripts do not mention the names of the sub-p arvans in their colophons. The list
of upaparvans in these manuscripts is compiled on the basis of the Parvasaṃgraha list, but as
this only gives the names of the 100 sub-p arvans without mentioning the adhyāyas in each, we
have no way of knowing how many adhyāyas a particular sub- parvan contains. See Sukthankar,
“Prolegomena,” xxxiii, n. 4. The igures are thus only an approximate guide to where the
southern manuscripts would have broken the parvan, had they done so.
23 Several sources report this as 24 parvans uniformly in the southern manuscripts, but this
is incorrect. As a matter of fact, there is no division characteristic of the southern recen-
sion as a whole, since the diferent manuscript groups do not agree (and sometimes there
is disagreement even within the manuscripts of a group). Burnell, in his survey of the
Mahābhārata manuscripts in the palace library at Tanjore, lists the following division
as characteristic of the “southern recension”: Ādiparvan (8 chapters), Āstīkaparvan (40
chapters), Saṃbhavaparvan (200 chapters), Śalyaparvan (56 chapters), Gadāparvan (11
chapters), Sauptikaparvan (9 chapters), Aiṣīkaparvan (11 chapters), Viśokaparvan (8
chapters), Rājadharmaparvan (172 chapters), Mokṣadharmaparvan (191 chapters). A. C.
Burnell, A Classiied Index to the Sanskrit MSS in the Palace at Tanjore (London: Trübner, 1880),
180. But, as Burnell did not possess a Malayālam exemplar (see ibid., 181–8 3, for his list
of manuscripts), this division cannot be extended to the southern recension as a whole.
Likewise, Winternitz only had access to Grantha manuscripts. Even though he claimed to
have seen and examined some “highly valuable […] Malayâlam MSS” in the collection
of the Royal Asiatic Society, London, these are not included in his description. See Moriz
456
456 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Winternitz, “On the South- Indian Recension of the Mahābhārata,” The Indian Antiquary
27 (1898): 68. The one Grantha manuscript he examined (no. 65 in the Whish collection)
had two parvans— the Ādiparvan and the Saṃbhavaparvan— rather than the three Burnell
reported. Ibid., 122. Winternitz appears not to have examined any manuscripts for the
books after the Ādiparvan (no. 65 itself is incomplete and includes only the Ādiparvan)
and his comments therefore are applicable only to the irst of the additional parvans found
in the southern recension. Lüders, the next to consider the problem, wrote that Burnell’s
distinction of the Sauptikaparvan into three parvans— the Sauptika, Aiṣīka and Viṣoka
parvans—w as not quite correct, since the Viṣokaparvan, in the printed editions of the
northern recension, was not considered part of the Sauptikaparvan, but rather, of the
Strīparvan. “Burnell ought, rather, to have said that, in south India, the Sauptikaparvan is
broken up into two parvans— the Sauptikaparvan and the Aiṣīkaparva— and the Strīparvan
likewise into two parvans—t he Viṣokaparvan and the Strīparvan.” Heinrich Lüders,
Über die Grantharecension des Mahābhārata, Abhandlungen der Königlichen Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Phil.-H ist. Klasse, N. F. vol. 14, no. 6. (Berlin: Weidmannsche
Buchhandlung, 1901), 66. Lüders only had access to a fragmentary manuscript of the
Śāntiparvan (Mackenzie 64, India Oice Library, London), but he nonetheless found that
the manuscript included the Āpaddharmaparvan along with the Rājadharmaparvan (both
under the parvan title of Rājadharmaparvan). Ibid., 68– 69.
24 Even the critical edition is unsatisfactory in this regard. Sukthankar is scrupulous about
noting the deviations from the northern division in the Ādiparvan (see his “Prolegomena”
xxxiii and xxxiii, n. 2), but thereafter no editor, to our knowledge, appears to have paid
much attention to this problem. Dandekar devotes much more attention to the fact that the
Devanāgarī manuscripts break the Śalyaparvan after adhyāya 28, reading thereafter a parvan
called the Gadāparvan (adhyāyas 29– 64), and does not discuss the much more important
fact that the southern manuscripts break the Śalyaparvan into two independent parvans.
See R. N. Dandekar, “Introduction,” in The Śalyaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited
(Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1961), ix. Velankar spends much more time
discussing the Parvasaṃgraha igures and only mentions the fact that M1 lists the Sauptika
sub-p arvan as part of the Śalyaparvan at the margins of his discussion. See H. D. Velankar,
“Introduction,” in The Sauptikaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited (Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1948), xxxii. Belvalkar, in contrast, does not seem to have
attached any signiicance to the southern division at all: both in his introduction and in his
critical apparatus, he does not mention the fact that the southern manuscripts consider the
Rājadharma and Āpaddharma parvans one parvan (the Rājadharmaparvan rather than the
Śāntiparvan) and treat the Mokṣdharmaparvan as its own, independent parvan.
25 In creating this table, we were guided by Burnell’s comments, but it is entirely possible that
we have overlooked other divisions. Sukthankar refers to the 24-p arvan division as a feature
of the southern recension as a whole, but clearly on Burnell’s and Winternitz’s authority. See
Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” xxxiii, n. 1. As a matter of fact, he could have had irsthand
knowledge only of the divisions in the Ādiparvan, as the search for manuscript of the other
parvans had probably only gotten under way in his time. Only a look at the colophons of all the
chapters of the Mahābhārata will really settle the question.
26 As a matter of historical interest, Burnell’s views on the division of the Mahābhārata
into 24 parvans in the southern tradition were irst published in the volume On the Aindra
School of Sanskrit Grammarians (Mangalore: Basel Mission Book & Tract Depository and
London: Trübner & Company, 1875), 75– 80. This section contains what must be the irst
stemma of the Mahābhārata manuscripts ever drawn up. Burnell divides the Mahābhārata
into two recensions— a northern (Nāgarī) recension, which he claims was “a revision of the
longer books, settled inally by Nīlakaṇṭha’s Commentary,” and a southern (Grantha) recen-
sion, which he calls “an independent revision of the longer books.” Ibid., 80. Had Burnell
457
APPENDICES 457
had access to manuscripts from the Malayālam area, he would have seen that the Grantha
was not the whole of the southern tradition (and certainly not the best representative of
it). He would also have hesitated to make the Devanāgarī manuscripts the main bearers of
the northern tradition, seeing as they are late and corrupt exemplars and as the northern
tradition was established long before Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary. It was left to Sukthankar,
following the extensive search for manuscripts in all scripts from all parts of India, to draw
up the irst true stemma of the Mahābhārata tradition. Nonetheless, Burnell’s stemma is of
interest as the irst attempt to diagram the relation of the main Mahābhārata traditions to
each other and because of the way it integrates the two traditions into the stemma: Burnell
imagines that the tradition would have begun with an “original collection of ballads,”
giving rise later to an “eclectic text with episodes added to it” before it inally broke up
into the northern and southern traditions. Ibid. The historical inluence of his stemma
on later editors (Sukthankar not excepted) is evident. Burnell’s stemma is reproduced in
Appendix 15.
27 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxiv (italicized in original).
28 Though not, of course, in the printed editions of the southern manuscripts, which cannot
be true to their claim to print the southern recension and also follow a division into 18
parvans.
29 On the translation and deinition of upākhyāna, see Robert P. Goldman, “On the Upatva of
Upākhyānas: Is the Uttarakāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa an Upākhyānas of the Mahābhārata?”
in Argument and Design: The Unity of the Mahābhārata, ed. Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee
(Leiden and Boston, MA: Brill, 2016), 69– 82.
30 Alf Hiltebeitel, “Not without Subtales: Telling Laws and Truths in the Sanskrit Epics,” Journal
of Indian Philosophy 33 (2005): 467– 69.
31 Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee, eds., Argument and Design: The Unity of the Mahābhārata
(Leiden and Boston, MA: Brill, 2016). Hiltebeitel’s 2005 article is reprinted as the irst of the
contributions.
32 Sukthankar remarks: D13 added at 1.205; K5 discontinued from 2.10; G1 has lacuna from
2.192 to 3.11; K6 Dr D8– 14 G7 discontinued, and Ñ1.2 B5 M5 added, from 3.1; Ñ3 added
at 14.1; Ś1 added at 26.10; B2 ends at 43.13; K1 has lacuna from 47.20 to 54.4; D6.7 M1.2.4
discontinued, and B6 M6– 8 added, from 54.1; Ś1 has lacuna from 55.3b to 60.61b and from
61.84b to 68.19; D3 (which transposes the Śakuntalā and Yayāti episodes) has lacuna from
62.3 to 69.51; V1 has lacuna from 68.74b to 92.13; K3 has lacuna from 69.41d to 71.17c,
and from 72.8c to 74.4; Ś1 has lacuna from 72.23 to 78.20b; D3 ends at 76.35; B4 ends at
90.88; V1 has lacuna from 96.37c to 127.21a; T2 ends as 181.40; T3 begins from 182.1.
Sukthankar’s remarks concerning Ś1 are partial and should therefore be supplemented with
the next appendix.
33 Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” x.
34 Brodbeck and Black present a concordance of the critical edition and the Ganguli/R oy edition
in Simon Brodbeck and Brian Black, eds., Gender and Narrative in the Mahābhārata (Abingdon and
New York: Routledge, 2007), 279– 84.
35 Sukthankar also warns in his introduction to the Āraṇyakaparvan that “there are some
grave mistakes in the numbering of the stanzas of the Calcutta edition. The irst mis-
take occurs after stanza 3095, where the next number suddenly jumps up to 4000 (when
it should be 3100). Similarly after 8895, the following number jumps up to 9900 (when it
should be 8900). For the third time, after 10,095, the following number is given as 11,000
(instead of 10,100). For the fourth time, after 11,095, the next number jumps up to 12,000,
when it should be 11,100. At the next step, however, the number equally suddenly jumps
back to 10,200! Thus at one place three successive numbers (which are supposed to increase
by ive at each step) are 11,095, 12,000, 10,200! After adhy. 117, there appear to be no
new mistakes, and from that point onwards the numbering may be taken to be continuous
458
458 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
and correct. But the result of these earlier miscalculations is that the extent of the parvan
appears to be 17,478, when it should in reality be (according to Jacobi’s computation)
12,848, the Parvasaṃgraha igure being 11,664! Several numbers occur twice, and in giving
references to the Calcutta edition, it is advisable to cite the adhyāya number as well.”
Sukthankar, “Introduction,” xxxiii. This is probably why Sukthankar does not cite igures
for the Calcutta edition in his concordance. To our knowledge, no other editor has drawn
attention to this problem.
36 For a discussion of Nīlakaṇṭha’s dates and background, see Christopher Minkowski, “Nīlakaṇṭha
Caturdhara’s Mantrakāśık̄han ̣ḍa,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 122, no. 2 (2002): 329–
44 and Christopher Minkowski, “Nīlakaṇṭha’s Mahābhārata,” Seminar 608, The Enduring
Epic (2010): 32– 38. Most of what we know about the Mahābhārata commentators comes
from a handful of studies: Vishnu S. Sukthankar, “Epic Studies V: Notes on Mahābhārata
Commentators,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 17, no. 2 (1935–3 6): 185– 202;
Vishnu S. Sukthankar, “Arjunamiśra,” in Dr. Modi Memorial Volume: Papers on Indo-I ranian and
Other Subjects, ed. Dr. Modi Memorial Volume Editorial Board (Bombay: K. J. Dubash, 1930),
565– 68 (reprinted in Sukthankar Memorial Volume, vol. 1, ed. P. K. Gode [Bombay: Karnatak
Publishing House, 1945], 403– 5) and Sukthankar, “Prolegomena” (the latter absorbing much
of the material of the irst two, but also adding much new material).
37 Sukthankar, “Notes on Mahābhārata Commentators,” 185. Additionally, P. K. Gode in a series
of articles in the Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute took up the question of the
dates of speciic commentators (these are all cited in the bibliography and in this appendix
where relevant).
38 They are, in no particular order: Anantabhaṭṭa, Arjunamiśra, Ānanda, Caturbhuja(miśra),
Jagadīśa- cakravartin, Devabodha, Nīlakaṇṭha, Mahānandapūrṇa, Yajña- Nārāyaṇa,
Ratnagarbha, Rāmakiṃkara, Rāmakṛṣṇa, Rāmānuja, Lakṣmaṇa, Varada, Vādirāja,
Vidyāsāgara, Vimalabodha, Śaṅkarācārya, Śrīnivāsa, Sarvajña- Nārāyaṇa and Ṣṛṣṭidhara.
Leclere inexplicably gives the number as “no less than twenty-o ne” even though Sukthankar’s
numbering is unambiguous. Basile Leclere, “New Light on Devabodha, the Earliest Extant
Commentator on Mahābhārata,” Asiatische Studien/ Études Asiatique 70, no. 2 (2016): 490.
39 See Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxx (Sukthankar’s italics): “A commentary older and
more important than the Arthadīpikā of Arjunamiśra, and one more neglected still, is the
Jñānadīpikā of Devabodha, cited here as Cd. Devabodha is certainly older than Vimalabodha,
Arjunamiśra and Nīlakaṇṭha, all of whom cite him with great respect, and probably earlier
than Sarvajña- Nārāyaṇa and Vādirāja. He is, therefore, most likely, the earliest commentator of
the Mahābhārata hitherto known, and, in my opinion, also the best.”
40 If there were commentators earlier than Devabodha, he does not mention them (at least in the
parts of his commentary that have been preserved). In contrast, almost all of the commentators
thereafter cite Devabodha; Arjunamiśra even mentions him with special reverence as the
irst in a series that begins with Vyāsa and Vaiśaṃpāyana: vedavyāsavaiśaṃpāyanadevabodhavim
alabodhasarvajñanārāyan ̣aśān ̣ḍilyamādhavapitṛbhyo namaḥ | śrıd̄evabodhapādādimatamālokya yatnataḥ
| kriyate’rjunamiśren ̣a bhāratārthapradıp̄ikā ||. Cited in Sukthankar, “Notes on Mahābhārata
Commentators,” 189. The fact that Arjunamiśra gives Devabodha irst place after Vyāsa and
Vaiśaṃpāyana is indicative.
41 See Minkowski, “Nīlakaṇṭha’s Mahābhārata.” Minkowski does not clarify how he arrives at
this date. Leclere’s relections are in “New Light on Devabodha,” 501– 5. Leclere validates
many of Sukthankar’s views about Devabodha except Sukthankar’s ascription to Kaśmīr on
the basis of his text. According to him, it is more likely that Devabodha was “an intellectual
from southern India who completed his studies and probably prepared his commentaries in
the great centre of traditional learning that Banaras already was by that time. Having spent
several decades of his life travelling in the North, he moved back to the South and composed
a devotional play on a Vaiṣṇava hero at the demand of his patron the king Tribhuvanamalla,
459
APPENDICES 459
who probably belonged to the Hoysaḷa dynasty” (that is, in modern-d ay Karnataka).
Ibid., 520.
42 The dates are Gode’s. See P. K. Gode, “Notes on Indian Chronology XXXIV: Date of
Vimalabodha’s Commentary on the Mahābhārata Called the Viṣamaślokī— after 1150 CE,”
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 17, no. 4 (1935–3 6): 395– 99. Gode provides
the upper date in P. K. Gode, “New Light on the Chronology of the Commentators of the
Mahābhārata,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 25, no. 1/ 3 (1944): 107.
43 Minkowski traces the origins of the Mahābhārata commentarial tradition back to the
“vyasaghatṭạ literature,” that is, “compendia of thorny parts of the text.” Christopher
Minkowski, “What Makes a Work ‘Traditional’? On the Success of Nīlakaṇṭha’s Mahābhārata
Commentary,” in Boundaries, Dynamics and Constructions of Traditions in South Asia, ed. Federico
Squarcini (Florence: Firenze University Press, 2005), 236. He also suggests that “as a phenom-
enon, epic commentaries in Sanskrit appeared relatively late in the life of the epics, with extant
commentaries datable not much earlier than the twelfth century.” Ibid.
44 In Sukthankar’s words, the Jñānadıp̄ikā is “a concise ṭīkā; that is, a running commentary,
explaining, as a rule, only the diicult words and passages in the text. Occasionally it ofers
explanations of constructional obscurities and grammatical diiculties, and gives the gist of
passages; in the latter case, usually, under citation of entire verses (i.e. half ślokas) from the
text.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxx. But see Leclere, “New Light on Devabodha,” 520–
21: “Admittedly the philological approach does prevail in the Jñānadıp̄ikā, which often explains
a diicult word by its synonyms or its etymologies, but Devabodha at the same time could
nonetheless have pursued a higher goal. For a devotee of Viṣṇu and an adept of Sāṃkhya-
Yoga, understanding the Great Epic correctly might have signiied approaching the truth of
God, and it is not irrelevant that the commentary enlarges and deepens each time it tackles
philosophical passages like the Sanatsujātıȳa. As a matter of fact, the soteriological aspect of the
enterprise is underlined by Devabodha himself at the end of such explanations.”
45 Ibid.
46 Leclere argues that the name Devabodhi arose due to the misinterpretation of a verse quoted
in Śrīdharadāsa. See ibid., 492– 94.
47 Ibid., 494– 95.
48 Ibid., 496– 97.
49 Ibid., 498. In Leclere’s translation, the two inaugural benedictory stanzas (the
Satyavratarukmāṅgada’s and the Jñānadıp̄ikā’s) read as follows:
As long as the moon and the sun exist, they assume the nature of seeds for provoking the
reappearance of the Fortune of the gods in the ield of the triple world divided by the
water of the River of the Immortals which springs from the foot [of Trivikrama]; they fall
from every side, out of desire for reaching the earth, the ether and the heaven which are
trembling: may the lines of dust coming from the lotus-f oot of [Viṣṇu], the enemy of the
Dānava, give you happiness!
It causes the hot and cool- rayed [celestial bodies] to turn away rapidly and conceals the sky-
roads; refulgent, it pervades the earth, the ether and the heaven and makes them shine with its
luminous nails it tears away the wall- like shores of the eastern and western regions from the
world of mortals up to the [celestial] abode; may it protect you, the foot of Nārāyaṇa which
grants [serenity] to the moving and stationary beings frightened for long!
50 Ibid., 516– 19.
51 Ibid., 520– 21.
52 Ibid., 521– 22, and see nn. 141 and 144.
53 See Minkowski, “What Makes a Work ‘Traditional’?” 238– 41 for the full passage and for a
broader discussion of Nīlakaṇṭha’s innovations in reading the text. Nīlakaṇṭha reads the epic
460
460 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
from a Vedāntic perspective, as conirming the truth of advaita (non- dual) philosophy, but his
devotion to Viṣṇu is evident.
54 A word’s meaning is obtained in two ways. The original or etymological meaning is called yoga.
The meaning established by the customary usage is called rūḍhiḥ. Thus, Devabodha explains
both meanings of the word jaya.
55 This compound can be split in two ways: (1) pravṛtteḥ aṅgam, which means part of the beginning;
and (2) pravṛttiḥ aṅgaṃ yasya tat, meaning (the subject matter) of which pravṛtti is a part.
56 Gode, “New Light on the Chronology of the Commentators of the Mahābhārata,” 103. Note
that this list is not the same as the list of Mahābhārata commentators and their dates (without
reference to manuscripts) given in Sukthankar, “Notes on Mahābhārata Commentators,” 202
(the Appendix).
57 All attempts to trace this list have failed. It is not included in the two- volume edition
of Sukthankar’s articles and works— Sukthankar Memorial Edition, 2 vols., ed. P. K. Gode
(Bombay: Karnatak Publishing House, 1944–45). It is also not found in the digitized
volumes of the Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (available through JSTOR).
It is possible that Gode was referring to a list for private and/ or internal use, known only to
staf and colleagues at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, as he does not mention
a source.
58 This measure is imperfect, of course, since more manuscripts may have turned up in the mean-
time or editions of more commentaries published. Our access to editions published in India
especially has been limited. But we hope that this appendix will be a starting point for other
scholars to ill in the missing data.
59 The number of manuscripts, strictly speaking, refers to the number used for the critical edition
and not the total number of manuscripts available. But as this was one of the widest searches
conducted for manuscripts of the commentaries and the editors did not discount any important
source, it may be taken as representative of the latter igure (except in the case of Nīlakaṇṭha,
of whose commentary likely many more copies exist than were used).
60 R. N. Dandekar, Commentary of Devabodha on the Ad̄ iparvan of the Mahābhārata (Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1941).
61 Hereafter, this statement will not be repeated. It is true, of course, of Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary
for all 18 parvans of the Mahābhārata.
62 “The Bombay Government MSS Collection (no. 180 of 1891–9 5) contains a fragment of his
commentary on the Ādi, comprising merely the irst adhyāya with the beginning of the second;
while the Madras Government Collection (no. 2169) contains another fragment which lacks
the beginning.” Sukthankar, “Notes on Mahābhārata Commentators,” 187.
63 Hereafter, this statement will not be repeated. Except for Edgerton, who used the printed text
of the Sabhāparvan in the P. P. S. Sastri edition, all of the other parvan editors made use of a
Devanāgarī transcript of Vādirāja’s commentary prepared by Sastri and later acquired by the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. In this case, the number of manuscripts is cited as
one, since the editors could not have had access to a second manuscript that Sastri acquired
later and whose readings are cited in the printed edition. However, a second manuscript must
also exist for these parvans.
64 Franklin Edgerton, “Introduction,” in The Sabhāparvan for the First Time Critically Edited
(Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1944), xxiv.
65 Note that this manuscript (and a second that Edgerton does not cite) later proved not to be
copies of Vimalabodha’s commentary, as per Belvalkar’s information (discussed later).
66 Edgerton, “Introduction,” xxiv.
67 R. D. Karmarkar, Commentary of Devabodha on the Sabhāparvan of the Mahābhārata (Poona:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1949).
68 There appear not to have been many commentaries on this parvan; Sukthankar notes that
Devabodha’s commentary on the Āraṇyakaparvan “has unfortunately been lost, or at least has
not been recovered so far.” Sukthankar, “Introduction,” xi.
461
APPENDICES 461
69 Raghu Vira, “Introduction,” in The Virātạ parvan for the First Time Critically Edited (Poona:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1936), x.
70 S. K. De, “Introduction,” in The Udyogaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited (Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1940), xiii.
71 S. K. De, Commentary of Devabodha on the Udyogaparvan of the Mahābhārata (Bombay: Bharatiya
Vidya Bhavan, 1944). For the Virāṭa and Udyoga parvans, we also have the aforementioned
edition of Mahadeva Shastri Gangadhara Bhatta Bakre (1915 and 1920). If we include this
edition (now extremely rare), then published versions exist of eight Mahābhārata commen-
taries for these two parvans.
72 More than one copy may exist, for Belvalkar remarks: “An almost complete MS of Vādirāja’s
commentary on the Mahābhārata is available in the Mysore Oriental Library, besides parts
of the commentary on stray parvans in several libraries of South India.” S. K. Belvalkar,
“Introduction,” in The Bhıṣ̄maparvan for the First Time Critically Edited (Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1947), lxix.
73 Manuscripts including commentaries of the Bhīṣmaparvan appear to have been especially
numerous. The editor of this parvan notes: “there exist, besides these 125 MSS of the text
alone, nearly 40 other MSS giving the text of the parvan together with a Sanskrit commen-
tary: namely, Arjunamiśra’s Bhāratārthadıp̄ikā, some 10 MSS; Nīlakaṇṭha’s Bhāratavbhāvadıp̄a (or
dıp̄ikā), about 30 MSS; and two MSS of an anonymous commentary. Manuscripts containing
commentaries alone on the Bhīṣmaparvan number more than 30, there being, besides the two
commentators already mentioned, about ten others, including Devabodha, the oldest of them
all.” Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Bhīṣmaparvan],” ix.
74 The identity of this commentator is uncertain. Belvalkar calls him “Yajña (or Sarvajña)
Nārāyaṇa,” but Sukthankar in his list of Mahābhārata commentators cites the two
separately.
75 Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Bhīṣmaparvan],” xii.
76 See S. K. Belvalkar, The Śan̄ tiparvan: Introduction (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute,
1966), cxxxix– cxli and cliv–c lv: “This commentary is mentioned in the Critical Apparatus of
the Sabhā, Virāṭa, Udyoga and Bhīsṃ aparvans, on the authority of two paper MSS, viz. no. 84
of 1869– 70 and no. 167 of 1887–9 1, both belong to the Deccan College, MS Library, now
deposited in the B. O. R. Institute. The irst of these three MSS is 9˝ x 5½˝ in size, with 88 folios,
giving 16 lines to a page and about 36 letters to a line. The second is 13½˝ x 6˝ in size, with
67 folios, and giving about 12 lines to a page and 48 letters to a line. […] There are, however,
certain indications showing that what we have in these two MSS is not the original commen-
tary of Vimalabodha, but only some select extracts from that commentary. […] Thus we have
three diferent names to deal with: Vimalabodha’s original Durghatạ r̄thaprakas̄ínı;̄ Trivikrama’s
Visạ mapadyatat̄paryar̄thavivarana ̣ tı̣k̄a ̄ (in MS no. 84 of 1869– 70 only), and Durbodhapadabodhinı ̄or
bhañjika ̄according to the two MSS before us. […] The two MSS above described do not, there-
fore, constitute the real commentary of Vimalabodha, but only a selection of diicult extracts
from the same. This was proved by the fortunate discovery of a MS belonging to the Rāja
Library at Darbhanga, which contained an unnumbered MS written in Maithili characters
and giving the original commentary of Vimalabodha on the Rājadharma (which, according
to the commentator, includes the Āpaddharma). A Devanāgarī transcript of the MS was
obtained through the courtesy of Shri Jīvānanda Ṭhakkara, the Head Pandit of that Library.
[…] For the Moksạ dharma, unfortunately, we have to rely on the extracts from Vimalabodha’s
commentary as supplied by our two MSS, no. 84 of 1869–7 0 and no. 167 of 1887–9 1. As
Vimalabodha quotes Bhojarāja’s Vyavahar̄amañjari and is himself quoted by Vidyāsāgara (Cs), his
date, according to Dr. P. K. Gode (Studies in Indian Literary History, vol. I, p. 422) lies between 1150
and 1300 CE. The commentator is therefore fairly old, and Arjunamisŕ a, although difering
from him once in a whole, generally follows him.”
77 S. K. Belvalkar, Commentary of Devabodha on the Bhıṣ̄maparvan (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1947).
462
462 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
78 De, “Introduction [to the Droṇaparvan],” xiii.
79 See Dandekar, “Introduction [to the Śalyaparvan],” xl (italics added): “Ujjain, Sanskrit
Oriental Institute Library, No. 482/ 5797 […] The MS., which is dated Śaka 1571 ( = 1649
CE) and which is said to have been written by one Nārāyaṇabhaṭṭa Mahokṣa, gives only the
commentary without the text […] there is, at the end of the commentary on Crit. Ed. adhy. 28,
a colophon with reads: iti śrıp̄aramahaṃsācāryaśrıd̄evabodhakṛtau bhāratadıp̄ikāyāṃ śalyaparvavivaran ̣aṃ
samāptam. The ascription of this commentary, on the basis of the colophon, to Devabodha is obviously a
mistake.” He continues: “Colophons 3, 5, and 6 in the Baroda MS., as cited above, are fairly
detailed and seem to put it past doubt that that MS. contains Arjunamiśra’s commentary on
the Śalyaparvan. The Ujjain MS., which, as mentioned above, is essentially identical with the Baroda MS.,
must, therefore, be also regarded as containing Arjunamiśra’s commentary. […] The ascription of the com-
mentary to Devabodha may have been due to the occurrence of the name of Devabodha in
the longer colophon in Arjunamiśra’s commentary.” Ibid., xli. And see ibid., xli, n. 3, where
Dandekar speciically mentions: “The same Ujjain MS. seems to have been used—a gain
erroneously—a s embodying Devabodha’s comm. also for the Crit. Ed. of the Droṇaparvan
(see: Introduction to that parvan, p. xiii). De had access to Arjunamiśra’s commentary in man-
uscript no. 2278 of the Benares Sanskrit College, so it is unclear why he did not note the error,
since his two manuscripts presumably contained the same text.
80 P. L. Vaidya, “Introduction,” in The Karn ̣aparvan for the First Time Critically Edited
(Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1954), xxi. It is not clear whether by “com-
plete MS” Vaidya means complete for this parvan or complete for the entire Mahābhārata.
81 See Belvalkar, The Śāntiparvan: Introduction, cxxxix–c xli and cliv–c lv, cited previously. Belvalkar
does not speciically mention the Karṇaparvan, but it is the same manuscript.
82 Velankar, “Introduction,” xxiii.
83 See Dandekar, “Introduction [to the Śalyaparvan],” xl–x li, cited previously. As with De, it is
unclear why Velankar did not notice the discrepancy, since he had access to Arjunamiśra’s
commentary.
84 Paranjpe, “Introduction,” xix.
85 See Dandekar, “Introduction [to the Śalyaparvan],” xl–x li, cited previously. As in De’s and
Velankar’s cases, it is unclear why Paranjpe did not notice the discrepancy, since he had access
to Arjunamiśra’s commentary.
86 See Belvalkar, The Śāntiparvan: Introduction, cxxxvi, who mentions that he also used “for com-
parison, copies procured from two other MSS in the Tanjore Sarasvathi Mahal Library, num-
bered, Burnell 1214 (= no. 8652 in P. P. S. Sastri’s Descriptive Catalogue, vol. XV, no. 8652) and
1237 (= ibid., no. 8651), both undated and written on paper in Devanāgarī characters.” Ibid.
These manuscripts are not mentioned in Belvalkar’s “Chart of the Śāntiparvan Critical
Apparatus” on pp. xix–x x, which therefore needs to be supplemented with the information
in the “Detailed Account of the Manuscripts.” “These Tanjore copies gave, without the text,
the commentary of Arjunamiśra on the Rājadharma sub-s ection only, while a third copy pro-
cured from Mysore Oriental Research Institute Library, no. S. A. 125, folios 138, also written
in Devanāgarī, gives Arjunamiśra’s commentary on the Āpaddharma sub- section.” Ibid.,
cxxxvi– cxxxvii. Additionally, Belvalkar made use of the text of Arjunamiśra’s commentary
on adhyāyas 12.260– 62 (the Gokapilīya chapters) in Friedrich Weinreich’s dissertation of 1928
(commentary available in the manuscript numbered 330 and in the London manuscript).
Since it is not known whether these two manuscripts ofer a relatively complete text of the
commentary or only this section, they have not been added to the count above. Weinreich’s
remaining manuscripts are enumerated in the critical edition of the Mokṣadharmaparvan; see
S. K. Belvalkar, ed., The Śāntiparvan, Part III: Mokṣadharma, B, For the First Time Critically Edited
(Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1954), 2194.
87 More than one copy may exist, for Belvalkar remarks: “Vādirāja’s commentary on the
Mahābhārata in an almost complete form is available in the Mysore Oriental Library, and stray
463
APPENDICES 463
portions of it in the several libraries of Southern India.” Belvalkar, The Śāntiparvan: Introduction,
clx. He does not cite his source for this information.
88 In addition to the manuscript listed in the table later, Belvalkar notes that “there is also a MS
of Paramānanda’s Mokṣadharmatı̣k̄ā mentioned by Burnell. It is a palm-l eaf MS in Grantha
characters, dated Saṃvat 1690 (cir. 1633 CE), of which no further details are available in P. P.
S. Sastri’s Descriptive Catalogue. This MS was not used for the present edition.” Ibid., clviii.
89 In addition to the two manuscripts listed in the table later, Belvalkar notes that “subsequently,
a MS of the same comm. was procured from the Hyderabad State Library, which did not ofer
much diference.” Ibid., clix.
90 See ibid., clv: “one more MS, Lahore, no. 2935 from D. A. V. College, Lalchand Library (now
transferred to Sadhu Ashram, Hoshiarpur, East Panjab), giving the Rājadharma alone, was
collated but not used for the present ed. except in 12.79.41.”
91 See R. N. Dandekar, “Introduction,” in The Anuśāsanaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited
(Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1966), xxxvi– xxxvii. Belvalkar’s informa-
tion in The Śāntiparvan: Introduction, cxxxix– cxli and cliv–c lv overturns Dandekar’s ascription.
Dandekar’s edition must have appeared concurrently with Belvalkar’s introduction in 1966, for
Belvalkar does not mention the Anuśāsanaparvan and if his introduction had appeared earlier,
Dandekar would surely have corrected it.
92 Belvalkar used only one manuscript for each of these parvans, but, according to his information
in the Śāntiparvan, a second manuscript containing Nīlakaṇṭha’s commentary on these parvans
also exists (no. 29c of the Maharashtra Government Collection).
93 Belvalkar notes in the introduction to the Bhīṣmaparvan that “a paper MS in Bengali
characters of Devabodha’s comm. on the Āraṇyakaparvan is mentioned by Rajendra
Lala: Notices of MSS, Vol. v, no. 3009. The MS belonged to Pratapacandra Bhattacharya
of Singura, Dist. Virabhuma” and that “no. 3010 is a Bengali MS of Devabodha on
the Virāṭaparvan, of the same owner.” Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Bhīṣmaparvan],”
lxii, n. 4 and lxiii, n. 1. If his information is correct, we would possess a near complete
commentary of the earliest of the Mahābhārata commentators up to the end of the
Bhīṣmaparvan.
94 Belvalkar notes that “of this old and venerable commentator, no MS of the commentary on
the entire Mahābhārata is known to exist. The Critical Edition could use his commentary
on the Ādiparvan, the Sabhāparvan, the Udyogaparvan and the Bhīṣmaparvan (without the
Bhagavadgītā). We still lack his commentary on the Āraṇyakaparvan, the Virāṭaparvan, the
Bhagavadgītā, the Karṇaparvan, the irst eight chapters of the Strīparvan and all the remaining
parvans from the Śānti to the end.” Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Bhīṣmaparvan],” lxii–
lxiii. His count is obviously based on assigning the manuscript in the collection of the Scindia
Oriental Institute, Ujjain (no. 482/5 797) to the Devabodha commentaries. However, this com-
mentary later turned out to be a commentary of Arjunamíra, with merely an incorrect colo-
phon attributing it to Devabodha.
95 We know that this must have existed, because, according to Belvalkar, “there is a MS (Baroda
Or. Inst. no. 13036) of Caturbhuja’s commentary on the Bhīṣmaparvan which seems to have
preserved a portion of Devabodha’s commentary on BG. 2.11–1 6 and 4.17– 31. But we cannot
be certain of its authenticity. Sarvajña-N ārāyaṇa [also] quotes Devabodha’s gloss on BG.
11.36.” Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Bhīṣmaparvan],” lxiii.
96 A complete commentary must have existed at one time, for Belvalkar remarks: “Complete
MSS of Arjunamíra’s commentary on the entire Mahābhārata are no longer met with,
although Rājendralāla Mitra, in his Notices, vol. V, p. viii, records having come across one
such at the village of Guḍāp (District Burdwan). MSS of the commentary for parvans 14,
16– 18, as also for occasional passages of the Rājadharma and the Āpaddharma sections of
the Śāntiparvan, have not yet been found in any of the collections of MSS of which lists are
available.” Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Bhīṣmaparvan],” lxxi.
464
464 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
97 This is not a conclusive argument, of course. Only a study of the colophons of the commen-
taries or the commentaries themselves can help settle the question. Dandekar, for instance,
notes that, in his commentary Durghatạ ̄rthaprakāśinı ̄on folio 58a of the manuscript in the
Bombay (now Maharashtra) Government Collection (deposited at the BORI), no. 84 of
1869– 70, Vimalabodha remarks: śalyādiparvān ̣i sugamānıt̄i rājadharme nirupyante. “So there is
not available any commentary by Vimalabodha on the Śalyaparvan as such.” Dandekar,
“Introduction [to the Śalyaparvan],” xxxix. But even this is not always a guide, since there is
no necessity that the commentator speciied the books he commented. On the other hand,
it is dangerous to conclude ex silentio from the fact that we do not possess a commentary
for certain parvans of the Mahābhārata that the author of that commentary did not write
one on them. It may simply be that the commentary for that section has not survived. In
the case of Caturbhuja, for instance, Belvalkar remarks: “Complete MSS of Caturbhuja’s
commentary on the entire Mahābhārata are no longer extant. MSS of his commentary on
the Āraṇyaka, Virāṭa (published by the Gujarati Printing Press, Bombay, 1915), and Droṇa
parvans have been reported.” Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Bhīṣmaparvan],” lxvi. At least
for the commentators, whose practice it appears to be to write continuous commentaries,
then, we might be justiied in assuming that commentaries for the remaining parvans existed
at one time.
98 With the exception of Ratnagarbha and Caturbhuja, who seemingly wrote complete com-
mentaries, the remaining commentators appear to have only commented on speciic sections
of the epic. A search for more extensive commentaries would probably be in vain. But see the
preceding note.
99 The standard work, often referred to as the Sadhale edition, is Shastri Gajanana Shambhu
Sadhale, ed., The Bhagavadgita with Eleven Commentaries, 2nd edn., 3 vols. (Bombay: The
“Gujarati” Printing Press, 1935; reprinted Delhi: Parimal Publishers, 2000), which includes
the commentaries of Śaṅkara, Ānandagiri, Rāmānuja, Vedānta Deśika, Vallabha, Madhva,
Jayatīrtha, Hanumat, Venkaṭanātha, Nīlakaṇṭha and Yamuna. A second multi- commen-
tary edition is Wasudev Laxman Sastri Pansikar, ed., Śrım̄ adbhagavadgıt̄ā with the Commentaries
of Śrım̄ at- Śaṅkarabhāṣya with An̄ andagiri; Nıl̄akan ̣tḥ ı;̄ Bhāṣyotkarṣadıp̄ikā of Dhanapti; Śrıd̄harı;̄
Gıt̄ārthasaṅgraha of Abhinavaguptāchārya; and Gūḍhārthadıp̄ikā of Madhusūdana with Gūḍhārthatattvā-
loka, 2nd edn. (Bombay: Nirṇaya- Sāgar Press, 1936; reprinted Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal,
1978).
100 See, however, W. M. Callewaert and Shilanand Hemraj, Bhagavadgıt̄ānuvāda: A Study in
Intercultural Translation (Ranchi: Satya Bharati Publication, 1983), 96– 110, who count a total
of 249 commentaries on the Gītā (either extant or known from a reference or cited in a man-
uscript catalog).
101 Almost all of the literature on one or more of the major Vedānta schools discusses the rela-
tionship of the principal commentators to each other. See also T. G. Mainkar, A Comparative
Study of the Commentaries on the Bhagavadgıt̄ā, 2nd edn. (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1969).
102 No commentaries more recent than Nīlakaṇṭha were collated, perhaps because their value
for establishing a critical text was minimal.
103 Editions of Śaṅkara and Rāmānuja are the most numerous by far, and therefore we have
cited only a few standard editions. For those commentators whose editions are rare, we have
striven to be more comprehensive.
104 Franco describes Brockington as “arguably the greatest living scholar on Indian epic litera-
ture.” Eli Franco, review of The Nay Science: A History of German Indology, by Vishwa Adluri and
Joydeep Bagchee, South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies 39, no. 3 (2016): 696. Von Hinüber
calls Brockington’s The Sanskrit Epics “the foundation for all further researches into ancient
Indian epic and a secure and reliable guide for everyone who preoccupies himself in some
way with these texts.” Oskar von Hinüber, review of The Sanskrit Epics, by John Brockington,
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 46 (2002): 269.
465
APPENDICES 465
105 International colloquium, “Enjeux de la philologie indienne: traditions, éditions, traductions–
transferts,” December 5–7 , 2016, Paris, Collège de France. For the conference theme,
program and abstracts, see: www.iran- inde.cnrs.fr/ evenements-s cientiiques/ colloques-
et- conferences- 2016/ enjeux- de- la- philologie- indienne- traditions- editions- traductions-
transferts.html?date_ debut=2017- 03- 28&lang=fr (accessed August 30, 2017).
106 John Brockington, “Regions and Recensions, Scripts and Manuscripts: The Textual History
of the Rāmāyaṇa and Mahābhārata,” www.college- de- france.fr/ site/ jean- noel- robert/
symposium- 2016- 12- 06- 14h00.htm (accessed June 30, 2017). We thank Silvia D’Intino for
the link. The website incorrectly lists the title as “Religions and Recensions, [etc.]” We thank
Brockington for the hint.
107 Ibid. (all italics ours). Brockington refers to Renate Söhnen, Untersuchungen zur Komposition
von Reden und Gesprächen im Rāmāyan ̣a, 2 vols., Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 6
(Reinbek: Dr. Inge Wezler, Verlag für orientalistische Fachpublikationen, 1979). For his
review, see John Brockington, review of Untersuchungen zur Komposition von Reden und Gesprächen
im Rāmāyan ̣a, by Renate Söhnen, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland
114, no. 1 (1982): 65: “The irst volume begins with various general observations, such as the
utility in an oral narrative of clear markers at the beginnings and endings of speeches. The
author then distinguishes three types of dialogue, dramatic (infrequent, despite providing all
four passages chosen for detailed study), narrative, and emotive. She takes as her basis the
Bombay edition on the grounds that, unlike the Critical edition, it represents a relatively uni-
form text. However, she lacks the courage of her convictions, regularly discussing the Critical
edition’s readings, frequently—e specially when it its her analysis—a ccepting its rejection of
stanzas found in the Bombay text, and occasionally suggesting that certain passages found
in both texts are not original. Her comments on such occasions are sensible but inconsistent
with her own initial position. Nevertheless, Söhnen argues persuasively for frequent delib-
erate structuring of speeches, especially for ‘Ringkomposition’, the organization of a speech
symmetrically around a central passage (less commonly there is no central point as such
but just an axis of symmetry). There is room for discussion about details of her analysis,
and in particular the varied nature of what constitutes a ring, for the similarity may rest on
theme, mode of expression, wording, or merely the attitude of the speaker, while the bal-
ancing elements may difer considerably in length. As the author recognizes, the interpreta-
tion therefore involves a substantial subjective element. More objective evidence of attention
to structure in speeches is provided by the undoubted greater frequency of refrains than in
the narrative parts, and also of chiasmus (to which she gives a more extended meaning than
I would).”
108 Reinhold Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” in Studien
zur Indologie und Buddhismuskunde, ed. Reinhold Grünendahl, Jens Uwe- Hartmann and
Petra Kiefer- Pülz, Indica et Tibetica 22 (Bonn: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 1993), 101–3 0.
Alternately, Grünendahl may himself owe the error to Brockington, who asserts, “Apart from
the Devanāgarī manuscripts, the [Rāmāyaṇa] Critical Edition groups its manuscripts by the
script employed but, as I stress in the previous paper, the numbers [sic] of manuscripts in
each version varies considerably. The point is equally valid of the Critical Edition of the
Mahābhārata.” John L. Brockington, “The Text of the Rāmāyaṇa,” Indologica Taurinensia
15– 16, Proceedings of the Seventh World Sanskrit Conference, Leiden, August 23– 29,
1987 (1989– 90): 80. The error repeats in John L. Brockington, “Textual Studies in Vālmīki’s
Rāmāyaṇa,” in Epic Threads: John Brockington on the Sanskrit Epics, ed. Greg Bailey and Mary
Brockington (New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2000), 195– 206 (verbatim on page 197).
(The article was irst published in 1986 in the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Calcutta.) We
cannot determine who borrowed the thesis from whom, since neither scholar cites the other.
Von Hinüber, review of The Sanskrit Epics, 268 notes the pointed omission: “Only very rarely
has a title that deserved mention escaped the author’s notice, whose overview of scholarship
466
466 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
is current up until the book’s very publication date. This applies, for example, to the impor-
tant contribution by R. Grünendahl, [...] who with good reasons disputes the connection
between the script and recension, which V. S. Sukthankar had already questioned.” The
reasons for this silence may have to do with Brockington’s negative review of Grünendahl’s
dissertation. See John Brockington, review of Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ: Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u
Part 1: Adhyāyas 1– 43, by Reinhold Grünendahl, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain
and Ireland 2 (1984): 291– 92.
109 Bigger’s “English Summary” states: “To sort their mss. for the edition, SUKTHANKAR
and his followers used what GRÜNENDAHL (1993b) called the premise of scripts
(Schriftartenprämisse). GRÜNENDAHL showed that this idea, namely that all mss. written
in a certain script belong together, is not tenable, but it may still be useful as a irst cri-
terion.” Andreas Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata: Seine Darstellung im Rahmen des Textes und
seiner Entwicklung (Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1998), 170. Mahadevan circumscribes
Grünendahl’s notion thus: “the texts of a given script hang together” and “A critical edition
(CE) of a work, by deinition, is an assemblage of its available texts, anchored on the twin
maxims of textual scholarship: brevior lectio praeferenda est (the shortest text is to be preferred) and
Schriftartenprämisse (manuscripts [MSS] in the same script belong together.).” T. P. Mahadevan,
“The Śakuntalā- Yayāti ‘Transposition’, the Southern Recension of the Mahābhārata, and
V. S. Sukthankar,” in The Churning of the Epics and Purān ̣as at the 15th World Sanskrit Conference, ed.
Simon Brodbeck, Alf Hiltebeitel and Adam Bowles (New Delhi: Dev Publishers, 2018), 60
and T. P. Mahadevan, “Three Rails of the Mahābhārata Text Tradition,” Journal of Vaishnava
Studies 19, no. 2 (2011): 23.
110 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 104.
111 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 118.
112 Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 117 (Grünendahl’s
italics).
113 Ibid., 121 (italics in original).
114 Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 15.
115 Andreas Bigger, “The Normative Redaction of the Mahābhārata: Possibilities and Limitations
of a Working Hypothesis,” in Stages and Transitions: Temporal and Historical Frameworks in Epic and
Purān ̣ic Literature. Proceedings of the Second Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and
Purān ̣as, ed. Mary Brockington (Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts, 2002), 20
(italics added).
116 Oskar von Hinüber, “Der vernachlässigte Wortlaut. Die Problematik der Herausgabe
buddhistischer Sanskrit- Texte, Zur Ü berlieferung, Kritik und Edition alter und neuerer Text,”
in Kleine Schriften, Teil I, ed. Harry Falk and Walter Slaje (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2008), 436.
117 Brockington cites Andreas Bigger, “Balarāma im Mahābhārata,” Asiatische Studien/ Études
Asiatiques xlviii, no. 1 (1994): 1297–9 9 with the words: “These episodes are briely studied by
Andreas Bigger (1994), as a foretaste of his thesis on the same subject,” but does not indicate
whether he has read this latter work. See Brockington, The Sanskrit Epics, 288, n. 129. Most
likely, it had not appeared at the time (both works appeared concurrently in 1998). There is
no reference to the Mahābhārata critical edition as a “normative redaction” and the term
redaction itself appears only sparingly (for example, on pages 21 and 156; on page 71 it is
linked to von Simson’s work). Whenever Brockington discovered the idea that the critical
edition reconstructs a normative redaction, it must be after 1998.
118 Ordinarily, this level of dependence would raise suspicions of plagiarism. In Brockington’s
case, it is likelier he lost sight of when he was speaking on the German scholars’ behalf.
We know of only one instance of demonstrable plagiarism, but here also it is likelier
Brockington forgot he was repeating in translation something his German source already
said. The passage occurs in John Brockington, “The Bhagavadgıt̄ā: Text and Context,” in The
Fruits of Our Desiring: An Inquiry into the Ethics of the Bhagavadgıt̄ā for Our Times, ed. Julius Lipner
467
APPENDICES 467
(Calgary: Bayeux, 1997), 32. “Also, in the visit of the Pāṇḍavas to the enemy, which follows the
Bhagavadgıt̄ā, we see a late piece of Brahmin apologetic, which equally with the second visit to
Bhīṣma (6.103.40– 84) must have been inserted for the moral justiication of the Pāṇḍavas.”
It is a literal translation from Georg von Simson, “Die Einschaltung der Bhagavadgıt̄ā im
Bhıṣ̄maparvan des Mahābhārata,” Indo- Iranian Journal 11, no. 3 (1968/ 69): 174: “Auch in dem
auf die Bhagavadgıt̄ā folgenden Besuch der Pāṇḍavas im feindlichen Heer (6.41) sehen wir
ein spätes Stück brahmanischer Apologetik, das ebenso wie der zweite Besuch bei Bhīṣma
(6.103.40– 84) zur moralischen Rechtfertigung der Pāṇḍavas eingefügt wurde.” Brockington
does not enclose the passage in quotation marks, and no citation is provided.
119 For Brockington’s views of the Mahābhārata’s “brāhman redactors,” see The Sanskrit Epics, 11,
19, 237 and 332. In John Brockington and Mary Brockington, Rāma the Steadfast: An Early Form
of the Rāmāyan ̣a (London: Penguin Books, 2006), the distinction between the Vedic-B rahmanic
and the Epic- Heroic traditions is encapsulated thus: “Transmission of the Rāmāyan ̣a and
Mahābhārata in their oral stages had been a diferent process from transmission of the Vedic
texts that preceded them, which in traditional circles still retain their original oral form.
Knowledge of the Vedic texts was restricted to the brāhmanic class, and the words themselves
took on a ritual, even a magic, signiicance largely unrelated to their semantic meaning. They
were handed down verbatim over the centuries without variation, and the reciter’s or hearer’s
understanding of them— or lack of it— was immaterial. The case of the Rāmāyan ̣a and the
Mahābhārata has been completely the opposite. They were heroic tales, narratives conceived
as entertainment. Both began, and both continued for several centuries, as the preserve of the
warrior kṣatriya class, before being taken over by brāhman redactors.” Ibid., xxiv. And see also
ibid., 364: “Around the irst to third centuries AD brāhman rather than kṣatriya values came to
dominate the text. The details of the process are not entirely clear, but seem to have involved
a change to a new set of redactors; probably at this time the text was irst committed to
writing, although it continued to be present orally.” Most recently, Mislav Ježić has revived the
hypothesis, distinguishing “brahmanical, hieratic poetry” from “aristocratic, heroic poetry.”
Here is how he expresses their distinction and transformation: “Vedic poetry is brahmanical,
hieratic poetry. Formulations about celestials, divinities, world and the powers inherent in it
are not narratives, no stories, and are not to be taken literally, but are expressions of a hidden,
invisible order, which can be understood as righteous if seen in its truth (ṛta), in which the
sages have insight (dhī), and which they express in an appropriately covert, enigmatic manner
(brahman, brahmodya). We may term Vedic mantras or brahmans, or formulations in them
myths, but we should be aware of the fact that they are not narrations, not even elliptical ones,
and that celestials praised in them are not anthropomorphic, have no clear genealogies, and
are essentially invisible to those who have no insights into their nature. Epic poetry is aristo-
cratic, heroic poetry at the base, as evident in the case of the Mahābhārata, which can repre-
sent a form of archaic court poetry, which may attain a certain poetical reinement close to
kāvya, as in the case of Rāmāyaṇa. It describes individual heroes who are human and mortal,
or partly superhuman, but certainly visible, for whom their genealogy is an essential condi-
tion of their nobility, whose feats can and should be narrated to glorify their superior virtues,
strength and skills. They serve as a model for other members of the aristocracy to follow. This
epic poetry, if it reaches out for universal hieratic mythic models, either to describe the rela-
tionship of mortals and immortals, or to enhance the glory of heroes by comparing it with
that of celestials, or even by elevating them to the level of immortal divinities, may assume a
form of religious poetry. This tendency can be reinforced if epic compositions are recited at
religious ceremonies, or if epic tradition starts being transmitted by brahmans or priests. The
idea that some epic heroes are sons of celestials, or that some of them are even incarnations
(avatāra) of God, gave the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa, and even more their khilas, their
religious signiicance. If hieratic topics, like the origin or creation of the world, its dissolution
and renewal, the cosmic periods, and origin of celestials and supernatural persons, become
468
468 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
the material for epic poets and singers, they will elaborate these by means of their poetical
technique, and give the immortals anthropomorphic features, ixed genealogy, and individual
(instead of regular or cyclical) feats, which can be narrated and tend to be understood liter-
ally, as mythological facts. They need not be decoded, solved as riddles, but may be taken at
their face value, remembered and transmitted (smṛti), in the same way as the genealogies of
heroes and (legendary or historical) kings. That is the literary genre of transmitting ancient
stories, ancient lore, namely the Purāṇas.” Mislav Ježić, “Vedic Myths and Epico-P urāṇic
Mythology— Transformation of the Sense of Vision into Narration,” paper presented at
the Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas (DICSEP) 8,
IUC, Dubrovnik, Croatia, September 12, 2017. Insofar as they oppose Vedic literature to the
Mahābhārata, all such attempts go back to Holtzmann Jr.’s claim that: “Alongside this epic
literature ran the religious literature of the Brahmans, both completely independent of each
other, only occasionally making use of each other. Epic and Veda are equally ancient; no bridge
leads from the Veda to the Mahābhārata; ‘the world of the Veda is a world by itself’ […] of
course, the epic knows of the Veda, albeit, to conclude from the Mahābhārata, only most super-
icially; but, on the whole, the two literatures, the Brahmanic and the heroic, are completely
independent of each other.” Adolf Holtzmann Jr., Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahābhārata
(Kiel: C. F. Haeseler, 1892), 61– 62. Despite Ježić’s attempt to separate the Mahābhārata
from the Veda, itihāsa is a Vedic genre. The Mahābhārata is thus no less “brahmanical” and
“hieratic” than the Vedas. The very term “epic poetry” is a misnomer. It has no equivalent
in the Indian tradition. Its use for the Mahābhārata originated with Lassen, who used it in
the sense of “the narration [Epos] of the battle of the Kurus and Pândavas.” Only later, once
Holtzmann Jr. identiied the Mahābhārata with the remains of a common “Indo- Germanic
epic” that constituted the “epic inheritance” (episches Erbgut) of the “Indo- Germanic people,”
did it enter scholarly discourse as a term for the entire Mahābhārata. Ibid., 42–4 3. For Lassen’s
use of the term, see Christian Lassen, “Beiträge zur Kunde des Indischen Alterthums aus
dem Mahâbhârata I: Allgemeines über das Mahâbhârata,” Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes
1 (1837): 61– 86.
120 For Brockington’s comments on the Sanskrit epics’ oral beginnings, see John Brockington,
“The Textualization of the Sanskrit Epics,” in Textualization of Oral Epics, ed. Lauri Honko
(Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 2000), 193–2 16. He declares: “It hardly needs
airming that the Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyaṇa together represent the culmination of
a lengthy tradition of oral poetry, transmitted through recitation by sūtas or bards.” Ibid.,
193. The attached note merely states: “All references to the epic are to their Critical Editions,
Sukthankar et al. 1933– 66; Bhatt and Shah 1960–7 5. I use the term ‘* passages’ generically
to designate all material excluded from the text of the Critical Edition in either the critical
apparatus or Appendix I (unless context clearly indicates a more limited usage).” Elsewhere
Brockington suggests: “In both the Sanskrit epics, the Rāmāyan ̣a and the Mahābhārata, their
framework stories present them as oral compositions; this suggests the importance of the
roles not only of the bard or reciter but also of the audience whose presence is integral to this
introductory frame.” Ibid., 193. Insofar as he refers to the epic’s narration at Śaunaka’s sattra
in the Naimiṣa Forest, the statement is false. Ugraśravas neither composes the Mahābhārata
before his audience nor refers to an anterior “oral composition.” In this irst reference,
the Mahābhārata is spoken of as a collection Vyāsa authored and taught his students
(Mahābhārata 1.1.15– 19 and 63–6 4). The transmission is irst Brahmanic and only then
bardic if we understand this term to mean a narrator of “ancient Lore” (sūta paurān ̣ika) rather
than the representative “of a lengthy tradition of oral poetry” Brockington imagines him as.
Contrary to Brockington’s claim that “the Mahābhārata in its frame indicates very clearly its
oral nature. […] Here we have the epic presented as if being narrated then and there, with
reciters and audience actually within the text” (ibid., 202), the sages assembled in the Naimiṣa
Forest ask to hear Vyāsa’s composition (dvaipāyanena yat prokta
ṁ
purān ̣a
ṁ
paramarṣin ̣ā, 1.1.15).
469
APPENDICES 469
The bard responds that he will narrate Vyāsa’s “entire thought” (mata
ṁ
kṛtsna ṁ, 1.1.23). The
Mahābhārata’s account of its transmission is more complex than most scholars imagine. It
is keenly attuned to issues of memory, philosophical insight and narrative time. See Vishwa
Adluri, “The Perils of Textual Transmission: Decapitation and Recapitulation,” Seminar
608, The Enduring Epic (2010): 48–5 4 and Vishwa Adluri, “Literary Violence and Literal
Salvation: Śaunaka Interprets the Mahābhārata,” Exemplar: The Journal of South Asian Studies 1,
no. 2 (2012): 45– 68.
121 Brockington’s The Sanskrit Epics begins with this distinction: “It is clear that the Mahābhārata
and the Rāmāyan ̣a represent the culmination of a lengthy tradition of oral poetry, trans-
mitted through recitation by the sūtas or bards. The oral origins of the Sanskrit epics have,
indeed, long been recognised.” Ibid., 3 (italics added). Thereafter, Brockington cites several
German sources. And see ibid., 18–1 9 for similar claims: “No doubt eulogies of heroes and
cycles of stories underlie the extant epics; traditionally the Mahābhārata had an earlier and
perhaps more clearly epic version in the Bhārata. The irst stage in the establishment of an epic
tradition would then have been the progressive clustering of ballads and other material around
some central theme, whether the personal vicissitudes of a hero or events of particular
importance. Eventually, these cycles may have been linked together into works with a more com-
plex plot. The Mahābhārata and Rāmāyan ̣a would on this view constitute the end- point of a
similar evolutionary process which can be identiied, according to some, through a number
of intermediate stages. The reciters and preservers of this heroic poetry would be the sūtas
or bards, who were attached to the courts of chieftains and who recited in short songs, and
on major festivals the glorious deeds of their lords.” Later he adds: “Although the two extant
epics are based on such traditional bardic material, in the course of time more religious and
didactic material was included in them, to such an extent that the Mahābhārata in particular
has rather lost the character of an epic, since so much of its volume is didactic material. On
the face of it, the Mahābhārata does give some indication of its own development. The very
setting of the scene suggests the process of expansion in transmission by which a Bhārata lay
of 24,000 verses grew to the Mahābhārata of 100,000. Elsewhere there occurs an instance
not only of self- reference but also of its narration by brāhmans (brāhman ̣āḥ kathayiṣyanti
mahābhāratam āhavam, 5.139.56ab). In the irst stage of growth the basic story must have been
subject to expansion from within, then in a second stage mythologised and in a third stage
entirely taken over by the brāhmanical tradition; inally, after the epic was committed to
writing, the number of manuscripts needed for the purpose seems to have become virtually a
library of Indian tradition, to which new material of all sorts could be added.” Ibid., 20–
21 (all italics ours). The passage quotes Van Buitenen nearly verbatim, who writes: “The
original story was in the irst phase of complication expanded from within, in the second
phase mythologized, in the third phrase brahminized. One might even discern a fourth
phase, after the epic was irst written down, when this collection of manuscripts became,
as it were, a library to which new books could be added.” J. A. B. van Buitenen, “The
Mahābhārata: Introduction,” in J. A. B. van Buitenen, trans., The Mahābhārata, vol. 1: The
Book of the Beginning (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973), xxiii. In contrast, the
idea of a “Bhārata lay of 24,000 verses” is probably owed to Hopkins’s idea of “Bhārata
(Kuru) lays,” allegedly “combined into one, but with no evidence of an epic before 400
B.C.” Van Buitenen also mentions a “Bhārata of 24,000 couplets” and an “old Bhārata lay.”
Ibid., xxiii and xxiv. Except that he changes “The Bhārata” to “a Bhārata lay” and replaces
“couplets” with “verses,” the statement is an exact facsimile of Van Buitenen’s claim: “Thus
The Bhārata of 24,000 couplets grew to The Mahābhārata of 100,000.” Ibid., xxiii. For the
Hopkins quote, see Edward W. Hopkins, The Great Epic of India: Character and Origin of the
Mahābhārata (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1901), 397.
122 Brockington, “The Text of the Rāmāyaṇa,” 79– 80: “These eleven manuscripts add well
over a third to the number used for the Critical Edition of the Ayodhyākān ̣ḍa (and more than a
470
470 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
quarter even to those that were initially collated). It is not surprising, therefore, that together
they add substantially to the body of variant readings recorded in the critical apparatus. This
material is signiicant, even if of no great value in itself, for building up a truer picture of the com-
plex relationship between the diferent recensions and versions” (italics added).
123 “What principle should we follow if not the manuscripts’ univocal testimony? If they are
obviously corrupt, the editor may propose a conjecture, though this situation will be rare,
since a problematic reading is unlikely to be conserved in all manuscripts” (Contini: difraction).
Sukthankar therefore rightly preferred documented readings (Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,”
xcii: “Emendation has played a very inconspicuous role in the preparation of the constituted
text. Interpretation has in general been given preference over emendation. Even in the case of corrupt
passages, the reading of some manuscript or other gives sense, though it may not be the
original sense, not even a wholly satisfactory sense. Precipitate emendation is, however, to be
deprecated; for experience has shown that but a small proportion of scholars’ corrections are
really amendments”; Sukthankar’s italics).
124 The error relects a prevailing confusion about critical editions. Despite many excellent
technical handbooks, many still think a critical edition is an edition that has been crit-
icized. They are unaware that critical edition refers to an edition based on an exhaustive
survey of the manuscripts that uses clearly enunciated principles and simple rules to recon-
struct a deinite state of the text. The term is frequently applied to a Lachmannian or
neo- Lachmannian edition and hence as a synonym for the genealogical- reconstructive
edition. Brockington’s criticisms are irrelevant because Sukthankar anticipated the charge,
and warned against expecting more from the edition than it could provide: “The reader
will ind that the constituted text is by no means smooth. It contains fresh instances of
loose and archaic linguistic forms and constructions, anacoluthons and lack of syntactical
concord. There remain many contradictions and superluities. There is evident lack of
inish in the hidden parts. These blemishes— if they be blemishes in epic poetry, which is
dynamic poetry, with no necessary pretensions to niceties of style, in the narrower sense
of the term—m ust have been inherent in the old poem. Where they are met with in the
critical text, they are not speculative iction; they are documented by the manuscripts them-
selves or at least are inferable from them with a high degree of probability.” Sukthankar,
“Prolegomena,” ciii–c iv. What Brockington seeks is not a critical edition, but an emended
edition meeting his expectations of simplicity and consistency. From a critic’s perspective,
this is the well- known tendency of banalization.
125 The reference could be to any of three works: M. A. Mehendale, “Interpolations in the
Mahābhārata,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 82, no. 1/ 4 (2001): 193–
212; M. A. Mehendale, “The Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata: Its Achievement and
Limitations,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 88 (2007): 1– 16; and M. A.
Mehendale, “The Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata: Its Constitution, Achievements,
and Limitations,” in Text and Variations of the Mahābhārata: Contextual, Regional and Performative
Traditions, ed. Kalyan Kumar Chakravarty (New Delhi: National Mission for Manuscripts,
2009), 3– 23. But it does little to bolster Brockington’s claims. Brockington likely cites
Mehendale because, like him, Mehendale also proceeds from the assumption that the
Mahābhārata “was orally transmitted for many centuries.” He divides interpolations in the
Mahābhārata into three categories: “1. Those revealed by ms. evidence and set aside by
the editors, 2. those that are not revealed by ms. evidence and part of the constituted text but
are quite obvious due to contradictions in consecutive stanzas and 3. those revealed either
by contradictions that are not so obvious because they are not found in consecutive passages
but are found in the text as a whole, or by the criterion of intrinsic probability.” Mehendale,
“Interpolations in the Mahābhārata,” 195– 96. Insofar as Brockington refers to the consti-
tuted text, he cannot mean the irst category. Insofar as his claim concerns the second cate-
gory, the manuscript evidence is unambiguous and no Lachmannian or neo-L achmannian
471
APPENDICES 471
editor would emend the text against the manuscripts’ uniform testimony. This leaves the
third possibility— that Brockington, like Mehendale, thinks the critical edition does not pro-
vide a facsimile of the “original” epic, because of its perceived inconsistencies. This suggests
that Brockington’s work aims, rather, at a subjective Konjekturalkritik. Insofar as he thinks this
continues the editors’ work he commits the same error as Mehendale when he suggests his
work contributes to Mahābhārata textual criticism. See Mehendale, “Interpolations in the
Mahābhārata,” 196: “The task of removing the spurious matter that still remains in the
constituted text and bringing it as close as possible to the older version of the Mbh. has been
left by them [the Mahābhārata editors] to future students of the text.” Mehendale annotates
the statement with a reference to Edgerton. “This task has been characterized as the appli-
cation of ‘higher criticism’ to the text. See F. Edgerton, Introduction to Sabhā- parvan,
p. XXXIII.” Ibid., 196, n. 12. In Mehendale, “The Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata: Its
Achievement and Limitations,” he notes: “The Editors of the critical edition have already
pointed out in their respective introductions to the parvans edited by them instances of such
contradictions, especially when they occur in passages close to each other. They have, how-
ever, not said which of the two contradictory passages could be original and which spurious.
That, according to them, would mean going beyond the scope of the work they had under-
taken. In all such cases, taking decisions would be the task of later researchers by adopting
‘higher criticism.’ ” Ibid., 7– 8. The attached note reads: “To try to make the text consistent
on such points would be to enter the realm of ‘higher criticism.’ F. Edgerton, Introduction
to Sabhāparvan, p. xxxiii.” Ibid., 7–8 , n. 16. Mehendale misrepresents Edgerton both times.
What Edgerton actually says is: “To try to make the text consistent on such points would be
to enter the realm of ‘higher criticism.’ I agree with Sukthankar that our job is diferent.” Edgerton,
“Introduction,” xxxiii (italics added). The reference is to Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” lxxxvii.
Sukthankar notes: “The above examples will show that the diaskeuasts did not always employ
any great art— I may add, fortunately— in conlating two discrepant accounts of an incident,
which is by no means an easy task. To resolve such anomalies, however, is beyond the scope of
this edition, since the entire manuscript evidence unanimously supports the conlation, which
is too old and deep- rooted to be treated by the ordinary principles of textual criticism. If we
went about, at this stage of our work, athetizing such passages as were self-c ontradictory or
as contradicted the data of some other part of the epic, there would not be much left of the
Mahābhārata to edit in the end.”
126 A critical edition in the sense of an edition free of contradictions is neither achievable nor is
it necessarily an improvement over the present text. Contrary to the expectation that a critical
edition must provide a completely coherent text, it attempts, rather, to undo the emendations
of scribes and editors. A critical edition prefers diicult readings over easier ones (the
diiciliores over faciliores) and generally works against the tendency to banalization. F. A. Wolf
famously wrote: “when the witnesses require it, a true recension replaces attractive readings
with less attractive ones. It takes of bandages and lays bare the sores. Finally, it cures not only
manifest ills, as bad doctors do, but hidden ones too.” F. A. Wolf, Prolegomena to Homer, trans.
with an introduction and notes by A. Grafton, G. W. Most and J. E. G. Zetzel (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985), 44. Sukthankar explicitly noted the advantages of the
vulgate over the constituted text: “The place for resolving contradictions is interpretation, as,
indeed, the work of glossators shows. The Vulgate text of the Mahābhārata is fairly readable
and will appear in places, at irst sight, to be even ‘better’ than the critical text, because the
former has been purged by the continuous emendations of scholars for centuries. A whole
army of anonymous scholars and poets must have worked at the text to make it smooth
and easy of comprehension and to increase its popularity and usefulness by adding to it
interesting anecdotes, incorporating into it current and popular versions and explanations,
bringing it in a line with the ethical, moral, religious and political ideas of essentially diferent
ages.” Sukthankar, “Prolegomena,” ciii.
472
472 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
127 This reference is essential. It comprises Venn’s main innovation over the earlier Euler dia-
gram. Edwards notes: “When such pictorial representation [the Euler diagram] is extended
to more complex sets of logical propositions, however, diiculties set in quickly. For example,
a logician faced with a series of propositions might wish to ascertain whether they were
mutually consistent, and Euler diagrams do not provide a graphical ‘algorithm’ for settling
such a question. Venn’s own description of the impasse, in 1880, is conclusive: ‘… we cannot
readily break up a complicated problem into successive steps which can be taken indepen-
dently. We have, in fact, to solve the problem irst, by determining what are the actual mutual
relations of the classes involved, and then to draw the circles representing this inal result; we
cannot work step- by- step towards the conclusion by aid of our igures.’ Venn had a better
idea.” A. W. F. Edwards, Cogwheels of the Mind: The Story of Venn Diagrams (Baltimore, MD,
and London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004), 3–4 . Venn himself explains his advance
over Euler thus: “Whereas the Eulerian plan endeavoured at once and directly to repre-
sent propositions, or relations of class terms to one another, we shall ind it best to begin by
representing only classes, and then proceed to modify these in some way to make them indi-
cate what our propositions have to say. How, then, shall we represent all the subclasses which
two or more class terms can produce? Bear in mind that what we have to indicate is the
successive duplication of the number of subdivisions produced by the introduction of each
successive term, and we shall see our way to a very important departure from the Eulerian
conception. All that we have to do is to draw our igures, say circles, so that each successive
one which we introduce shall intersect once, and once only, all the subdivisions already
existing, and then we have what may be called a general framework indicating every possible
combination producible by the given class terms.” John Venn, “On the Diagrammatic and
Mechanical Representation of Propositions and Reasonings,” cited in Edwards, Cogwheels of
the Mind, 4. There is no Venn diagram not based on a prior establishment or analysis of sets.
This is the greatest problem with Brockington’s work: he does not conceptualize much less
deine his sets.
128 Brockington, “Regions and Recensions, Scripts and Manuscripts.” Brockington does not
provide a citation for the use of Venn diagrams in linguistics, but all the examples we exam-
ined had two features in common: (1) they deined the members of the sets under consid-
eration; (2) they employed Venn diagrams to depict either the extent of shared features
between two languages or to classify certain types of statements. Neither feature applies in
Brockington’s case.
129 Brockington, “Textual Studies in Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa,” 203– 4. The proposal was probably
announced earlier at the 23rd International Congress for Asian and North African Studies
in Hamburg, as the following abstract records: “Of the varied manuscripts examined, the
most signiicant is ms. 14052 (unfortunately containing only half the Ayodhyākāṇḍa) for it is
closely related to M4 and probably of similar age. Their closeness is marked by omissions—
more exactly absence of material— rather than additions, indicating relative antiquity.
However, omissions unique to each show that, despite their regular shared readings, neither
could have been copied from the other, nor probably from an immediate ancestor. […] Such
details suggest that the CE scheme of recensions and subrecensions is too limiting. I propose
as a possible model the Venn diagram, which can better represent overlapping inluences and
avoids a straight either/ or classiication.” John Brockington, “Textual Studies in Vālmīki’s
Rāmāyaṇa,” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, Supplement IX, Proceedings of
the XXXII International Congress for Asian and North African Studies, Hamburg, 25th– 30th August
1986 (1992): 509–1 0. Brockington also refers to the Venn diagram in his latest published
work: “Elsewhere I have proposed that a better model than either the Critical Edition’s
system of script versions or a stemma codicum would be the Venn diagram, which with
its overlapping circles or ovals can better indicate degrees of commonality between various
manuscripts, as well as being capable of arrangement to a certain extent in a form reminiscent
473
APPENDICES 473
of geographical relationships.” John Brockington, “Is the Script Relevant? Further Evidence
from a Nevārī- Script Rāmāyaṇa Manuscript,” in Epic and Argument in Sanskrit Literary History.
Essays in Honor of Robert P. Goldman, ed. Sheldon Pollock (Delhi: Manohar, 2010), 24.
130 Compare Brockington, “Regions and Recensions, Scripts and Manuscripts”: “Within the
northern recension, they align particularly with two manuscripts D1 and [D] 2 which are
usually assigned to the western subrecension within the northern recension and to a lesser
extent with a third V1.” Compare also Bigger, Balarāma im Mahābhārata, 113 and 133, n. 88.
For Grünendahl’s use of the term (sich anschließen), see Grünendahl, “Zur Klassiizierung von
Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” 126: “Additionally, there are nine passages where, according
to the list all the Ñ manuscripts feature the reading of γ, but, according to the critical appa-
ratus, individual manuscripts align themselves with the reading of ν and the southern
recension.”
131 The following is typical: “Within this same span of the irst thirty sargas, in addition to its
unique omissions, the Trivandrum manuscript omits two other passages found in M4 but
omitted by some other manuscripts; the second of these is interesting, since it shows the
Trivandrum manuscript diverging from M4 on one of the few occasions when M4 goes with
the S recension in these irst thirty sargas. After sarga 31 (its own sarga 34) M4 shows a greater
tendency to side with the S recension, and so in general does the Trivandrum manuscript,
but it still omits some S material occurring in M4 (such as 42.25cd + 1047*, and 1107*1) and
includes some N material lacking in M4 (such as 1097*3–4 + 1098*1–2 ). Equally, though, it
includes some S material absent from M4 (for example, 50.11 and 1200*), so it is not possible
to simply say that it shows a greater tendency than M4 to retain the ainity with the N recen-
sion. Indeed, there are two instances where it seems to give even clearer evidence than M4
of combining both N and S traditions. These are at the start of sarga 50, where it has both
1217* (read by many N mss and M4) and 1218* (read by S mss, including some Devanāgarī
mss), and at 54.16cd where it has both the text (representing the S version) and the N variant
successively. Moreover, at 50.11, although its reading is basically that of the text (= S), it has
a unique variant reading in the irst pāda which is similar to the N substitute (1197*1 pr.).”
Brockington, “Textual Studies in Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa,” 202– 3.
132 As West also notes: M. L. West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique (Stuttgart: B. G. Teubner,
1973), 14– 15.
133 Brockington’s approach is peculiar. He writes: “In view of the large numbers of Rāmāyan ̣a
manuscripts preserved in various collections, and in particular of their relative lateness (and
therefore the impracticality of establishing a stemma codicum), the number of manuscripts
used for the Critical Edition is really quite small. The largest number—4 1— was used for
the Uttarakāṇḍa and the smallest—2 9— was for the Ayodhyākāṇḍa and also for the Āraṇya
and Sundara kāṇḍas, although admittedly a larger number was initially collated (e.g. 43 for
Ayodhyā). It is not surprising, therefore, that variant readings and new patterns of omission
or addition can be found in virtually every new manuscript examined. I would argue that
this material is signiicant if we are to build up a truer picture of the complex relationships
between the diferent recensions and versions.” Brockington, “Textual Studies in Vālmīki’s
Rāmāyaṇa,” 197. Compare also John L. Brockington, “A Malayāḷam- Script Rāmāyaṇa
Manuscript,” Indologica Taurinensia 21–2 2 (1995– 96): 79: “However, the Critical Edition neces-
sarily utilised a relatively small number of manuscripts (29 in the case of the Ayodhyākāṇḍa)
and so variant readings and new patterns of omission or addition can be found in virtually
every new manuscript examined.” The late manuscripts probably deserve classiication as
inutiles. Even if they contain good readings, their lateness makes it unlikely they will afect
the stemma. Brockington has not grasped the principle of eliminatio codicum descriptorum, which
Trovato elucidates as follows: “In operative terms, if all the sources of a contaminated ms.
or of a subfamily of contaminated mss. are preserved, there is no need to use the contam-
inated ms. or subfamily, which can be eliminated as codices descripti, or rather inutiles.” The
474
474 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
sole exception to this rule is: “If, instead, a ms. that descends to some extent from a known
exemplar contains high-q uality variants not found in any known ms. or subfamily, we shall
need to assume that ‘extra- stemmatic’ (Timpanaro) or rather ‘extra- archetypal’ contamina-
tion has occurred.” Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method,
134. But here also, rather than alter the stemmatic relationships of older family members,
this is more likely to trigger a revision in our judgment about (the utility of) late and inferior
specimens. Moreover, the circumstance that “new patterns of omission or addition can be
found in virtually every new manuscript examined” does not negate the relationships already
established, since they were not established using “patterns of omission or addition.” Possibly,
what Brockington means is that some discarded manuscripts contained better readings due
to their scribes’ access to good, old sources. But he does not argue from the lectio diicilior. He
merely claims that several lower- value manuscripts exist. This is like saying we should not
establish family trees for blue- bloods because we cannot establish the parentage of the bas-
tard children of prostitutes.
134 Trovato, Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 80.
135 Brockington, “Regions and Recensions, Scripts and Manuscripts.” The reference is to
Brockington, “Textual Studies in Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa,” speciically the claim that “to a
certain extent this is a reversion to the stemma codicum in that it attempts to depict the
diferent inluences or originals which have formed a speciic manuscript, while avoiding
the impossible task of constructing the entire chain of transmission involved.” Ibid.,
204. This is a novel interpretation. A stemma codicum would only “depict the diferent
inluences or originals which have formed a speciic manuscript” if every manuscript had
lines not only diverging from it but also converging on it, that is to say, if every manuscript
was copied not from one exemplar, but several. Though not impossible, this is an unusual
interpretation of the stemma, since genealogical reconstruction under these conditions is
impossible.
136 If he wanted, an editor could draw dotted lines converging on manuscripts to depict the
direction and extent of contamination (for example, by varying the lines’ thickness or aixing
numbers). Belvalkar actually undertook this. But besides mapping the extent of contami-
nation, his stemma did not provide new insights. It did not afect the relationships already
established. From an editor’s perspective, showing “multiple allegiances” is less relevant
than establishing the manuscripts’ descent as unambiguously as possible. The tradition
may, of course, be so hopelessly contaminated that we cannot reconstruct an archetype. In
this case another solution like editing the best manuscript must be pursued. But this is not
Brockington’s contention. He does not recommend another editorial strategy. He defends the
critical editions as “on the whole the best we have.” Brockington probably emphasizes the
“multiple allegiances involved” because he has not collated the manuscripts himself and does
not seek to provide an edition, critical or otherwise.
137 But see our proposed amendments to his igure later, for what we think Brockington is really
trying to express. Here also the circles must intersect even though they have no common
members. A Venn diagram must indicate all possible logical combinations of sets.
138 We did not ind a single example of complete collations in the articles we examined. To our
knowledge, Brockington has never edited a manuscript. The closest he comes to providing
collations is in Brockington, “A Malayāḷam- Script Rāmāyaṇa Manuscript,” 77– 91, but even
this does not amount to a complete collation. Although he provides a detailed account of
variants for the irst 20 sargas, he then focuses on “major features,” especially additions and
omissions. The following passage is typical: “The Trivandrum manuscript agrees with D1.2
M4 in, for example, omitting—a s well as 9.14ef, 18–1 9, 26, 43, 10.6cd, 21–2 5, 13.25, 18.19cd
(not D2) and 40 (not D2)— 20.23c– 34d, App. I 12.35– 39, 58, 80– 81 and 24.16, in inserting
168*, 203* and 362* (also in B2.4), in reading 620*4 after 632*, in the sequence of stanzas
at 25.4– 14, and in very many common readings elsewhere. It is still more interesting to note
475
APPENDICES 475
the frequency with which it agrees with D1 or D1.2 only against M4. It agrees with D1 only
but not M4 at 17.24b, 451*3, 452*5, the insertion of 469* (also in D5), 489*19– 20 (but
not 37– 40), 508*1 and 570*2; it agrees with D1.2 but not M4 at 281*2, 295*3 (also in D5),
320*3, 14.18c, App. I 12.80, 623*2 and 658*1. These are certainly not enough to indicate a
link between this manuscript and these two of the supposed Western recension manuscripts
to the exclusion of M4, but it does suggest that D1.2 are aligned in some way with this alter-
native Malayāḷam recension of M4 and ms. 14052, which is still more obvious when we note
the common readings, insertions and omissions of these four manuscripts. There are also
traces of links with V1 either of all four manuscripts or of the two Malayāḷam- script ones.”
Ibid., 88– 89.
139 See Brockington, The Sanskrit Epics, 103– 11. He estimates that “the proportion [of formulaic
expressions] for the Mahābhārata is at least as great as in the Rāmāyan ̣a where around one- third
of the ślokas contain signiicant formulaic material.” Ibid., 103.
140 Ibid., 105– 6.
141 An earlier version of this section was presented at the DICSEP 8 conference. This version
beneits from Brockington’s input on this paper.
142 Brockington, “Is the Script Relevant?” 18.
143 The attached note makes this explicit: “the point that script boundaries are less signiicant
than assumed by the editors of the Critical Edition is one that is valid for the Mahābhārata also,
as research being done in Cambridge under John Smith by a former student of mine is
demonstrating by the rather diferent technique of applying cladistics (see Wendy J. Phillips-
Rodriguez, ‘The Evolution of a Sanskrit Epic: Some Genetic Considerations about Scripts’,
in The Evolution of Texts: Confronting Stemmatological and Genetical Methods, ed. C. Macé, P. Baret,
A. Bozzi, L. Cignoni, Linguistica Computazionale 24– 25 (IEPI, Pisa- Roma).” Ibid., 27– 28, n. 4
(italics added).
144 We referred to the diagrams in Wendy Phillips- Rodriguez, C. J. Howe and H. F. Windram,
“Chi- Squares and the Phenomenon of Change of Exemplar in the Dyūtaparvan,”
in Sanskrit Computational Linguistics, ed. Gérard Huet, Amba Kulkarni and Peter Scharf
(Heidelberg: Springer, 2009), 383– 86.
145 Reeve rightly notes that “scholars [who] believe that contamination and interpolation were
so common that stemmatic method seldom or never works […] are biting of the hand that
fed them, because unless one can actually see scribes contaminating and interpolating under
one’s nose it is only by applying stemmatic method that one can detect contamination and
interpolation.” Michael D. Reeve, “Stemmatic Method: ‘Qualcosa che non funziona?’ ” in
The Role of the Book in Medieval Culture: Proceedings of the Oxford International Symposium, September
26– October 1, 1982, ed. P. Ganz, Bibliologia 3 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1986), 65.
146 This is also the opinion of no less an authority than West: “Of the value of other sorting
methods, in particular statistical methods, I remain sceptical. A numerical table of signiicant
agreements between every two manuscripts, as described on p. 38, will provide objective con-
irmation of groupings suggested by casual inspection, and will indicate how clear-c ut they
are (e.g. how much more often GHIKL agree with each other than with other manuscripts);
but simply collecting the evidence, without reducing it to igures, will probably have given
a clear enough picture already. Indeed, where groups of three or more manuscripts are
concerned it will have given a clearer one, for the information that A agrees with B 81 times,
B with C 92 times, and A with C 79 times does not enable us to deduce that ABC all agree
together 73 times, or even once.” West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique, 46.
147 John G. Griith, “A Taxonomic Study of the Manuscript Tradition of Juvenal,” Museum
Helveticum 25, no. 2 (1968): 101– 38.
148 West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique, 46– 47.
149 Griith provides the following, not entirely perspicuous explanation: “A dot is then placed in
each square that corresponds to a coincidence of reading in each pair of mss. The agreement
476
476 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
of an isolated pair is recorded by a single dot in the appropriate square; three dots are needed
for a trio of mss. in agreement, 6 for a quartet, and so on. Obviously an aberration or singu-
larity on the part of an individual ms. has to be neglected, if only because there is nowhere to
register it. (One might in such a case record the agreement of the other 15, but it is doubtful
whether the extra labour would afect the result and isolated eccentricities are more likely to
falsify the picture than to clarify it.) The only critical activity demanded of the recorder is that
he should be alert to exclude from the count any non-s igniicant similarities, such as lines lost
by homoeoteleuton (such as I 87–8 8) or homoearchon (as at II 24– 25). Spelling trivialities are
also inadmissible, as in these details scribes may have unconsciously conformed to ingrained
habit and so not reproduced faithfully what was before them. The recording process is not
however completed by merely illing in the Squares wherever there is agreement between
pairs of mss. and leaving it at that. Thus at V 116, PRA agree in spumat, as is shown by the
three entries in distinctive hachuring (white bands running from ‘North-W est’ to ‘South-
East’) in diagram I below[.] But the agreement of the other 13 in the alternative fumat must
be plotted in too, as has been done in the diagram by a rather diferent hachuring, with the
white bands running from ‘South- West’ to ‘North- East.’ This second operation entails 78
recording acts, in addition to the three already made: in practice no distinction need be made
between the agreement within a small and the agreement within a large group, which in dia-
gram I has only been done for clarity of exposition. Obviously the least tedious distribution
to record is a split of 8 mss. against 8, which requires only 28+28 or 56 recording acts in all.
The maximum number occurs when 14 mss. agree against 2: this works out at 91+1 or 92
in all. Where mss. split into 3 groups, each group is treated separately, as at VI 322. There
AFNPR agree in luctum, LO in frictum and the rest (BGHJKTUVZ) in fructum. This calls for
10+1+36 recording acts, or 47 in all, as is shown in diagram I. Reference to the diagram and
its attendant key should dispel obscurity.” Griith, “A Taxonomic Study of the Manuscript
Tradition of Juvenal,” 120– 22.
150 “This enquiry sets out to see how far an unsophisticated but, I hope, judicious use of
taxonomical methods (4.22 f., below) may lead towards a rational sorting of those mss. which,
being fully collated, represent for this purpose the ‘open’ or ‘horizontally interpolated’ ele-
ment in the tradition.” Ibid., 102.
151 “I now turn to those other mss. which have been collated in suicient detail to make quan-
titative comparison possible. There is an undoubted element of randomness inherent in the
data, in as much as the choice of mss. for collation was made by diferent individuals long
ago, and was, so far as can be seen, largely a haphazard one. Indeed much of the work of
collation was undertaken before many of the possible candidates for scrutiny were known or
even listed. It may well be that the choice was on the whole not a bad one. Whatever its merits
or failings, it is only practical to make the most of the information at present available. Any
improvement to the text of the author will thus be consequential, neither is this an efort to
establish an order of merit of the witnesses being examined. This would be tantamount to
reviving the meaningless concept of a ‘best ms.’ ” Ibid., 112– 13.
152 “What I set out to do is to explore a promising method of achieving a meaningful calibration
of the supericially disparate array of manuscript-c haracteristics in terms of ‘near-n eighbour’
ainity, which is quite another matter. If an arrangement of clusters of mss. can be detected
underneath the confusion of data before us, the path to the next stage of enquiry may be
clearer than it would otherwise be. If the process is properly conducted, it should result in
a scale of such near- neighbour relationships, with the most heavily interpolated documents
coming together at one end of the scale and as far apart from the sincere witnesses as pos-
sible. Clusters with less pronounced characteristics should appear in the middle section of
the line, which can be thought of as similar to a spectrum-l ine in the ield of Physics or
Chemistry.” Ibid., 113.
153 Ibid.
477
APPENDICES 477
154 “From what has just been said, it will be clear that one must cut oneself loose from the
preconceptions and limitations of the conventional family- tree presentation, whose inade-
quacy has become increasingly evident as the intricacies of such open traditions come to be
better understood. A further advantage of the process is that the investigator is entirely igno-
rant of the way the data he is analysing will work out until his counting is completed and he
comes to the inal stage of the resolution of the igures he has arrived at for each section of
the satires.” Ibid.
155 See ibid.: “In the conventional methods of evaluating mss. there is an inherent danger of
circular argument, from which the taxonomic process is free.”
156 “I take the view that the return on the labour of further full-s cale collation is unlikely to be
justiied. The use of reliable sampling techniques to associate promising witnesses, as yet
imperfectly collated or unknown, with well-e stablished taxa is obviously a matter that will
have to be faced at the next stage. It is obviously impracticable to re- calculate similarity-
matrices de novo to take account of new material as it arises; fortunately other techniques
(such as ‘split matching- scores’ and the like) may enable the classiication to be achieved with
an acceptable economy of efort.” Ibid., 132.
157 “So long as one is dealing with compact arrays of data which show characteristics common
to the whole group of specimens being studied, the accepted methods are generally ade-
quate, in biological study as elsewhere. Such systems are now called ‘monothetic’ and their
treatment and interpretation are mostly straightforward. They are obviously analogous to a
‘closed’ textual tradition, in which features such as lacunae of identical extent [are] common
to a whole group of mss. They tell their own story. ‘Polythetic’ systems are another matter.
Here characteristics are not universal to the group under investigation: thus there exist in
nature birds without wings, mammals lacking red corpuscles and countless other ‘untidy’
phenomena to bedevil classiication. Concentration on single characteristics leads nowhere
in such situations, and attention has to be directed to an aggregate of properties. Certainly,
acute observation, aided by luck, may detect some striking features of resemblance, but
discovery of this kind is at best fortuitous and at worst misleading, in that what has been
observed may have come in only at a late stage in the evolutionary process, and so mean
less than it might seem. Obviously, for the taxonomical approach to be valid, a substantial
number of points of similarity between specimens or groups of specimens is essential. There
seems general agreement that a minimum of 40 mutually unrelated elements should be taken
for any single operation, but a igure of the order of 60–7 0 is safer. If therefore in a literary
text a signiicant divergence occurs about once in every 4 or 5 lines, reliable results may be
expected where stretches of not less than 300 lines have been treated; in most of what follows
considerably longer blocks have been used.” Ibid., 114– 15.
158 “One question has been deliberately left undiscussed. Has the taxonomic process efectively
disentangled the underlying relations of the interpolated mss. and penetrated to the pattern
of their ‘genetic histories’ latent beneath the over-b urden of interpolation they now present
to our observation? The degree of regularity of their behaviour as disclosed in this study
makes this at least a tenable supposition. It has been put to me that the position should be
stated more strongly: that it is incumbent on those who are sceptical of the method or of
its results in Juvenal’s case to indicate the kind of explanation which in their view would
cover both the supericial disarray of the data and the underlying regularity revealed by
the analysis, certiied as this is by rigorous and accepted criteria of statistical probability.”
Ibid., 134.
159 Ibid., 119.
160 West, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique, 47.
161 Unlike Griith, who applies a statistical approach only to the manuscripts, Brockington also
applies it to the constituted text of both epics itself. On one hand, he lists interpolations
and “omissions” in manuscripts, and uses this to undermine the critical editions’ claims
478
478 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
to authority. On the other, he lists repeated words or verses in their constituted texts, and
uses this to argue for the works’ oral origins. Pollock notes: “In the most recent discussion
Brockington (1984) stubbornly reairms Jacobi’s view: ‘Far from being a Vaiṣṇava epic,
Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa is no religious epic at all. It is lamentable that misunderstanding of this
point […] should still persist so long after Jacobi’s explicit declaration’ (p. 13). Brockington
employs an elaborate ive- stage scheme of text evolution to demonstrate the developing con-
ception of the hero (from one who is ‘thoroughly human’ to a god, pp. 218–2 5).” Sheldon
I. Pollock, “Introduction,” in The Rāmāyan ̣a of Vālmık̄i: An Epic of Ancient India, ed. Robert
P. Goldman, vol. III: Aran ̣yakān ̣ḍa, trans. Sheldon I. Pollock (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007),
17, n. 21. For Pollock’s rejection of the thesis of a “ ‘heroic epic’ [transformed] according to
a later theological program,” see ibid., 18–1 9. The reference is to John Brockington, Righteous
Rāma: The Evolution of an Epic (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984).
162 Trovato’s judgment is apt and devastating: “More generally, as many of the considerations
discussed above suggest, one gains the clear impression that almost all the debatable elements
discussed so far, and possibly even the search for a computer based alternative, arise from
inadequate knowledge of traditional philological theory and methods.” Trovato, Everything
You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method, 199.
163 For an insight into the sense of humility and service that motivated the Mahābhārata
editors, see Belvalkar, “Introduction [to the Bhīṣmaparvan],” cxxxii (“The edition of the
Bhīṣmaparvan, completed by me after several years’ labour, is now ofered, as a sort of
vāṅmaya- śrāddha, to the revered memory of Ramakrishna Gopal Bhandarkar on the occasion
of his twenty- second death- anniversary. May it be regarded as a tribute worthy of that
great savant, and may it also be, in accordance with BG. 18.70, acceptable to Lord Kṛṣṇa
as a proper iṣtị of the Jñānayayajña that is to redound to His Glory!”) and Sukthankar,
“Introduction,” xxxviii (“If Mahārṣi Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa tells us that he has cried
himself hoarse urging people to follow the Path of Duty: ūrdhvabāhurviraumyeṣa na ca kaś
cicchṛn ̣oti mām | dharmādarthaś ca kāmaśca sa kimarthe na sevyate ||, his shouting with uplifted
arms has not been entirely in vain. He has not failed in his mission. Across the reverber-
ating corridors of Time, we his descendants can still hear dimly his clarion call to Duty.
It is in response to that call and in a spirit of reverent homage to that sage of unfath-
omable wisdom—that embodied Voice of the Collective Unconscious of the Indian
people—[that] we ofer this work, pledged to broadcast to mankind, in this hour of its
need and its peril, the luminous message of the Maharṣi: na jātu kāmānna bhayānna lobhād;
dharme tyajejjıv̄itasyāpi hetoḥ | nityo dharmaḥ sukhaduḥkhe tvanitye; jıv̄o nityo heturasya tvanityaḥ ||”)
(all italics Sukthankar’s). See also V. S. Sukthankar’s statement in “Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, Poona Silver Jubilee Celebrations 4th and 5th of January 1943. Roger
Lumley, N. C. Kelkar, J. R. Gharpure, R. N. Dandekar, C. Kunhan Raja, V. M. Apte,
P. V. Bapat, A. P. Karmarkar, B. R. Kulkarni, H. D. Sankalia, C. R. Sankaran, S. R.
Shende, Ludwik Sternbach,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 24, no. 1/2
(1943): xlvii: “There is a danger that in our pseudo- scientiic mood, we may be tempted to
discard this great book, thinking that we have out- grown it. That would be a capital blunder!
That would in fact mean nothing but an indication of our will to commit suicide, national
suicide, the signal of our national extinction. For never was truer word spoken than when
the late German Indologist Hermann Oldenberg said that ‘in the Mahābhārata breathes the
united soul of India, and the individual souls of her people.’ And why is that? Because the
Mahābhārata is the national saga of India. It is, in other words, the content of our collective
unconscious. And just for that reason it refuses to be discarded. We must therefore grasp this
great book with both hands and face it squarely. Then we shall recognize that it is our past
which has prolonged itself into the present. We are it: I mean the real WE! Shall we be guilty
of strangling our own soul? NEVER!” (italics and capitalization Sukthankar’s). Penned on
January 5, 1943, 16 days before he died, they are the last words Sukthankar wrote.
479
APPENDICES 479
164 P. L. Vaidya, the last general editor, recollects: “The late Dr. Sukthankar, the irst General
Editor, was paid a salary of Rs. 500 per month for a period of nearly 18 years. After his
death in 1943, the Institute found that it could pay to the General Editor not more than Rs.
250 a month. When, therefore, a scholar of the eminence of Dr. Belvalkar, who had held a
post in the Indian Education Service, was appointed General Editor, we could not ofer him
more than Rs. 250 per month as salary. In order to make this paltry sum look digniied, we
started referring to his ‘salary’ as ‘honorarium of Rs. 3,000 per annum.’ Out of his 18 years of
General Editorship, Dr. Belvalkar received this honorarium for 10 years only, and, although
the cost of living was steadily rising all those years, the amount of his honorarium of Rs.
3,000 per annum actually happened to dwindle down to a zero. The Parvan-e ditors were
paid at the rate of Rs. 5/- p er printed page of demi quarto size, no doubt, but this rate, in
my opinion as well as in actual experience, worked out to be not more than one rupee a day.
The departmental staf was paid a salary every month, but, according to Government Audit
Party visiting the Institute annually, it was far below the standard.” “The Completion of the
Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 47,
no. 1/ 4 (1966): iii– iv (italics in original).
165 This also applies to Grünendahl, who, after casting suspicion on Sukthankar in “Zur
Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften,” states that “a more detailed evaluation of
the Nepali manuscripts of the Mahābhārata in general and of the Ādiparvan manuscript Ñ4
in particular must be reserved for a work currently in preparation.” Ibid., 129– 30. Twenty-
ive years later this work is yet to appear (despite being told “the conditions for this [task] are
provided by the work of the Nepal-G erman Manuscript Preservation Project”; ibid., 130). In
fact, the sole collations we possess for this manuscript are Sukthankar’s, provided in 1939 in
Vishnu S. Sukthankar, “Epic Studies VII: The Oldest Extant Ms. of the Ādiparvan,” Annals
of the Bhandarkar Oriental Institute 19 (1938– 39): 201– 62. Grünendahl himself relies on them,
though, like Brockington, he neglects readings for interpolations. Not one Mahābhārata
critic has addressed himself to the task Sukthankar set when he wrote: “In the light of such
variants, some readings of the Critical Edition will have to be reconsidered, and it may, in
sporadic cases, be found necessary even to alter slightly the readings of the Ādiparvan in the
Critical Edition. That work must however be left over now for further research by a future
generation of scholars.” Ibid., 209.
166 To clarify a pervasive misunderstanding, it is not that we think oral transmission is completely
excluded: we think scholars have not made the case for it. Their attempts to reinstate the oral
hypothesis after the critical edition are circular and question-b egging. The orality hypothesis
frequently conceals real deicits in their knowledge of textual criticism, to say nothing of the
fact that they can more easily make claims about a nonexistent text since these claims are,
in a literal sense, unveriiable. As Sullivan observes: “As [Kevin] McGrath writes in his most
recent volume (McGrath 2013: 10), ‘In this book I examine what I envision to be an earlier
and thoroughly heroic status of the poem when it still existed in a preliterate form, examining
the narrative as it concerns Kṛṣṇa as he exists in that hypothetically “earlier” telling.’ In fact,
we do not have such a text, so McGrath is examining the text we have while omitting portions
he chooses to ignore, namely, parts he regards as didactic, concerning ‘ediication’ (McGrath
2004: 5).” Bruce M. Sullivan, “An Overview of Mahābhārata Scholarship: A Perspective on
the State of the Field,” Religion Compass 10, no. 7 (2016): 170.
167 See Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee, The Nay Science: A History of German Indology
(New York: Oxford University Press), 153: “In spite of Fitzgerald’s and McGrath’s eforts,
however, the Holtzmannian Ur- epic remained elusive. As far back as they pushed this ideal
epic— and in his most recent iteration McGrath has advanced a date of the Bronze Age—
they were still unable to ind evidence of it and for the simple reason that its origins lay nei-
ther in the fourth century CE nor in the fourth century BCE nor even in the twelfth century
BCE, but in the nineteenth century CE when the thesis was irst proposed by Lassen. The
480
480 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
idea of an original epic, as we have seen, was a speciically German notion answering to spe-
ciically German needs. German scholars had deployed the idea in pursuit of an ideal of a
heroic Aryan race. It permitted them to make polemical points against Roman Catholicism
as being essentially alien to the spirit of the German people. It permitted them to identify
deining traits of the ‘Indo-G ermanic’ or ‘Aryan’ peoples—n obility, free- spiritedness, suspi-
cion of priestly authority, a warrior culture, and so on—i n contradistinction to the ‘Semitic’
tribes. It permitted them to undertake a sustained critique of non- Germanic cultures as well
as to issue stern warnings of what might befall the German nation if it permitted itself to be
overrun by these cultures. Beyond these ends, the theory of a heroic epic had no relevance to
Mahābhārata criticism.”
168 Leonardi expresses this sense of responsibility well: “The concept of a critical edition [also]
implies a responsibility to propose a text that, while meeting the requirements of science and
elucidating the manuscript tradition, is not merely accessible to specialists, but recovers a
work of the past for a contemporary public to read; one that does not reproduce a document,
but interprets the tradition as a whole as a means to transfer its textual reality into something
that is readable today.” Lino Leonardi, “Il testo come ipotesi (critica del manoscritto- base),”
Medioevo romanzo 35 (2011): 6 (Trovato’s translation). Indology’s greatest law is that it lacks a
similar sense of responsibility, to say nothing of readers to which it could feel responsibility.
169 Friedrich Nietzsche, Twilight of the Idols, trans. Richard Polt (Indianapolis and Cambridge:
Hackett Publishing Company, 1997), 65–66 (italics in original).
481
GLOSSARY
ad fontes. Latin for “[back] to the sources,” the term refers to the belief or the neces-
sity that one must consult the original manuscripts rather than rely on medieval
or Renaissance copies. Generally attributed to Erasmus of Rotterdam (1466–
1536): “Sed in primis ad fontes ipsos properandum, id est graecos et antiquos”
(“Above all, one must hasten to the sources themselves, that is, to the Greeks and
ancients”; De ratione studii ac legendi interpretandique auctores, 1511).
analytic and synthetic. The two main schools of Mahābhārata criticism. The ana-
lytic school holds that the epic is a work of composite origins. Accordingly, the
critic’s task is to distinguish its several sources or layers. In contrast, the synthetic
school holds that the Mahābhārata is a unity, the product of a conscious creation.
The critic’s task thus is to understand the text or the author’s message. Joseph
Dahlmann (1861– 1930) introduced the terms in his Genesis des Mahābhārata (1899).
ancestor. The source from which one or more manuscripts, whether extant or nonex-
tant, were copied; occasionally reserved for lost sources alone.
anti- Brahmanism. The view that the Brahmans seized control of an original Kṣatriya
epic and altered it for apologetic reasons. Anti- Judaic in intent (its origins lie in the
German Protestant suspicion of priestly authority), anti-B rahmanism has been a
central principle of German Mahābhārata criticism, since it “explained” why the
epic, though attributed to a heroic warrior culture, appears as a work of theology,
law and ritual.
apograph. Literally meaning “written or copied from” (from Greek apo- , “from,” and
grapho,̄ “to write”), a copy of a work made from an older exemplar. Contrasted with
the autograph, the work from the author’s hand (or someone he commissioned to
write for him).
apparatus criticus/critical apparatus. A list of variant readings and their manuscript
sources placed beneath the constituted text, the critical apparatus provides the
information required to evaluate the latter (for example, the manuscripts it is based
on and the stage of the tradition it reconstructs). A critical apparatus may some-
times also include other editorial annotations such as the manuscripts available
and their state or peculiarities of the tradition.
arbre réel/complet. French for “real tree,” the real or historical tree that depicts the rela-
tionship of all the exemplars ever produced as it must have existed as opposed to
the stemma codicum, which is reconstructed on the basis of the available information
and is thus always a partial representation of the historical reality.
482
482 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
archetypus/archetype. The latest common ancestor of the manuscripts examined for
an edition. An archetype may be extant or nonextant. In the latter case, it may be
possible to reconstruct it using the available manuscripts.
assimilation/harmonization. The incorporation of passages from a second source
into one’s copy with the intent of achieving greater consistency, assimilation is
responsible for the production of composite manuscripts.
autograph. The authorized, original copy of a work, produced by the author himself or
someone he commissioned to write. Occasionally multiple autographs may exist, if
the author signiicantly revised his work in the time after the irst edition was produced.
banalization. Replacement of a word by a more familiar or easier form.
Bédierism. The view that editors should edit the text of the best manuscript (also called
the bon manuscrit), correcting obvious errors, but otherwise not attempting to restore
an earlier state of the text (for example, through genealogical reconstruction).
Bédierism is directed against Lachmannism with its belief in restoration of the
text of the archetype. The name comes from French critic Joseph Bédier (1864–
1938), who after producing a Lachmannian edition, turned against the method
after he observed that most stemmata had two branches and suspected editors were
attempting to increase the scope for subjective iudicium or subjective choice.
Bipartite (also: biid) stemma. A stemma having two branches. Contrasted with tri-
partite, quadripartite, pentapartite and so on. A bipartite stemma poses problems
for the genealogical- reconstructive method, since no stemmatic justiication exists
for choosing the reading of one branch over the other.
canon. Any collection of authoritative books, usually applied to scripture. From the
Greek kanon, meaning “measuring stick” and hence, by extension, a “rule” or a
“standard.”
closed tradition/recension. A tradition or recension free of contamination in which
no manuscript is copied from more than one source. All variants therefore can be
accounted for within that tradition or recension (that is, as either inherited from an
ancestor or an innovation within the particular exemplar).
codex (pl.: codices). In the ancient Near East and Greece, texts were written on long,
continuous scrolls of paper or parchment. Around the late irst century CE, the
codex, a bound book with cut pages, appeared and largely replaced the scroll by the
fourth century CE. The distinction is irrelevant in the Indian context, as the use of
scrolls died out in the third century CE and all our Mahābhārata manuscripts are
codices (either in book format or the Indian long format known as pothı)̄, written
on palm leaves or birch- bark pages.
codex descriptus (pl.: codices descripti). A codex copied from an extant witness. As the
codex contains additional errors over its source and ofers no new information for
the reconstruction of the archetype, it should be discarded from the stemma.
codex inutilis (pl.: codices inutiles). A codex discarded as of lesser or negligible value
for the reconstruction. Sebastiano Timpanaro introduced the term in his article
“ ‘Recentiores’ e ‘deteriores,’ ‘codices descripti’ e ‘codices inutiles’ ” in 1985. He
distinguished it from the descriptus as follows: “Thus, if a witness that is certainly a
descriptus can contribute to the tradition with a variant acquired by contamination,
483
GLOSSARY 483
it can happen, on the other hand—and it does happen very often—the opposite
case of a witness that is not necessarily a descriptus, which nonetheless does not
contribute any ‘relevant’ reading and this is so not because it is not true or corrupt
but simply because it does not carry any previously unattested reading.”
codex unicus. The sole manuscript of a work in existence at a given moment in time.
The archetype of a tradition reconstructed on the basis of extant manuscripts is
the sole witness for that stage of the tradition, even though it may not have been
the only exemplar in existence at that time.
codicological/ manuscript evidence. Codicology is the study of the physical aspects of
the book (materials, paper, inks, techniques of binding, etc.). Codicological evidence,
sometimes also called manuscript evidence, thus refers to the physical evidence.
collation/collation text. Collation (from the Latin collatio, meaning “to compare”)
refers to the comparison of witnesses. Typically, one manuscript (usually an
authoritative exemplar) is chosen as a reference manuscript (collation text) and the
irst verse of the irst manuscript is compared with its irst verse and so on for the
remaining verses. The procedure is then repeated for the remaining manuscripts.
colophon. Information found at the end of a work, a book (for a work in several
books), a chapter or a section thereof, the colophon provides information on the
title or subject matter, the chapter number or book count and sometimes the scribe
or date and place of production. The following is an example of a Mahābhārata
colophon (from Mahābhārata 1.1): iti śrım̄ ahābhārate ādiparvān ̣i prathamo’dhyāyaḥ || 1
|| samāptamanukraman ̣ıp̄ arva ||.
common- error method. The genealogical-r econstructive method is also called the
common- error method because it is based on the insight that two manuscripts are
related only if they have at least one signiicant error in common. Agreement in
the correct reading or in the truth, in contrast, proves nothing for their relation-
ship because the correct reading could have been passed down to them from any
branch of the tradition, in contrast to the error, which is unique to the family.
composite edition. An edition produced through the combination of readings from
diferent sources. An edition may be accidentally composite, as is the case with
manuscripts copied over time, or intentionally composite, as is the case with the
Lachmannian edition, which is not based on one manuscript but takes the evi-
dence of several representative exemplars into consideration. Nonetheless the
Lachmannian edition is composite to a lesser degree than a historical manuscript,
as it attempts to undo the errors and alterations of centuries and arrive at a text as
close as possible to the author’s hand.
concordance. An index of the initial words or phrases of all the verses of a work,
with a reference permitting the identiication of the location of any verse in the
work. The two main Mahābhārata concordances— Jacobi’s and Sørensen’s—
only permit the tallying of the Bombay and Calcutta editions against each other
(Sørensen’s also against the P. C. Roy translation).
conlation/ hybridization. The combination of readings from two diferent sources,
creating a new reading diferent from either. Conlation is similar to assimilation,
but applied at a more granular level.
484
484 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
conjunctive error/e rrore conjunctivo. A signiicant error shared between two manuscripts,
which serves to establish that the two manuscripts are related. For instance, if both
A and B contain an error that is such that either they or their respective ancestors
could not have made it independently, then either A got it from B or B from A or
both got it from a common source.
constitutio textus/ constituted text. The text the editor reprints as the (hypothetical) text
of the archetype. The constituted text is printed in the main body of the edition,
with variants the editor rejected appearing beneath.
contamination. The inclusion of readings from memory from one source, while
actually copying from a diferent source. Contamination is sometimes used inter-
changeably with conlation, but the former is accidental, whereas the latter implies
a conscious activity (that is, a hermeneutic or critical evaluation of the variants
available to the scribe).
corruption. A change in a manuscript’s reading due either to scribal error or to
contamination. Corruptions are the only truly probative evidence for establishing
iliation. Corruptions may be contrasted with emendations, which are intentional
changes to the text’s reading.
critical text. The reconstructed text based on a systematic evaluation of variants. The
critical text may be based on the best manuscript or manuscripts or undertake a
genealogical reconstruction of the archetype.
critique génétique/g enetic criticism. An approach less interested in the inished, static
work than in the process of evolution (writing, drafting, editing) that precedes
and leads to the inished work. Genetic criticism treats works less as inalized,
bounded units and more as stages of concretion within a dynamic, creative
movement.
crux. From the Latin for “cross,” a crux arises when we have two equally valid alter-
native readings, either of which could be the reading of the source. A crux typ-
ically arises in a bipartite stemma, as it presents no stemmatic way of choosing
between them.
descendant. A manuscript copied from another. It may be possible to establish a
manuscript’s descent using the genealogical- reconstructive method.
deteriores. The inferior manuscripts, contrasted with the meliores.
dittography. Greek for “written twice,” dittography refers to the accidental repetition
of a letter, word or line. The opposite of haplography, in which a semantic unit is
omitted through oversight.
divinatio. A conjectural emendation, usually proposed when none of the available
alternatives makes sense and a third reading both makes sense and explains the
attested readings. Also sometimes used to designate the last stage of producing a
critical edition, when following the recensio and examinatio, the editor attempts to
restore damaged or unattainable parts of the text through emendation.
ecdotics. Sometimes used as a synonym for textual criticism, ecdotics encompasses a
wider ield that includes not just traditional critical editing of texts but all aspects
concerned with the reading, production and transmission of texts (that is, a textual
culture in the widest sense).
485
GLOSSARY 485
editio princeps (pl.: editiones principes). Latin for “irst edition,” editio princeps refers
to the irst printed edition of a text (previous exemplars all being handwritten
manuscripts). The editio princeps of the Mahābhārata is the Calcutta edition the
Education Committee/ Baptist Mission’s Press published in four volumes between
1834 and 1839. Its text is based on Nīlakaṇṭha’s version.
eliminatio. In the attempt to unify the manuscript branches, the elimination of variant
readings (or sometimes of entire manuscripts) is the most important step. Eliminatio
is of two types: eliminatio codicum descriptorum (elimination of derivative manuscripts)
or eliminatio lectionum singularium (elimination of unique readings).
eliminatio codicum descriptorum. This type of eliminatio removes entire manuscripts, the
so- called codices descripti, from the stemma. If a manuscript derives from another
extant manuscript, it contains no information useful for the reconstruction and
hence the editor need not consider it further.
eliminatio lectionum singularium. Since readings shared between independent families of
manuscripts are more likely to preserve the reading of the archetype (unless there was
simultaneous innovation or contamination between the families), readings unique to one
branch of the manuscript tradition (or to one manuscript) can often be assumed to be
corruptions introduced during copying. In reconstructing the archetype, the editor thus
inevitably eliminates these readings in favor of the consensus of independent witnesses.
emendatio ope ingenii and emendatio ope codicum. The two types of emendation practiced,
emendation with the help of native wit and with the help of manuscripts, refer to
the preference for subjective judgment and for the testimony of the manuscripts.
Emendatio ope ingenii is now often disparaged.
emendation. Conscious changes made to the text, either to correct something the
scribe thought incorrect or could not construe or to improve upon the text.
epigraphy. The study of inscriptions, including their writing systems, decipherment
and historical classiication.
errors, innovations or secondary readings. An error in textual criticism does not neces-
sarily refer to a mistake. It simply means a non-o riginal reading. Hence, sometimes
the word innovation or the term secondary reading is preferred. See also: latent error.
exegesis. From the Greek exēgeisthai, meaning “to explain, interpret” and, literally, “to
lead out” (from ex- + hēgeisthai), exegesis is the practice of drawing out the meaning
of the text through careful study.
family. Two or more manuscripts related by descent. The grouping of manuscripts
into families is the irst step in genealogical reconstruction. A family is distin-
guished from a group or manuscripts having similar features that are not related
in a genealogical sense.
iliation. The familial or genealogical relationship between manuscripts or entire
branches of manuscripts, typically illustrated by means of a stemma codicum.
genealogical analysis/ reconstruction. The analysis of the relations of iliation
between manuscripts or groups of manuscripts, typically carried out using the
common- error method.
genealogical- reconstructive method/ edition. Also known as the common-e rror
method and Lachmann’s method, the genealogical- reconstructive method is based
486
486 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
on the insight that two manuscripts must be related if they have one or more signif-
icant errors in common. The presence of such errors can be used to establish the
genealogical relationship between manuscripts, which can be expressed in the form
of a stemma and be used to reconstruct the reading of their common ancestor
(if lost). The genealogical-r econstructive edition, also known as the Lachmannian
edition, is an edition based on the genealogical- reconstructive method.
haplography. The accidental omission of a letter, word or line due to its similarity or
identity with a preceding one. When the haplography involves a larger section of
text, it is common to speak of a saut du même au même.
hermeneutics. Hermeneutics, from the Greek hermeneuein, meaning “to express, to
explain, to translate, to interpret,” signiies the art of interpretation. It designates
the rules and techniques for elucidating the text. Hermeneutics is sometimes
contrasted with exegesis and is understood as establishing or making sense of the
bare meaning of a text.
hiatus. Both Greek and Sanskrit avoid hiatus, a break in a sentence, through
modiications to either the end of the word preceding the hiatus or the beginning
of the word succeeding it (crasis or contraction of two vowels or diphthongs into a
new vowel or diphthong, elision of the initial vowel of the following word, changes
in word order and, in Sanskrit, other types of vocalic changes). Epic Sanskrit is
lexible regarding hiatus, but later scribes appear to have strenuously avoided it.
The critical edition restores many hiatuses.
higher criticism/internal or inner criticism. Sometimes contrasted with lower
criticism, which culminates in the reconstruction of the archetype, higher criticism
attempts to restore still earlier forms of the text using specious criteria such as con-
tent, ideology, assumed form and metrical and stylistic criteria and the like.
historical criticism/historical-critical method. As a historical movement and as a
method, historical criticism is the view that a text can only be understood out of its
historical context. Practically, it expresses itself as a skepticism about texts’ unity
and literary context and their received meaning. Historical criticism seeks to ascer-
tain the realia, the historical and social conditions obtaining at the time of the text’s
composition, which it considers the key to the text’s “true” (that is, literal) meaning.
With its emphasis on the literal and historical dimension, historical criticism sets
forth central principles of Protestant scriptural hermeneutics.
horizontal and vertical transmission. Pasquali introduced the terms in 1952 to distin-
guish a tradition in which readings are transmitted from a source to its descendant
without deviation (vertical transmission) from one in which a witness reproduces
the characteristics of a diferent branch of the stemma, suggesting that some of its
readings are inherited from a manuscript family other than its own (horizontal trans-
mission). A tradition may comprise a mixture of vertical and horizontal transmission.
hyparchetype. A hyparchetype or a sub- archetype is a source in the stemma, either
extant or nonextant, from which a family of manuscripts is descended. In the
latter case, it may be possible to reconstruct it. Hyparchetypes may be represented
as intermediary nodes in the stemma (occurring beneath the archetype, which
occupies the stemma’s vertex) from which lines branch.
487
GLOSSARY 487
indicative error (see: signiicant error).
interpolation. Verses or passages inserted into a manuscript, either from another
source or possibly composed by the scribe, thus altering the original text.
Interpolations can only be securely detected through the comparison of man-
uscript exemplars.
Lachmann’s method/Lachmannism/Lachmannian edition. Widely attributed to
Lachmann, though he had several important predecessors and was inconsis-
tent in applying the method, Lachmann’s method reconstructs the reading of
the hypothetical archetype, using the common errors between manuscripts to
establish their genealogical relationships or iliation. Lachmannism endeavors
to reconstruct a presumed historical archetype and is opposed to Bédierism,
which rejects this possibility. The Lachmannian edition is also known as the
genealogical- reconstructive edition and is a composite edition based on the
consensus of independent manuscripts or witnesses.
lacuna (pl.: lacunae). Physical damage to a manuscript caused by careless handling,
improper storage, weathering or vermin that has left a gap or a fragment missing
in the text.
latent error. A latent error is a reading whose non-o riginal nature is not immediately
apparent due to its unexceptionable character. A latent error can only be identiied
using the stemmatic method. It is contrasted with the manifest error, which reveals
itself as a mistake on reading.
layers/strata. Associated more with biblical than with textual criticism, the term refers
to materials of difering antiquity and origin found within the same text. Layers
are typically identiied using internal criteria and stylistic or linguistic changes to
the text in conjunction with what is known about the historical conditions at the
time, but often face the charge of circularity.
lectio brahmanica and lectio heroica. The Brahmanic reading and the heroic reading.
Not terms in textual criticism, but useful to understand the Indologists’ work. For
almost all Indologists, a good reading is identical with the lectio heroica (regardless of
its attestation or state of preservation) and their philology consists of a single prin-
ciple: lectio heroicior praeferenda est (the more heroic reading is preferable). By contrast,
the lectio brahmanica must be discarded as by deinition a corruption (and between two
competing versions, the lectio brahmanicior, the more Brahmanic version, must be
discarded).
lectio brevior/ brevis potior. The principle, associated with J. J. Wettstein (1693–1 754),
that when two versions of a text or a passage are found, the shorter one is prefer-
able. The underlying idea is that ancient scribes are more likely to add details (by
making implicit ideas explicit, by adding glosses or additional lines or, when faced
with alternate versions, including both in order to preserve the putative original)
than to omit them. Given this determination to transmit the text intact, texts tend
to expand over time. The editor interested in restoring the original will thus regard
the longer version with justiied skepticism.
lectio diicilior probabilior/p raeferenda est. The principle, irst articulated by Jean Le Clerc
(1657– 1736), that of two readings, the more diicult or the more obscure one is
488
488 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
likely the original. The principle is the inverse of the well- known phenomenon
of banalization, that is, that a scribe was more likely to replace a more diicult
reading, either consciously or unconsciously, with an easier one.
lectio facilior/ clarior (pl.: lectiones faciliores). The lectio facilior is the simpler reading (com-
pare banalization) and is therefore most often rejected for the lectio diicilior in
reconstructing the reading of the ancestor or archetype.
lectio singularis (pl.: lectiones singulares). Literally, “singular reading.” The lectio singularis is
a unique reading found in a single witness, that is to say, a reading lacking support
from the other witnesses. It is therefore usually assumed to be the result of scribal
error and hence can be eliminated. Sometimes, however, the lectio singularis can be
the correct reading, especially if the manuscript containing it represents an inde-
pendent branch of the tradition and all the other witnesses innovated.
lower criticism. Sometimes encountered as a synonym for textual criticism, lower criti-
cism is contrasted with higher criticism.
meliores. The better manuscripts, the term referring to the quality of the text found in
the manuscripts and not their physical condition.
negative apparatus. An apparatus that only lists the manuscripts that contain readings
difering from the constituted text and not the manuscripts on which the consti-
tuted text is based. A negative apparatus is less useful than a positive apparatus. In
the latter, the manuscripts on which the constituted text is based are typically listed
to the left and followed by a single square bracket (]) and thereafter by the other
manuscripts with their respective variants. The Mahābhārata critical edition has
a negative apparatus.
Neo-Lachmannism/trans-Lachmannism/Italian school. A perspective associated
with Giorgio Pasquali (1885–1 952), though others such as Cesare Segre, Michel
Barbi, Gianfranco Contini and Silvio Avalle also made important contributions.
Neo- Lachmannism refers to a Lachmannian approach tempered with investigations
into the history of the text, that is to say, it attempts to undergird the abstract and
mathematical nature of Lachmannian reconstruction with positive knowledge of
the text, its transmission and the scribes’ practices. Sometimes also referred to as
the Italian school in view of Italian scholars’ signiicant theoretical contributions.
open tradition/recension. A tradition or recension in which some exemplars in the
stemma have lines converging on them, so called because there has been contami-
nation from exemplars outside of the tradition or recension modeled in the stemma.
original. The text of the author’s hand or the text as authorized for publication by the
author, the originals of ancient texts have not been preserved in all but a handful
of cases. What we have in some cases are the archetypes, later exemplars from
which all extant manuscripts are descended. Very rarely is the original identical
with the archetype.
paleography. The study of ancient writing, including its development from one script
to another. Paleography sometimes overlaps with epigraphy, the study of ancient
inscriptions, though it actually refers only to the writing system.
palimpsest. From Greek palimpsēstos, meaning “scraped again,” a palimpsest is
a manuscript that has been reused after erasing the original text. The original text
489
GLOSSARY 489
may sometimes be detectable, especially using infrared or ultraviolet photography,
leading to the wider use of the term for something that has been altered and still
bears traces of that alteration.
polygenesis of errors. If an error is found in two branches of the tradition neither
having gotten it from the other or from a common ancestor, it is common to
speak of polygenesis or the development from more than one source of the error.
Polygenesis is typically restricted to common orthographic confusions or other
kinds of errors two scribes could have committed independently.
recensio/ systematic recension. From Latin recenseo, meaning “to examine, review, or
survey.” A systematic recensio is a comprehensive survey of the available manuscripts
of a work conducted prior to creating an edition. Occasionally, recensio is distin-
guished from examinatio, even though it also entails an evaluation of manuscripts.
recension. A recension strictly refers to an editorial revision of a text, but it is more
widely applied to signiicantly diferent versions of a work. Recensions of a work
may arise due to conscious changes to the source, but they may also be the product
of the reinforcement of scribal corruption, emendation, interpolation and even
conlation over centuries or millennia.
recentiores. The newer manuscripts, typically applied to Latin and Greek manuscripts
from the mid- twelfth century onward.
redactor. From Latin redigere, meaning “to edit,” a redactor is someone who edits,
arranges and otherwise revises existing materials into a new literary composition.
saut du même au même. French for “leap from the same to the same,” saut du même au même
refers to a copyist’s accidental skipping of a line. Its occurrence is facilitated by
verbal similarities at the beginning or the end of the line (known as homoearchon
and homoeoteleuton, respectively).
Schichtanalyse/ Textenschichtung. The analysis or separation of a work into its presumed
constituent layers or texts. Favored by German Indologists, these terms ind no
mention in handbooks of textual criticism.
Schriftartprämisse. The mistaken view that the Mahābhārata manuscripts were
classiied by script.
scripts. The writing system employed for a work, the script is a system of marks or
signs and therefore distinct from the text.
separative error/ errore separativo. A term introduced by Paul Maas (1880–1 964), the
separative error (German: Trennfehler) is a signiicant error that serves to establish
that one manuscript is not the source of another. For instance, if A has a signii-
cant error not found in B, then A cannot be the source of B (presuming the error
is not such as could have been corrected by a scribe through conjecture), though B
might still be the source of A (to exclude this latter possibility, we must identify a
separative error of B versus A).
signiicant error/ errore signiicativo. The concept of a signiicant error (also known as
the indicative error) refers to the fact that, in order to establish iliation using the
common- error method, the errors under consideration cannot be simple spelling
mistakes or orthographic confusions (that either scribe could commit indepen-
dently) or be attributable to regional and idiomatic variations. In other words, the
490
490 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
errors must be such as to indicate that one exemplar is the source of the other’s
error or that the manuscripts in question must have had a common source to
which they all owe the error.
simultaneous innovation. Also referred to as polygenesis of errors, simultaneous
innovation refers to the circumstance that two manuscripts may feature the same
corruption, especially if it is a trivial one, without one having gotten it from the
other or both having gotten it from a common ancestor.
source. The exemplar from which another manuscript was copied (compare German
Vorlage).
stemma codicum (pl.: stemmata codicum). The genealogical tree of manuscript
relationships established on the basis of the signiicant errors shared between
manuscripts, a stemma codicum may be either implicit or explicit (that is, drawn up
or represented as a graphic) and includes extant witnesses, as well as hypothetical
ancestors.
text transmission. The descent of the text from one or more exemplars, usually
established through genealogical analysis of manuscripts in cases where external
testimony is unavailable.
textual criticism. The two- stage process of a systematic recensio followed by a gene-
alogical analysis of manuscripts. Sometimes applied to the methods of biblical
criticism, but should be restricted to the production of a critical text, either of the
hypothetical archetype or of the best surviving witness, after a careful study of the
available variants alone.
textual history. Also history of the text, the practice of determining the text’s genesis
and transmission and the circumstances surrounding its reproduction. Should not
be confused with Textgeschichte in German Mahābhārata studies, which refers to
an a priori history based on neither positive historical evidence nor stemmatic
reconstruction.
textus receptus. Latin for “received text.” The textus receptus of the New Testament
is either the 1633 edition of Elzevir or the 1550 edition of Robert Stephanus.
More generally, the term can be used to refer to the traditional text, as received or
handed down within a particular community.
usus auctoris/ usus scribendi. The author’s or scribe’s habitual style, the distinction
between the two is not hard and fast.
varia lectio (pl.: variae lectiones). Literally, “variant reading.” An alternate wording of a
passage or word in one manuscript in another manuscript of the same work.
variantistica. The study of the author’s variants or versions of a text as an end in
itself, an intellectual enterprise revealing much about the author, his work and the
creation of texts, rather than as a problem to overcome in the attempt to recon-
struct the archetype.
variation place. It is sometimes helpful to distinguish a variation place, a passage or
unit of the text in which a variant can occur, from the actual variants themselves.
vetusti. The old manuscripts of a work.
vetustissimi. The oldest manuscripts of a work.
491
GLOSSARY 491
vulgate/ vulgata. The term for any successful edition of a text (from editio vulgata).
Accordingly, there may be several vulgatae of a work. For the Bible, the vulgate
is the version of the Latin Bible the medieval Church recognized as the “vetus
et vulgata editio” (the “old and popular edition”). The vulgate version of the
Mahābhārata is Nīlakaṇṭha’s late seventeenth- century edition. The attribution
is Sukthankar’s.
witness. Extant manuscripts of a work, so called because they witness or attest to that
work. Sometimes also called surviving manuscripts.
492
493
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
This bibliography includes the works cited in this book and additional sources that provide an
overview of the main currents in Mahābhārata scholarship. It is not intended as a comprehensive
overview of literature on the Mahābhārata. The background of Mahābhārata studies is covered in
our book The Nay Science, while the bibliographies in Argument and Design ofer a better overview of
literary and philosophical approaches. The focus in this bibliography is, rather, on Mahābhārata
textual criticism, supplemented with information about the main debates in Mahābhārata schol-
arship and suggestions for further study. Additionally, introductions and theoretical overviews of
textual criticism are included, especially those from the Italian school, as the most germane for
Mahābhārata textual criticism.
The Mahābhārata Critical Edition
The full titles of the Mahābhārata critical edition volumes are clariied in Appendix 1. The
volumes, however, are almost never cited like this. The shorter forms that have become scholarly
convention and that are adopted in this book are listed in this section. Also included here is the
edition’s predecessor, N. B. Utgikar’s critical edition of the Virāṭaparvan.
Belvalkar, S. K., ed. The As̄ramavāsikaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1959.1
— — — . The Bhıṣ̄maparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, 1947.
— — — . The Mahāprasthānikaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1959.
— — — . The Mausalaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, 1959.
— — — . The Śāntiparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. 4 vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1954– 61.
— — — . The Śāntiparvan, Part III: Mokṣadharma, B, For the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1954.
— — — . The Svargārohan ̣aparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1959.
Dandekar, R. N., ed. The Anuśāsanaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. 2 vols. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1966.
— — — . The Śalyaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, 1961.
De, S. K., ed. The Dron ̣aparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. 2 vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1958.
— — — . The Udyogaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, 1940.
Edgerton, Franklin, ed. The Sabhāparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1944.
Karmarkar, R. D., ed. The As̄́vamedhikaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1960.
494
494 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Paranjpe, V. G., ed. The Strıp̄arvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1956.
Sukthankar, V. S., ed. The Ad̄ iparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. 2 vols. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1933.
— — — . The Ar̄an ̣yakaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. 2 vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1942.
Utgikar, N. B., ed. The Virātạ parvan of the Mahābhārata Edited from Original Manuscripts as a Tentative
Work with Critical and Explanatory Notes and an Introduction. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, 1923.
Vaidya, P. L., ed. The Harivaṃśa for the First Time Critically Edited. 2 vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1969– 71.
— — — . The Karn ̣aparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, 1954.
— — — . The Pratık̄a- Index of the Mahābhārata. 6 vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute,
1967– 72.
Velankar, H. D., ed. The Sauptikaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1948.
Vira, Raghu, ed. The Virātạ parvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1936.
Editors’ Introductions from the Mahā bhārata Critical Edition
The editorial introductions to the respective volumes of the critical edition remain the best source
of information about it. The most important introductions from the perspective of textual criticism
are Sukthankar’s “Prolegomena” (the introduction to the Ādiparvan), his “Introduction” (to the
Āraṇyakaparvan) and Edgerton’s “Introduction” (to the Sabhāparvan). Sukthankar’s “Foreword”
(to the irst fascicule of the Ādiparvan) and the series of “Editorial Notes” (written for succeeding
fascicules) ofer a glimpse into his evolving understanding of the Mahābhārata tradition. Most of
their information was absorbed into the “Prolegomena,” which replaced them from the seventh
and inal fascicule onward.
Belvalkar, S. K. “Introduction.” In The As̄́ramavāsikaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. i– xlviii.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1959.
— — — . “Introduction.” In The Bhıṣ̄maparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. ix– cxxxii.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1947.
— — — . “Introduction.” In The Mahāprasthānikaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. ix– xxvi.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1959.
— — — . “Introduction.” In The Mausalaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. ix– xxxv.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1959.
— — — . “Introduction.” In The Svargārohan ̣aparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. ix– xxxi.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1959.
— — — . The Śāntiparvan: Introduction. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1966.2
Dandekar, R. N. “Introduction.” In The Anuśāsanaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Vol. 1.
ix– lxxxv. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1966.
— — — . “Introduction.” In The Śalyaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. ix– lvi. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1961.
De, S. K. “Introduction.” In The Dron ̣aparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Vol. 1. i– xxxii.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1958.
— — — . “Introduction.” In The Udyogaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. i– xlix.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1940.
Edgerton, Franklin. “Introduction.” In The Sabhāparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. ix– l.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1944.
495
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 495
Karmarkar, R. D. “Introduction.” In The As̄́vamedhikaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. ix– xlvi.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1960.
Paranjpe, V. G. “Introduction.” In The Strıp̄arvan for the First Time Critically Edited. vii– xxiv.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1956.
Sukthankar, V. S. “Editorial Note.” In The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited,
Ad̄ iparvan: Fascicule 2. i. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1928.
— — — . “Editorial Note (2).” In The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, Ad̄ iparvan: Fascicule
3. i– iii. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1929.
— — — . “Editorial Note (3).” In The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, Ad̄ iparvan: Fascicule
4. i– iv. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1930.
— — — . “Editorial Note (4).” In The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, Ad̄ iparvan: Fascicule
5. i– iii. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1931.
— — — . “Foreword.” In The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, Ad̄ iparvan: Fascicule 1. i– ix.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1927.
— — — . “Introduction.” In The Ar̄an ̣yakaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Vol. 1. i– xxxviii.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1942.
— — — . “Prolegomena.” In The Ad̄ iparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. Vol. 1. i–c x.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1933.
Utgikar, N. B. “Introduction.” In The Virātạ parvan of the Mahābhārata Edited from Original Manuscripts
as a Tentative Work with Critical and Explanatory Notes and an Introduction. i– lii. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1923.
Vaidya, P. L. “Introduction.” In The Harivaṃśa for the First Time Critically Edited. Vol. 1. ix–l .
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1969.
— — — . “Introduction.” In The Karn ̣aparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. ix– xlii.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1954.
Velankar, H. D. “Introduction.” In The Sauptikaparvan for the First Time Critically Edited. ix– xxxiv.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1948.
Vira, Raghu. “Introduction.” In The Virātạ parvan for the First Time Critically Edited. i– xxvii.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1936.
Reviews of the Mahābhārata Critical Edition
No attempt has been made to collect all the reviews of the Mahābhārata critical edition, but the
list that follows is fairly representative. The most important reviewer of the edition was Franklin
Edgerton: in a series of reviews published in the Journal of the American Oriental Society, Edgerton
expressed his keen understanding of the principles behind the edition. Lüders and Winternitz also
wrote early and detailed reviews. Also included here are reviews and discussions of the tentative
critical edition of the Virāṭaparvan under N. B. Utgikar’s leadership and P. P. S. Sastri’s southern
recension. Lévi’s 1929 review is notable for his suggestion that Sukthankar abandon the attempt
to reconstruct the archetype in favor of reprinting the text of the vulgate with an apparatus of
variants (see the introduction). Of the reviews we examined, the majority were positive. The few
longer, negative articles are listed under “German Scholarship/ Errors in Textual Criticism” in
light of their frequent misunderstandings of the critical edition.
Agrawala, V. S. Review of The Mahābhārata: Drona- Parvan, Parts I, 2, 3A, 3B, by S. K. De. Journal of
the American Oriental Society 82, no. 2 (1962): 231– 32.
Barnett, L. D. Review of The Mahābhārata: For the First Time Critically Edited by V. S. Sukthankar,
Fascicules 1 and 2. Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies 5, no. 2 (1929): 379– 80.
— — — . Review of The Virat̄ạ parvan of the Mahab̄ har̄ata, by Narayan Bapuji Utgikar; Shrimant Balasaheb
Pant Pratinidhi. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland no. 2 (1924): 293–9 5.
— — — . Review of The Virātạ parvan of the Mahābhārata. Edited from original manuscripts by
Narayan Bapuji Utgikar. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 56, no. 2 (1924): 293– 95.
496
496 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Belloni Filippi, F. “The Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata.” East and West 5, no. 4 (1955):
265– 70.
Belvalkar, S. K. “Publication of Fascicule 22 of the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata.” Annals
of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 32, no. 1/ 4 (1951): 340– 43.
Burrow, T. Review of The Ar̄an ̣yakaparvan (Part 2). For the First Time Critically Edited by Vishnu
S. Sukthankar. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 78, no. 1– 2 (1946): 111– 12.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata. For the First Time Critically Edited by Vishnu S. Sukthankar and S. K.
Belvalkar, vols. VII, X, XIII, XIV, XV. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 84, no. 3– 4 (1952): 165.
Dewhurst, R. P. Review of The Mahābhārata, Ad̄ iparvan, Fascicule 6, edited by Vishnu S. Sukthankar.
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 65, no. 2 (1933): 443– 44.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata. For the First Time Critically Edited by Vishnu S. Sukthankar,
Ādiparvan fascicules 1– 4. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 63, no. 2 (1928): 465– 66.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata. For the First Time Critically Edited by Vishnu S. Sukthankar, Fascicule
5. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 64, no. 3 (1932): 668– 69.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata (Southern Recension). Vol. I: Ad̄ i Parva, Part I, by P. P. S. Śastri. Journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 64, no. 2 (1932): 446– 47.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata (Southern Recension). Vol. III: Sabhā Parvan by P. P. S. Śastri. Journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 65, no. 1 (1933): 142.
Dikshitar, V. R. R. Review of The Maha ̄bha ̄rata, Vol. I, Parts 1 & 2, Critically Edited by P. P. S. Sastri.
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 13, no. 2 (1931–32): 192.
Edgerton, Franklin. “A Critically Edited Text of Nala, 1–5 .” Journal of the American Oriental Society
62, no. 3 (1942): 198– 200.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, by V. S. Sukthankar.
Ādiparvan: Fascicules 2 and 3. Journal of the American Oriental Society 49 (1929): 282– 84.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, by V. S. Sukthankar.
Ādiparvan: Fascicule 5. Journal of the American Oriental Society 52, no. 3 (1932): 252– 54.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, by V. S. Sukthankar.
Ādiparvan: Fascicule 7. Journal of the American Oriental Society 56, no. 3 (1936): 360– 62.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, by V. S. Sukthankar. Text of
1.1.1 to 1.2.233. Journal of the American Oriental Society 48 (1928): 186– 90.
Emeneau, M. B. Review of The Mahābhārata. Vol. 2. The Sabhāparvan by Vishnu S. Sukthankar; S. K.
Belvalkar; Franklin Edgerton. Journal of the American Oriental Society 66, no. 3 (1946): 267– 69.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata. Vol. 5. The Virātạ parvan by Vishnu S. Sukthankar; Raghu Vira;
The Mahābhārata. Vol. 6. The Udyogaparvan by Vishnu S. Sukthankar; Sushil Kumar De. Journal
of the American Oriental Society 62, no. 3 (1942): 205– 6.
Gurner, Walter. Review of The Mahābhārata. Vol. XV: Śāntiparvan by S. K. Belvalkar; The
Mahābhārata. Vols. VIII and IX: Droṇaparvan by S. K. De; The Mahābhārata. Vol. X:
Karṇaparvan by P. L. Vaidya. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 88,
no. 1/ 2 (1956): 108– 9.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata by V. S. Sukthankar and S. K. Belvalkar. Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 90, no. 3/ 4 (1958): 211– 12.
Hopkins, E. Washburn. Review of The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, by V. S.
Sukthankar. Ādiparvan: Fascicule 4. Journal of the American Oriental Society 51, no. 2 (1931): 179–8 0.
Johnston, E. H. Review of The Mahābhārata. Vol. V. The Virātạ parvan. Critically edited by Raghu
Vira. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 70, no. 4 (1938): 588– 89.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata. Vol. 1. The Ad̄ iparvan. Critically edited by Vishnu S. Sukthankar.
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 68, no. 2 (1936): 317– 22.
Lévi, Sylvain. Review of The Mahābhārata. For the First Time Critically Edited, by Vishnu S. Sukthankar.
Journal Asiatique 215 (1929): 345– 48.
— — — . Review of The Mahābhārata. For the First Time Critically Edited, by Vishnu S. Sukthankar.
Journal Asiatique 225 (1929): 281– 83.
497
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 497
Lüders, Heinrich. Review of The Mahābhārata for the First Time Critically Edited, by Vishnu
S. Sukthankar. Deutsche Literaturzeitung 24 (1929): 1137– 146.
Pisani, Vittore. “A Note on Anuśānaparvan.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 48/ 49,
Golden Jubilee Volume 1917– 67 (1968): 59– 62.
Thomas, E. J. Review of The Sabhaparvan, by Franklin Edgerton. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and
African Studies 12, no. 2 (1948): 458– 59.
Weller, Hermann. “Zum zweiten Heft der neuen Mahābhārata Ausgabe.” Zeitschrift für Indologie und
Iranistik 7 (1929): 91– 95.
— — — . “Zum 7. Heft der neuen Mahābhārata- Ausgabe.” Zeitschrift für Indologie und Iranistik 10
(1935– 36): 116– 20.
Winternitz, Moriz. “The Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata: Ādiparvan.” Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Institute 15, nos. 3– 4 (1934): 159– 75.
— — — . Review of The Virātạ parvan of the Mahābhārata Edited from Original Manuscripts as a Tentative
Work with Critical and Explanatory Notes and an Introduction, by N. B. Utgikar. Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 5, no. 1 (1923– 24): 19– 30.
Yarrow, Andrew H. Review of The Mahābhārata. Vol. 7. The Bhīṣmaparvan by Vishnu S. Sukthankar;
S. K. Belvalkar; Shripad Krishna Belvalkar. Journal of the American Oriental Society 70, no. 4
(1950): 317– 20.
Editions Other than the Critical Edition
The editions listed here were described in Appendix 2 and therefore are not discussed here again.
The critical edition will be the standard edition for the foreseeable future, but readers should not
neglect the vulgate and other regional editions of the Mahābhārata, where available in print. In
many cases, they remain the best guides to the archetypal text, exceeding in value most of the
scholarly and “scientiic” literature composed about the epic.
Ainapure, Vasudev Balacharya, ed. The Mahābhārata with the Commentary Bhāvadıp̄a of Nıl̄akan ̣tḥ a.
6 vols. Bombay: Gopal Narayan & Company, 1901.
Khadilkar, Atmaram, ed. Mahābhārata with Nıl̄akan ̣tḥ a’s Commentary. Bombay: Ganpat Krishnaji’s
Press, 1863.
Kinjawadekar, Ramachandra, ed. Mahābhāratam with the Commentary of Nıl̄akan ̣tḥ a. 6 vols. Pune:
Chitrashala Press, 1929– 36.
Krishnacharya, T. R., ed. A Descriptive Contents of Sriman Mahabharatam. Kumbakonam: Madhva
Vilas Book Depot, 1912.
Krishnacharya, T. R., and T. R. Vyasacharya, eds. Sriman Mahabharatam. A New Edition Mainly Based
on the South Indian Texts with Footnotes and Readings. 19 vols. Bombay: Javaji Dadaji’s “Nirṇaya-
Sāgar” Press, 1906– 14.
The Mahábhárata, an Epic Poem Written by the Celebrated Veda Vyása Rishi. 4 vols. Calcutta: Education
Committee’s Press/ Baptist Mission Press, 1834– 39.
Pandit Ramanarayanadatta Sastri Pandey, ed. Śrım̄ anmaharṣi Vedavyāsapran ̣ıt̄a Mahābhārata. 7 vols.
(including Harivaṃśa). Gorakhpur: Gita Press, no date.
Sastri, P. P. S., ed. The Mahābhārata (Southern Recension) Critically Edited by P. P. S. Sastri. Madras:
Ramaswamy Sastrulu & Sons, Madras, 1931– 33.
Translations (Including Reviews) of the Critical Edition or the Vulgate
With the exception of the abridged translation of the Mahābhārata into French, the translations
listed here were described in Appendix 3 and therefore are not discussed here again. With the excep-
tion of Biardeau’s and Péterfalvi’s editions, cited for their valuable commentaries, abridgements
(such as John D. Smith’s) are not listed here.
498
498 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Aklujkar, Ashok. Review of The Mahabharata. I. The Book of the Beginning, by J. A. B. van Buitenen.
Paciic Afairs 48, no. 1 (1975): 133– 34.
Biardeau, Madeleine. Le Mahābhārata. Extraits traduits du sanscrit. Vol. I: Livres I à V. Vol. II: Livres VI à
XVIII. Translated by J.- M. Péterfalvi. Introduction, commentaries, summaries and glossary by
M. Biardeau. Paris: Flammarion, 1985– 86.
— — — . Le Mahābhārata: Un récit fondateur du brahmanisme et son interpretation. 2 vols. Paris: Éditions du
Seuil, 2002.
Bisschop, Peter. Review of Mahābhārata. Book Two. The Great Hall by Paul Wilmot; Mahābhārata. Book
Three. The Forest. Volume Four by William J. Johnson; Mahābhārata. Book Nine. Śalya. Volume One by
Justin Meiland. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 159, no. 1 (2009): 239– 41.
Bodewitz, H. Review of Le Mahābhārata. Livres I à V. Livres VI à XVIII. Extraits traduits du sanscrit par
Jean- Michel Péterfalvi. Commentaires, résumé et glossaire par Madeleine Biardeau, by J.-M . Péterfalvi,
M. Biardeau. Anthropologica xxix (1987): 167– 68.
Bolle, Kees W. Review of The Mahābhārata, Book 1: The Book of the Beginning, by J. A. B. van Buitenen.
Journal of the American Academy of Religion 43, no. 3 (1975): 617.
Van Buitenen, J. A. B., trans. The Mah ābh ārata. 3 vols. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1973– 78.
Debroy, Bibek, trans. The Mahābhārata. 10 vols. New Delhi: Penguin Books India, 2010– 14.
Dutt, Manmatha Nath, trans. A Prose English Translation of the Mahabharata (Translated Literally from the
Original Sanskrit Text). 8 vols. Calcutta: Elysium Press, 1895– 1905.
Fitzgerald, James L., ed. and trans. The Mahābhārata. Vol. 7:11. The Book of the Women, 12. The Book
of Peace, Part One. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
Ganguli, Kisari Mohan, trans. The Mahābhārata of Krishna-D waipayana Vyasa Translated into English
Prose. 11 vols. Calcutta: Bharata Press, 1884– 96.
Goldman, Robert. “India’s Great War.” Review of The Mahabharata. Book I. The Book of the Beginning,
by J. A. B. van Buitenen. The Journal of Asian Studies 35, no. 3 (1976): 463– 70.
Hazlehurst, Leighton. Review of The Mahābhārata: Book 1, the Book of the Beginning, by J. A. B. van
Buitenen. Ethnohistory 21, no. 2 (1974): 181– 83.
Hiltebeitel, Alf. “On Reading van Buitenen’s Vyāsa.” Review of The Mahābhārata. Vol. 1: The Book
of the Beginning, by J. A. B. van Buitenen. History of Religions 14, no. 3 (1975): 230– 32.
— — — . “On Reading Fitzgerald’s Vyāsa.” Review of The Mahābhārata. Vol. 7: 11, the Book of the
Women; 12, the Book of Peace, Part One, by James L. Fitzgerald. Journal of the American Oriental Society
125, no. 2 (2005): 241– 61.
Hudson, Dennis. Review of The Mahābhārata, by J. A. B. van Buitenen. Journal of the American
Academy of Religion 46, no. 3 (1978): 387– 88.
Lal, Purushottam, trans. The Mahābhārata of Vyāsa: Transcreated from Sanskrit. 18 vols. Calcutta: Writers
Workshop, 1968– 2008.
Maha Bhárata. 15 vols. Clay Sanskrit Library. New York: New York University Press and the JJC
Foundation, 2005– 9.
Mehta, Mahesh. Review of The Mahābhārata. VII: The Astika Parva in the Adi Parva, by P. Lal. Books
Abroad 45, no. 1 (1971): 183.
Olson, Carl. Review of The Mahābhārata. Book 11: The Book of the Women; The Mahābhārata. Book
12: The Book of Peace, Part One, by James L. Fitzgerald. International Journal of Hindu Studies 10,
no. 1 (2006): 109– 10.
Regier, Willis G. Review of The Mahābhārata, Volume 7, by James L. Fitzgerald. MLN 119, no. 5,
Comparative Literature Issue (2004): 1103– 06.
Rocher, Ludo. Review of The Mahābhārata by J. A. B. van Buitenen. Journal of the American Oriental
Society 98, no. 2 (1978): 193– 94.
Smith, John D. Review of The Mahābhārata: 11, The Book of the Women; 12, The Book of Peace, Part
One, ed. and trans. James L. Fitzgerald. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 68, no. 1
(2005): 131– 33.
499
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 499
Von Simson, Georg. Review of Mahābhārata. Book Four. Virātạ , trans. Kathleen Garbutt; Mahābhārata.
Book Seven. Dron ̣a. Volume One, ed. and trans. Vaughan Pilikian; Mahābhārata. Book Eight. Karn ̣a.
Volume One, trans. Adam Bowles. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 159, no. 2
(2009): 481– 89.
Problems in Mahābhārata Textual Criticism
Lüders and Winternitz were the earliest and most acute observers of the Mahābhārata tradi-
tion (see the section “Background of the Mahābhārata Critical Edition; Biographic Sources”
for additional writings). The main persons to address problems in Mahābhārata textual criti-
cism thereafter were the editors of the critical edition. Sukthankar produced eight important
studies titled “Epic Studies” (I–I V and VI– VII are listed here; V is listed under “Mahābhārata
Commentators, Commentators’ Editions, and Chronological Surveys” and VIII under “Textual
Traditions and Editions of Texts Other than the Mahābhārata”; all eight are reprinted in the
irst volume of the Sukthankar Memorial Edition). Edgerton planned to write a series of articles titled
“Epic Studies: Second Series” in homage to Sukthankar, but we could locate only the irst. Some
of the most important articles thereafter concerned the Parvasaṃgraha igures, Sukthankar having
already discussed the argument from them in 1933 and 1939. Also included here are Mahesh
Mehta’s and M. A. Mehendale’s articles, as examples of the kind of higher critical ideas frequently
projected onto the Mahābhārata critical edition.
Belvalkar, S. K. “The Interpretation of the Parvasaṃgraha Figures.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 27, no. 3/ 4 (1946): 303– 9.
— — — . “The Mahābhārata Text- Transmission Problems: Problem No. 4.” Journal of the American
Oriental Society 72, no. 1 (1952): 34– 37.
— — — . “Some Interesting Problems in Mahābhārata Text- Transmission.” Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 25, no. 1/ 3 (1944): 82– 87.
Bhattacharya, Ramkrishna. “The Mahābhārata 12.224– 30: A Text-C ritical Note.” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 83 (2002): 153– 63.
De, Sushil Kumar. “Some Lexicographical Notes on the Udyoga- Parvan of the Mahābhārata.”
Bulletin of the Deccan College Research Institute 8, Dikshit Memorial Volume (1947): 1– 33, 1– 2.
De, S. K., and E. H. Johnston. “A Passage from the Udyoga- Parvan.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society of Great Britain and Ireland 1 (1940): 69– 73.
Edgerton, Franklin. “Epic Studies: Second Series.” Bulletin of the Deccan College Research Institute 5,
Sukthankar Memorial Volume (1943– 44): 1– 12.
Kosambi, D. D. “The Parvasaṃgraha of the Mahābhārata.” Journal of the American Oriental Society
66, no. 2 (1946): 110– 17.
Kosambi, D. D., and E. D. Kulkarni. “Parvasaṃgraha Figures for the Bhīṣmaparvan of the
Mahābhārata.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 71, no. 1 (1951): 21– 25.
Krishnamurti Sarma, B. N. “An Opening Verse of the Mahābhārata.” Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 26, no. 3/ 4 (1945): 307– 12.
Kulkarni, E. D. “The Parvasaṃgraha Figures.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 66, no. 2
(1946): 118– 45.
Lüders, Heinrich. Über die Grantharecension des Mahābhārata. Abhandlungen der Königlichen
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Phil.-H ist. Klasse, N. F. vol. 14, no. 6.
Berlin: Weidmannsche Buchhandlung, 1901.
Mehendale, M. A. “The Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata: Its Achievement and Limitations.”
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 88 (2007): 1– 16.
— — — . “The Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata: Its Constitution, Achievements, and
Limitations.” In Text and Variations of the Mahābhārata: Contextual, Regional and Performative
Traditions, edited by Kalyan Kumar Chakravarty, 3–2 3. New Delhi: National Mission for
Manuscripts, 2009.
500
500 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
— — — . “Interpolations in the Mahābhārata.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 82,
no. 1/ 4 (2001): 193– 212.
Mehta, Mahesh M. “The Mahābhārata: A Study of the Critical Edition with Special Reference to
the Suparṇākhyāna of the Ādiparvan: Part II.” Bhāratıȳa Vidyā 32 (1972): 3– 72.
— — — . “The Problem of the Double Introduction to the Mahābhārata.” Journal of the American
Oriental Society 93, no. 4 (1973): 547– 50.
Sukthankar, Vishnu S. “Epic Questions I: Does Indra Assume the Form of a Swan?” Bulletin of the
Deccan College Research Institute 1, no. 1 (1939): 1– 7.
— — — . “Epic Questions II: The Parvasaṃgraha Figures.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Institute
23, Silver Jubilee Number (1939): 549– 58.
— — — . “Epic Studies I: Some Aspects of the Mahābhārata Canon.” Journal of the Bombay Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society, n.s., 4 (1928): 157– 78.
— — — . “Epic Studies II: Further Text-C ritical Notes.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Institute 11,
no. 2 (1930): 165– 91.
— — — . “Epic Studies III: Dr. Ruben on the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata.” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Institute 11, no. 3 (1930): 259– 83.
— — — . “Epic Studies IV: More Text-C ritical Notes.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Institute 16,
no. 1 (1934– 35): 90– 113.
— — — . “Epic Studies VI: The Bhṛgus and the Bhārata: A Text-H istorical Study.” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Institute 18, no. 1 (1936– 37): 1– 76.
— — — . “Epic Studies VII: The Oldest Extant Ms. of the Ādiparvan.” Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Institute 19 (1938– 39): 201– 62.
Winternitz, Moriz. “On the South-I ndian Recension of the Mahābhārata.” The Indian Antiquary 27
(1898): 67– 81, 92– 104, 122– 36.
— — — . “Der Sabhāparvan in der südindischen Rezension des Mahābhārata.” Wiener Zeitschrift für
die Kunde des Morgenlandes 17 (1903): 70– 75.
Mahābhārata Commentators, Commentators’ Editions and
Chronological Surveys
The works listed here appear in the notes to Appendix 16 (“Commentaries on the Mahābhārata”).
They are listed again here for convenience. Additionally listed are the most important articles
and essays on the Mahābhārata commentators. The Mahābhārata commentators remain the least
researched aspect of the Mahābhārata tradition. They are often passed over for a fetish history of
origins or allusions to the Mahābhārata as a Wikipedia- like undertaking or a text so luid that it
cannot be said that a single Mahābhārata ever existed. Newer studies of the commentators, how-
ever, reveal a deinite text with established canons for its interpretation so that we must radically
revise our notions of the work and its reception.
Apte, V. M., and D. V. Garge. “Mahābhārata Citations in the Śabara Bhāṣya.” Bulletin of the Deccan
College Research Institute 5, Sukthankar Memorial Volume (1943– 44): 221– 29.
Bakre, Mahadeva Shastri, ed. Udyogaparvan. Bombay: Gujarati Printing Press, 1920.
— — — . Virātạ parvan. Bombay: Gujarati Printing Press, 1915.
Belvalkar, S. K. Commentary of Devabodha on the Bhıṣ̄maparvan. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, 1947.
Bhattacharya, Dinesh Chandra. “Vidyāsāgara’s Commentary on the Mahābhārata.” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 25, no. 1/ 3 (1944): 99– 102.
Dandekar, R. N. Commentary of Devabodha on the Ad̄ iparvan of the Mahābhārata. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1941.
— — — . “Devabodhakṛtamahābhāratatātparyatı̣k̄ā— ādiparva.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute 22, no. 1/ 2 (1941): 135– 70.
501
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 501
Dandekar, R. N., and V. M. Bedekar. “Vādirāja’s Lakṣālaṃkāra on the Viṣṇusahasranāmastotra.”
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 46, no. 1/ 4 (1965): 81– 98.
De, S. K. Commentary of Devabodha on the Udyogaparvan of the Mahābhārata. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya
Bhavan, 1944.
Gode, P. K. “Dr. P. P. S. Sastri, and the Date of Vādirājatīrtha.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 17, no. 2 (1935– 36): 203– 10.
— — — . “New Light on the Chronology of the Commentators of the Mahābhārata.” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 25, no. 1/ 3 (1944): 103– 8.
— — — . “Nīlakaṇṭha Caturdhara, the Commentator of the Mahābhārata— His Genealogy and
Descendants.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 23 (1942): 141– 61.
— — — . “Notes on Indian Chronology XXXIV: Date of Vimalabodha’s Commentary on the
Mahābhārata Called the Viṣamaślokī— After 1150 AD.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute 17, no. 4 (1935– 36): 395–9 9.
— — — . Studies in Indian Literary History. 2 vols. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1953– 54.
Kane, P. V. “The Mahābhārata and Ancient Commentators.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 19, no. 2 (1938): 161– 72.
Karmarkar, R. D. Commentary of Devabodha on the Sabhāparvan of the Mahābhārata. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1949.
Leclere, Basile. “New Light on Devabodha, the Earliest Extant Commentator on Mahābhārata.”
Asiatische Studien/ Études Asiatique 70, no. 2 (2016): 489– 526.
Minkowski, Christopher. “Nīlakaṇṭha Caturdhara’s Mantrakāśīkhan ̣ḍa.” Journal of the American
Oriental Society 122, no. 2 (2002): 329– 44.
— — — . “Nīlakaṇṭha’s Mahābhārata.” Seminar 608, The Enduring Epic (2010): 32– 38.
— — — . “What Makes a Work ‘Traditional’? On the Success of Nīlakaṇṭha’s Mahābhārata
Commentary.” In Boundaries, Dynamics and Constructions of Traditions in South Asia, edited by
Federico Squarcini, 225– 52. Florence: Firenze University Press, 2005.
Misra, V. N. Mahābhārata- Tātparyaprakāśa of Śrı ̄Sadānanda Vyāsa. Varanasi: Ratna, 1992.
— — — . Śrimahābhāratatātparyanirn ̣aya of Śrı ̄An̄ andatır̄tha (Madhvācārya). Varanasi: Ratna, 1992.
Narsimha Acharya, N. C. “The Āndhra Mahābhāratamu.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute 22, no. 1/ 2 (1941): 97– 102.
Raghavan, V. “Notes on Some Mahābhārata Commentaries.” In A Volume of Studies in Indology,
Presented to Prof. P. V. Kane, edited by S. M. Katre and P. K. Gode, 351– 55. Poona Oriental Series
75. Poona: Oriental Book Agency, 1941.
Sukthankar, Vishnu S. “Arjunamiśra.” In Dr. Modi Memorial Volume. Papers on Indo- Iranian and
Other Subjects, edited by Dr. Modi Memorial Volume Editorial Board, 565– 68. Bombay:
K. J. Dubash, 1930.
— — — . “Epic Studies V: Notes on Mahābhārata Commentators.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 17, no. 2 (1935– 36): 185– 202.
Commentators’ Editions of the Bhagavadgītā
The works listed here appear in the notes to Appendix 17 (“Commentaries on the Bhagavadgītā”).
They are listed again here for convenience. Recent scholarship on developments in Bhagavadgītā
criticism in the past 100 years is listed under “Overviews of Bhagavadgītā Scholarship.”
Annangaracariyar, P. B., ed., Rāmānujagranthamāla. Kāñcīpuram: Granthamālā Oice, 1956.
Belvalkar, S. K. Śrım̄ ad- Bhagavad- Gıt̄ā with the “Jñānakarmasamuccaya” Commentary of An̄ anda[vardhana],
Edited from an unique Śārada MS, by S. K. Belvalkar, MA, PhD, with an Introduction Discussing the
Problem of the “Kashmir Recension” and Two Appendices. Poona: Bilvakuñja Publishing House,
1941.
Chintamani, T. R., ed. Śrım̄ adbhagavadgıt̄ā, with Sarvatobhadra of Rājānaka Rāmakan ̣tḥ a. Madras
University Sanskrit Series no. 14. Madras: University of Madras, 1941.
502
502 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Gambhīrānanda, Swāmī, trans. Bhagavad Gıt̄ā: With the Commentary of Śaṅkarācārya. Calcutta: Advaita
Ashrama, 1995.
Krishna Warrier, A. G., trans. Srım̄ ad Bhagavad Gıt̄ā Bhāṣya of Sri Saṃkarācārya. Madras: Sri
Ramakrishna Math, 1983.
Mainkar, T. G. A Comparative Study of the Commentaries on the Bhagavadgıt̄ā. 2nd edn. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1969.
Marjanovic, Boris, trans. Abhinavagupta’s Commentary on the Bhagavad Gita: Gıt̄ārtha- saṃgraha, Translated
from Sanskrit with an Introduction and Notes. Varanasi: Indica Books, 2002; 2nd edn. 2004.
Pansikar, Wasudev Laxman Sastri, ed. Śrım̄ adbhagavadgıt̄ā with the Commentaries of Śrım̄ at-
Śaṅkarabhāṣya with An̄ andagiri; Nıl̄akan ̣tḥ ı;̄ Bhāṣyotkarṣadıp̄ikā of Dhanapti; Śrıd̄harı;̄ Gıt̄ārthasaṅgraha
of Abhinavaguptāchārya; and Gūḍhārthadıp̄ikā of Madhusūdana with Gūḍhārthatattvāloka. 2nd edn.
Bombay: Nirṇaya- Sāgar Press, 1936. Reprint, Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1978.
Raina, Lakshman (a.k.a. Lakshman Joo). Śrım̄ adbhagavadgıt̄ā with Commentary by Mahāmaheśvara
Rājānaka Abhinavagupta. Srinagar: Kashmir Pratap Steam Press, 1933.
Rao, Subba, trans. Bhagavadgıt̄ābhāṣya by Madhvācārya. Madras: n.p., 1906.
Sadhale, Shastri Gajanana Shambhu, ed. The Bhagavadgita with Eleven Commentaries. 2nd edn. 3 vols.
Bombay: The “Gujarati” Printing Press, 1935. Reprint, Delhi: Parimal Publishers, 2000.
Sampatkumaran, M. R., trans. The Gıt̄ābhāṣya of Rāmānuja. Madras: Professor M. Rangacharya
Memorial Trust, 1969.
Sastri, Alladi Mahadeva, trans. Gıt̄ā Bhāṣya of Śaṅkara. Madras: Samata Books, 1988.
Sharma, Arvind, trans. Abhinavagupta: Gıt̄ārthasaṅgraha, Translated with an Introductory Study. Leiden: E.
J. Brill, 1983.
Shastri, Madhusudan Kaul, ed. The Bhagavadgıt̄ā with the Commentary Called Sarvatobhadra by Rājānaka
Ramakan ̣tḥ a. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 64. Srinagar: Research and Publication
Department, Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir Government, 1943.
Śrimadbhagavadgıt̄ā. The Bhagavad-G ıt̄ā: With the Commentary of Śankaracarya, Critically Edited by Dinkar
Vishnu Gokhale. Poona Oriental Series 1. Poona: Oriental Book Agency, 1950.
Subhadropadhyaya, D., ed. Bhagavadāśayānusaran ̣ābhidhānabhāṣyaṃ. Sarasvatī Bhavana Granthamālā
94. Varanasi: Varanaseya Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya, 1965.
Swāmī Ādidevānanda, trans. Śrı ̄ Rāmānuja Gıt̄ā Bhāṣya: With Text and English. Madras: Sri
Ramakrishna Math, 1991.
Tadpatrikar, Shriniwas Narayan, ed. Rājānakarāmakavikṛtasarvatobhadrākhyātı̣k̄āyutākāśmır̄apātḥ ānusārin ̣ı ̄
śrım̄ adbhagavadgıt̄ā. Ānandāsramasaṃskṛtagranthāvaliḥ 112. Pune: Ānandāśramamudraṇālaya,
1939.
The Works of Sri Sankaracharya. 20 vols. Srirangam: Sri Vani Vilas Press, 1910.
Introductions to Textual Criticism
Besides the earlier manuals on textual criticism, this section lists some of the most useful current
ones. West is invaluable for his conciseness and precision. Trovato combines a comprehensive over-
view of the ield with a systematic approach that builds up to ever more complex problems. We
relied extensively on both for this book. Most provides a good overview of the aims of textual crit-
icism. Katre is the sole work on textual criticism of Indian texts. A work like Reynolds and Wilson,
a standard reference work for the Greek and Latin classics, is badly needed for the Indian context.
Bieler, Ludwig. The Grammarian’s Craft: An Introduction to Textual Criticism. 3rd edn. New York: The
Catholic Classical Association, 1960.
Havet, Louis. Manuel de critique verbale appliquée aux textes latins. Paris: Libraire Hachette, 1911.
Joshi, Venkatesh Laxman, ed. Prauḍha Manoramā with Commentary Śabdaratna. Deccan College
Monograph Series 31. Poona: Deccan College, 1966.
Kantorowicz, Hermann. Einführung in die Textkritik: Systematische Darstellung der textkritischen Grundsätze
für Philologen und Juristen. Leipzig: Dieterich, 1921.
503
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 503
Katre, S. M. Introduction to Indian Textual Criticism. With Appendix II by P. K. Gode. Deccan College
Handbook Series 5. Pune: Deccan College, 1954.
Maas, Paul. Textkritik. 4th edn. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1960.
———. Critica del testo. Translated by Nello Martinelli. Florence: Le Monnier, 1972.
Most, Glenn W. “Editor’s Introduction.” In Sebastiano Timpanaro, The Genesis of Lachmann’s
Method. Edited and translated by Glenn W. Most. 1–3 2. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2005.
Reynolds, Leighton Durham. Texts and Transmission: A Survey of the Latin Classics. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1983.
Reynolds, L. D., and N. G. Wilson. Scribes and Scholars: A Guide to the Transmission of Greek and Latin
Literature. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991.
Stählin, Otto. Editionstechnik, Completely Revised Second Edition. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1914.
Trovato, Paolo. Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Lachmann’s Method: A Non- Standard Handbook
of Genealogical Textual Criticism in the Age of Post- Structuralism, Cladistics, and Copy- Text. Padua: Lib
reriauniversitaria, 2014.
West, M. L. Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique. Stuttgart: B. G. Teubner, 1973.
Advanced Works in Textual Criticism
The more advanced works here deal either with objections to the genealogical-r econstructive
method or special applications of it. Also listed are works addressing the problem of contamina-
tion. A few, such as Timpanaro, are concerned with the history of the method, but are also useful
as a guide to the method itself. Gane and Soulen are Soulen are two useful lexica.
Avalle, D’Arco Silvio. “Di alcuni rimedi contra la ‘contaminazione’. Saggio di applicazione alla
tradizione manoscritta di Rigaut de Berbezilh.” In La letteratura medievale in lingua d’oc nella sua
tradizione manoscritta. 159– 78. Turin: Einaudi, 1961.
Bornmann, Fritz. “Sui criteri di ‘recensio’ meccanica enunciati da Lachmann nel 1817.” Rivista di
Letterature Moderne e Comparate 15 (1962): 45– 53.
de Contenson, Pierre Marie. “Principles, Methods and Problems of the Critical Edition of the
Works of Saint Thomas as Presented in the ‘Leonine Edition’.” Tijdschrift voor Filosoie 36, no. 2
(1974): 342–64.
Dearing, Vinton A. “Some Notes on Genealogical Methods in Textual Criticism.” Novum
Testamentum 9, no. 4 (1967): 278– 97.
Eklund, Sten. “The Traditional or the Stemmatic Editorial Technique?” Eranos 104 (2006– 7): 5– 18.
Froger, Jacques. La critique des textes et son automatisation. Paris: Dunod, 1968.
Gane, Yorick Gomez. Dizionario della terminologia ilologica. Turin: Accademia University Press, 2013.
Greetham, D. C. “Criticizing the Text: Textual Criticism.” In Textual Scholarship. An Introduction.
295– 346. New York: Garland, 1994.
Greg, W. W. The Calculus of Variants: An Essay on Textual Criticism. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1927.
Irigoin, Jean. “Quelques rélexions sur le concept d’archétype.” Revue d’histoire des textes 7 (1977):
235– 45.
— — — . La tradition des textes grecs: Pour une critique historique. Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 2003.
Lachmann, Karl. “Der Nibelungen Lied, herausg. von v. d. Hagen. Breslau 1816.” In Kleinere Schriften
zur deutschen Philologie. Vol. 1. Edited by Karl Müllenhof. 81–114. Berlin: G. Reimer, 1876.
Lejay, Paul. “Revue critique d’histoire et du littérature.” N. S. XXVI (1888): 281– 83.
Maas, Paul. “Leitfehler und stemmatische Typen.” Byzantinische Zeitschrift 37 (1937): 289– 94.
Marichal, Robert. “La critique des textes.” In L’histoire et ses méthodes, edited by Charles Samaran,
1246– 366. Paris: Éditions Gallimard, 1961.
Pasquali, Giorgio. Review of La critique des textes, by P. Collomp. Gnomon 8 (1932): 128– 34.
— — — . Review of Textkritik, by Paul Maas. Gnomon 5, no. 8 (1929): 417– 35.
— — — . Review of Textkritik, by Paul Maas. Gnomon 5, no. 9 (1929): 498– 521.
504
504 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Quentin, Henri. Essais de critique textuelle (Ecdotique). Paris: Picard, 1926.
Van Reenen, Pieter, and Margot van Mulken, eds. Studies in Stemmatology. Amsterdam and
Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamin Publishing Company, 1996.
Van Reenen, Pieter, August den Hollander and Margot van Mulken, eds. Studies in Stemmatology II.
Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamin Publishing Company, 2004.
Rizzo, Silvia. Review of Il lapsus freudiano. Psicanalisi e critica testuale, by Sebastiano Timpanaro.
Rivista di ilologia e di istruzione classica (1977): 102– 5.
Schmidt, P. L. “Lachmann’s Method: On the History of a Misunderstanding.” In The Uses of Greek
and Latin: Historical Essays, edited by A. C. Dionisotti, Anthony Grafton and Jill Kraye, 227–3 6.
London: The Warburg Institute, University of London, 1988.
Segre, Cesare. “Appunti sul problema delle contaminazioni nei testi in prosa.” In Studi i problemi di
critica testuale. Convegno di Studi di Filologia Italiana nel Centenario della Commissione per i testi di lingua.
63– 67. Bologna: Commissione per i testi di lingua, 1960.
Shillingsburg, Peter L. Scholarly Editing in the Computer Age: Theory and Practice. Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press, 1996.
Soulen, Richard N., and R. Kendall Soulen. Handbook of Biblical Criticism. 4th edn. Louisville,
KY: Westminster John Knox Press, 2011.
Timpanaro, Sebastiano. The Genesis of Lachmann’s Method. Edited and translated by Glenn W. Most.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
— — — . Per la storia della ilologia virgiliana antica. Rome: Salerno Editrice, 1984.
Varvaro, Alberto. “Considerazioni sulla contaminazione, sulle varianti adiafore e sullo stemma
codicum.” In Storia della lingua italiana e ilologia. Atti del vii Convegno asli Associazione per la Storia della
lingua italiana, edited by Claudio Ciociola, 191– 96. Florence: Cesati, 2010.
Wolf, F. A. Prolegomena to Homer. Translated with an introduction and notes by A. Grafton, G. W.
Most and J. E. G. Zetzel. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985.
Problems in Textual Criticism/ Computer- Aided Analysis
Several works listed here are concerned with the overrepresentation of bipartite stemma in crit-
ical editions (often called “Bédier’s paradox” after Joseph Bédier, who irst articulated the problem
in 1928). Others concern probabilistic calculations of the type: given x manuscripts, what are
the stemmatic combinations possible, or, given x manuscripts at a certain point of time, what are
the chances that a certain percentage survived and so on. Though not essential to understanding
textual criticism, they sharpen the reader’s sense for its probabilistic nature. For obvious reasons,
these problems often invite and sometimes demand computer- aided analysis. For understanding how
problems can be solved using intuitive logic and a sense for the possible outcomes given certain
premises, Reeve’s articles are unequalled. They should be required reading for everyone interested
in learning to think abstractly about stemmata.
Bédier, Joseph. “La tradition manuscrite du Lai de l’ombre. Rélexions sur l’art d’éditer les anciens
textes.” Romania 54 (1928): 161– 96, 321– 58.
Flight, Colin. “A Complete Theoretical Framework for Stemmatic Analysis.” Manuscripta 38, no.
2 (1994): 95– 115.
— — — . “How Many Stemmata?” Manuscripta 34, no. 2 (1990): 122– 28.
— — — . “Stemmatic Theory and the Analysis of Complicated Traditions.” Manuscripta 36, no. 1
(1992): 37– 52.
Grier, James. “Lachmann, Bédier and the Bipartite Stemma: Towards a Responsible Application
of the Common- Error Method.” Revue d’Histoire des Textes 18 (1988): 263– 78.
Guidi, Vincenzo, and Paolo Trovato. “Sugli stemmi bipartiti. Decimazione, assimmetria e calcolo
delle probabilitità.” Filologia italiana 1 (2004): 9– 48.
Hall, J. B. “Why Are the Stemmata of So Many Manuscript Traditions Bipartite?” Liverpool Classical
Monthly 17 (1992): 31– 32.
505
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 505
Hering, Wolfgang. “Zweispaltige Stemmata: Zur Theorie der textkritischen Methode.” Philologus
111 (1967): 170– 85.
Irigoin, Jean. “Stemmas biides et états de manuscrits.” Revue de Philologie, third series, 28
(1954): 211– 17.
Kleinlogel, Alexander. “Das Stemmaproblem.” Philologus 112 (1968): 63– 82.
Najock, D., and C. C. Heyde. “On the Number of Terminal Vertices in Certain Random Trees
with an Application to Stemma Construction in Philology.” Journal of Applied Probability 19,
no. 3 (1982): 675– 80.
Poole, Eric. “The Computer in Determining Stemmatic Relationships.” Computers and the Humanities
8, no. 4 (1974): 207– 16.
Reeve, Michael D. “Archetypes.” In Manuscripts and Methods: Essays on Editing and Transmission. 107–
17. Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 2011.
— — — . “Classical Scholarship in the Renaissance.” In Manuscripts and Methods: Essays on Editing and
Transmission. 255– 81. Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 2011.
— — — . “Cuius in Usum? Recent and Future Editing.” The Journal of Roman Studies 90
(2000): 196– 206.
— —— . “Editing Classical Texts with a Computer: Hyginus’s Astronomica.” In Manuscripts and
Methods: Essays on Editing and Transmission. 361– 93. Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura,
2011.
— — — . “Eliminatio codicum descriptorum: A Methodological Problem.” In Editing Greek and Latin Texts,
edited by J. N. Grant, 1– 35. New York: AMS Press, 1989.
— — — . “Errori in Autograi.” In Manuscripts and Methods: Essays on Editing and Transmission. 3– 23.
Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 2011.
— — — . “Gruppenarbeit an Handschriften.” In Manuscripts and Methods: Essays on Editing and
Transmission. 315– 21. Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 2011.
— — — . “A Man on a Horse.” In Manuscripts and Methods: Essays on Editing and Transmission. 211– 19.
Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 2011.
— — — . “Reconstructing Archetypes: A New Proposal and an Old Fallacy.” In Hesperos: Studies
in Ancient Greek Poetry Presented to M. L. West on His Seventieth Birthday, edited by P. J. Finglass, C.
Collard and N. J. Richardson, 326– 40. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.
— — — . “The Rediscovery of Classical Texts in the Renaissance.” In Manuscripts and Methods: Essays
on Editing and Transmission. 229– 54. Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 2011.
— — — . “Shared Innovations, Dichotomies, and Evolution.” In Manuscripts and Methods: Essays on
Editing and Transmission. 55– 103. Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 2011.
— — — . “Some Applications of Pasquali’s ‘Criterio Geograico’ to 15th- Century Latin Manuscripts.”
In Manuscripts and Methods: Essays on Editing and Transmission. 221–2 8. Rome: Edizioni di Storia
e Letteratura, 2011.
— — — . “Stemmatic Method: ‘Qualcosa che non funziona?’ ” In The Role of the Book in Medieval
Culture: Proceedings of the Oxford International Symposium, September 26–O ctober 1, 1982, edited
by P. Ganz, 57–7 0. Bibliologia 3. Turnhout: Brepols, 1986.
Salemans, Benedictus Johannes Paulus. “Building Stemmas with the Computer in a Claddistic,
Non- Lachmannian Way: The Case of Fourteen Versions of ‘Lanseloet van Denemerken.’ ”
PhD Diss., Katholieke Universiteit Nijmegen, 2000. www.neder- l.nl/ salemans/ diss/ salemans-
diss- 2000.pdf.
Spencer, Matthew, and Christopher J. Howe. “Collating Texts Using Progressive Multiple
Alignment.” Computers and the Humanities 38, no. 3 (2004): 253– 70.
— — — . “Estimating Distances between Manuscripts Based on Copying Errors.” Literary and
Linguistic Computing 16, no. 4 (2001): 467– 84.
Timpanaro, Sebastiano. “Ancora su stemmi bipartiti e contaminazione.” Maia 17 (1965): 392– 99.
— — — . “‘Recentiores’ e ‘deteriores,’ ‘codices descripti’ e ‘codices inutiles.’ ” Filologia e critica 10
(1985): 164– 92.
506
506 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Tov, Emmanuel. “Computer-A ssisted Tools for Textual Criticism.” In Tradition and Innovation in
Biblical Interpretation: Studies Presented to Professor Eep Talstra on the Occasion of His Sixty- Fifth Birthday,
edited by W. Th. van Peursen and J. W. Dyk, 245– 60. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2011.
Trovato, Paolo. “Bédier’s Contribution to the Accomplishment of Stemmatic Method: An Italian
Perspective.” Textual Cultures 9, no. 1, Texts, Contexts, Interpretation (2014): 160– 76.
— — — . “La tradizione manoscritta del ‘Lai de l’ombre’: Rilessioni sulle tecniche d’edizione
primonovecentesche.” Romania 131 (2013): 338– 80.
Weitzman, Michael P. “The Analysis of Open Traditions.” Studies in Bibliography 38 (1985): 82–1 20.
— — — . “Computer Simulation of the Development of Manuscript Traditions.” Bulletin of the
Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing 10, no. 2 (1982): 55– 59.
— — — . “The Evolution of Manuscript Traditions.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 150, no. 4
(1987): 287– 308.
Whitehead, Frederick, and Cedric E. Pickford. “The Introduction to the Lai de l’ombre: Sixty Years
Later.” Romania 94 (1973): 145– 56.
Windram, Heather F., Matthew Spencer and Christopher J. Howe. “Phylogenetic Analysis of
Manuscript Traditions, and the Problem of Contamination.” Linguistica computazionale 24– 25
(2004– 5): 141– 55.
Theoretical Perspectives, Romance Philology and Italian
Textual Criticism
Beginning with Pasquali, Italian editors developed a rich and parallel tradition of textual criticism
that, although imbibing the lessons of Lachmannism, characteristically pays greater attention to
the history of the text, its reception and its variations. Somewhat simplistically, one might say that
whereas German textual criticism is shaped by its Protestantism (the principle of sola scriptura, a
desire to purify the receptus and the desire for a pure text unmediated by an interpretive tradition),
Italian textual criticism is still a child of its Renaissance heritage. No one should approach textual
criticism without studying the developments over a narrow Lachmannism from the South. For
obvious reasons, this tradition is more relevant to the Mahābhārata, where Protestant prejudices
presented a major obstacle to the work’s correct interpretation and appreciation. Pugliatti and
Varvaro ofer good introductions to the distinctive features of this tradition. Dembowski and
Altschul discuss the related French tradition. Dante ofers an introduction to Contini, perhaps the
most important Italian theoretician of the past century.
Avalle, D’Arco Silvio. Principî di critica testuale. Padua: Antenore, 1972.
Barbi, Michele. La nuova ilologia e l’edizione dei nostri scrittori da Dante al Manzoni. Florence: Sansoni, 1938.
Berdozzo, Fabio. “Platon, Wilamowitz und Giorgio Pasquali.” Hermes 133, no. 2 (2005): 245– 55.
Contini, Gianfranco. “Come lavorava l’Ariosto.” In Esercizi di lettura sopra autori contemporanei con
un’appendice su testi non contemporanei. 2nd edn. 232– 41. Turin: Einaudi, 1982.
— — — . “La critica testuale come studio di strutture (1971).” In Frammenti di ilologia romanza: Scritti di
ecdotica e linguistica (1932– 1989). Edited by Giancarlo Breschi. Vol. 1. 63– 74. Florence: Edizioni
del Galluzo, 2007.
— — — . “Filologia (1977).” In Frammenti di ilologia romanza: Scritti di ecdotica e linguistica (1932–1 989).
Edited by Giancarlo Breschi. Vol. 1. 3– 62. Florence: Edizioni del Galluzo, 2007.
— — — . “Rapporti fra la ilologia (come critica testuale) e la linguistica romanza (1970).” In
Frammenti di ilologia romanza: Scritti di ecdotica e linguistica (1932–1 989). Edited by Giancarlo
Breschi. Vol. 1. 75– 97. Florence: Edizioni del Galluzo, 2007.
— — — . “Ricordo di Joseph Bedier.” In Esercizi di lettura sopra autori contemporanei con un’appendice su
testi non contemporanei. 358–72. Turin: Einaudi, 1974.
— — — . “La ‘Storia della tradizione e critica del testo’ di Giorgio Pasquali (1935).” In Frammenti di
ilologia romanza: Scritti di ecdotica e linguistica (1932– 1989). Edited by Giancarlo Breschi. Vol. 1.
99– 112. Florence: Edizioni del Galluzo, 2007.
507
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 507
— — — . “La ‘Vita’ francese ‘di Sant’Alessio’ e l’arte di pubblicare i testi antichi (1970).” In Frammenti
di ilologia romanza: Scritti di ecdotica e linguistica (1932– 1989). Edited by Giancarlo Breschi. Vol. 2.
957– 85. Florence: Edizioni del Galluzo, 2007.
Dembowski, Peter F. “The ‘French’ Tradition of Textual Philology and Its Relevance to the Editing
of Medieval Texts.” Modern Philology 90, no. 4 (1993): 512– 32.
Durante, Erica “Sous la rature, la littérature. L’expérience de la philologie italienne au service de
la littérature comparée.” TRANS— Révue de littérature générale et comparée 2 (2006). http:// trans.
revues.org/ 171 (accessed October 13, 2005).
Fahy, Conor. “Old and New in Italian Textual Criticism.” In Voice, Text, Hypertext: Emerging Practices
in Textual Studies, edited by Raimonda Modiano, Leroy F. Searle and Peter L. Shillingsburg,
401– 11. Seattle and London: University of Washington Press, 2004.
Fiesoli, Giovanni. La genesi del lachmannismo. Florence: Edizioni del Galluzzo, 2000.
Flores, Enrico. Elementi critici di critica del testo ed epistemologia. Naples: Lofredo, 1998.
Fraenkel, Eduard. Review of Storia dello spirito tedesco nelle memorie d’un contemporaneo, by Giorgio
Pasquali. Gnomon 26, no. 5 (1954): 337– 41.
Isella, Dante. “Contini e la critica delle varianti.” Filologia e critica 15 (1991): 281– 97.
Kenney, E. J. “Recentiores non Deteriores.” Review of A. Persi, Flacci, Saturarum liber, ed. W. V.
Clavsen. The Classical Review n.s., 7, no. 3/ 4 (1957): 226– 28.
Klingner, Friedrich. “Giorgio Pasquali.” Gnomon 25, no. 1 (1953): 60– 62.
Leonardi, Lino. “Il testo come ipotesi (critica del manoscritto-b ase).” Medioevo romanzo 35
(2011): 5– 34.
Lernout, Geert. “Genetic Criticism and Philology.” Text 14 (2002): 53– 75.
Montanari, Elio. La critica del testo secondo Paul Maas: testo e commento. Florence: SISMEL edizioni del
Galluzzo, 2003.
Nadia, Altschul. “The Genealogy of Scribal Versions: A ‘Fourth Way’ in Medieval Editorial
Theory.” Textual Cultures 1, no. 2 (2006): 114– 36.
Pasquali, Giorgio. Storia della tradizione e critica del testo. Florence: Le Monnier, 1952.
— — — . “Arte Allusiva.” In Stravaganze quarte e supreme, 11– 20. Venice: Pozza, 1951.
Perrotta, Gennaro. “Intelligenza di Giorgio Pasquali.” Quaderni Urbinati di Cultura Classica, n.s., 21,
no. 3 (1985): 7– 12.
Pugliatti, Paola. “Textual Perspectives in Italy: From Pasquali’s Historicism to the Challenge of
‘Variantistica’ (And Beyond).” Text 11 (1998): 155– 88.
Renzi, Lorenzo and Alvise Andreose. Manuale di linguistica e ilologia romanza. Bologna: il Mulino,
2009.
Seel, Otto. Review of Storia della tradizione e critica del testo, by Giorgio Pasquali. Gnomon 12, no. 1
(1936): 16– 30.
Segre, Cesare. “Critique des variantes et critique génétique.” Genesis 7 (1994): 29– 46.
Stussi, Alfredo. Introduzione agli studi di ilologia italiana. 4th edn. Bologna: il Mulino, 2011.
Ullman, B. L. Review of Storia della tradizione e critica del testo, by Giorgio Pasquali. Classical Philology
32, no. 4 (1937): 371– 73.
Varvaro, Alberto. “Elogio della copia.” In Atti del XXI Congresso Internazionale di Linguistica e Filologia
Romanza, vol. VI, edited by Giovanni Ruino, 785– 96. Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1998.
— — — . “The ‘New Philology’ from an Italian Perspective.” Translated by Marcello Cherchi. Text
12 (1999): 49– 58.
Zaccarello, Michelangelo. “Metodo stemmatico ed ecdotica volgare italiana. Brevi considerazioni
su alcuni recenti contributi metodologici.” Textual Cultures 4, no. 1 (2009): 55– 71.
Discussions of the Mahābhārata Critical Edition
There are very few sensible discussions of the Mahābhārata critical edition. Sukthankar’s
“Prolegomena” remains the best introduction, but it is daunting in its technical brilliance. Dunham’s
shorter essay is an excellent summary. Some of the articles listed in this section are technically
508
508 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
incorrect, but the truly problematic works are listed later. Biardeau’s and Bedekar’s articles preserve
an important exchange concerning the value of the vulgate and historical methods in the study
of the epic. Phillips- Rodriguez and colleagues apply methods of computer analysis to the critical
edition.
Adarkar, Aditya. “Turning a Tradition into a Text: Critical Problems in Editing the Mahabharata.”
In Theoretical Approaches to the Transmission and Edition of Oriental Manuscripts, Papers of the Symposium
Organized in Istanbul, Turkey, 2001, edited by Judith Pfeifer and Manfred Kropp, 133– 46.
Beiruter Texte und Studien 111. Wurzburg: Ergon, 2007.
Adluri, Vishwa. “Introduction.” In Ways and Reasons for Thinking about the Mahābhārata as a
Whole, edited by Vishwa Adluri, vii– xxxii. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, 2013.
— — — . “The Critical Edition and Its Critics: A Retrospective of Mahābhārata Scholarship.” Journal
of Vaishnava Studies 19, no. 2 (2011): 1– 21.
Austin, Christopher. “Evaluating the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata: Inferential Mileage and
the Apparatus Materials.” Journal of Vaishnava Studies 19, no. 2 (2011): 71– 86.
Bagchee, Joydeep. “The Epic’s Singularization to Come: The Śakuntalā and Yayāti Upākhyānas
in the Southern Recension of the Mahābhārata.” In Argument and Design: The Unity of the
Mahābhārata, edited by Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee, 83– 126. Leiden and Boston.
MA: Brill, 2016.
Bedekar, V. M. “Principles of Mahābhārata Textual Criticism: The Need for a Restatement.”
Purān ̣a 11, no. 2 (1969): 210– 28.
Bhate, Saroja. “Methodology of the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata.” In Mahābhārata
Now: Narration, Aesthetics, Ethics, edited by Arindam Chakrabarti and Sibaji Bandyopadhyay,
29– 36. New Delhi and Abingdon: Routledge, 2014.
Biardeau, Madeleine. “Letter to the Editor— Dr. Madeleine Biardeau’s Letter in Reply to Sri V. M.
Bedekar’s Article.” Purān ̣a 12, no. 1 (1970): 180– 81.
— — —. “Some More Considerations about Textual Criticism.” Purān ̣a 10, no. 2 (1968):
115– 23.
Dunham, John. “Manuscripts Used in the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata: A
Survey and Discussion.” In Essays in the Mahābhārata, edited by Arvind Sharma, 1–1 8.
Leiden: Brill, 1991.
Hiltebeitel, Alf. “On Sukthankar’s ‘S’ and Some Shortsighted Assessments and Uses of the Pune
Critical Edition (CE).” Journal of Vaishnava Studies 19, no. 2 (2011): 87– 126.
Metzger, Bruce M. “Trends in the Textual Criticism of the Iliad, the Mahabharata, and the New
Testament.” Journal of Biblical Literature 65, no. 4 (1946): 339– 52.
Phillips- Rodriguez, Wendy J. “The Evolution of a Sanskrit Epic: Some Genetic Considerations
about Scripts.” In The Evolution of Texts: Confronting Stemmatological and Genetical Methods, edited
by C. Macé, P. Baret, A. Bozzi and L. Cignoni, 175–9 0. Linguistica Computazionale 24–2 5.
Pisa: Istituti editoriali e poligraici internazionali, 2006.
Phillips- Rodriguez, Wendy, C. J. Howe and H. F. Windram. “Chi-S quares and the Phenomenon of
Change of Exemplar in the Dyūtaparvan.” In Sanskrit Computational Linguistics, edited by Gérard
Huet, Amba Kulkarni and Peter Scharf, 380– 90. Heidelberg: Springer, 2009.
— — — . “Some Considerations about Bifurcation in Diagrams Representing the Written
Transmission of the Mahābhārata.” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 52–53, Text
Genealogy, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique (2009– 10): 29– 43.
Proudfoot, Ian. Ahiṃsā and a Mahābhārata Story: The Development of the Story of Tulādhāra in the
Mahābhārata in Connection with Non-v iolence, Cow Protection and Sacriice. Asian Studies Monographs,
n.s., 9. Canberra: Faculty of Asian Studies, Australian National University, 1987.
———. “Interpreting Mahābhārata Episodes as Sources for the History of Ideas.” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 60, no. 1/4 (1979): 41–63.
509
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 509
Discussions of the Mahābhārata and the Mahā bhārata Tradition
Masses have been written on the Mahābhārata since the early nineteenth century. Most of these
works, as Sukthankar predicted in 1942, are only of antiquarian interest now. The Nay Science is the
best guide currently available to the history of Mahābhārata studies. Because of the great variation
in literature, we have subdivided the category by themes.
Overviews of Mahābhārata Scholarship
The Nay Science covers the irst phase of “critical” Mahābhārata studies, and thus complements the
present book. Sullivan contains a balanced appraisal of recent literature. Brodbeck has a good
account of why Euro-American Mahābhārata studies developed as they did. Sukthankar is a
classic work that defends the Mahābhārata’s integrity and traditional reception against the
German critics’ specious theory of a Kṣatriya “Ur- epos.”
Adarkar, Aditya. “The Mahābhārata and Its Universe: New Approaches to the All- Encompassing
Epic.” History of Religions 47, no. 4 (2008): 304– 19.
Adluri, Vishwa, and Joydeep Bagchee. The Nay Science: A History of German Indology. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2014.
Brodbeck, Simon. “Analytical and Synthetic Approaches in Light of the Critical Edition of the
Mahābhārata and the Harivaṃśa.” Journal of Vaishnava Studies 19, no. 2 (2011): 223– 50.
— — — . Review of Strı:̄ Women in Epic Mahābhārata, by Kevin McGrath. Indo- Iranian Journal 53, no. 1
(2010): 89– 94.
Sukthankar, Vishnu S. On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata. Bombay: Asiatic Society, 1957.
Sullivan, Bruce M. “An Overview of Mahābhārata Scholarship: A Perspective on the State of the
Field.” Religion Compass 10, no. 7 (2016): 165– 75.
Overviews of Bhagavadgītā Scholarship
The Nay Science, “Paradigm Lost” and “Who’s Zoomin’ Who” provide a comprehensive overview
of historical- critical research on the Bhagavadgītā, the main current in contemporary scholar-
ship. The earlier Callewaert and Hemraj is still useful as a resource. Malinar encapsulates the
German approach to the Gītā but is now superseded.
Adluri, Vishwa. Review of The Bhagavadgıt̄ā: Doctrines and Contexts, by Angelika Malinar. History of
Religions 50, no. 1 (2010): 102– 07.
Adluri, Vishwa, and Joydeep Bagchee. The Nay Science: A History of German Indology. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2014.
— — — . “Paradigm Lost: The Application of the Historical-C ritical Method to the Bhagavadgītā.”
International Journal of Hindu Studies 20, no. 2 (2016): 199– 301.
— — — . “Who’s Zoomin’ Who: Bhagavadgītā Recensions in India and Germany.” International
Journal of Dharma Studies 4, no. 4 (2016): 1– 41.
Callewaert, W. M., and Shilanand Hemraj. Bhagavadgıt̄ānuvāda: A Study in Intercultural Translation.
Ranchi: Satya Bharati Publication, 1983.
Malinar, Angelika. The Bhagavadgıt̄ā: Doctrines and Contexts. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2007.
Philosophical Interpretations
Biardeau is a rare example of a Western scholar who appreciated the Mahābhārata as a work of
philosophy. The other works listed here are indebted to her insights. The edited volume Argument
and Design represents new direction in Mahābhārata studies after The Nay Science.
510
510 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Adluri, Vishwa. “The Divine Androgyne: Crossing Gender and Breaking Hegemonies
in the Ambā Upākhyāna of the Mahābhārata.” In Argument and Design: The Unity of the
Mahābhārata, edited by Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee, 275–3 19. Leiden and Boston,
MA: Brill, 2016.
— — — . “Ethics and Hermeneutics in the Mahābhārata.” Review of Disorienting Dharma: The
Aesthetics of Sufering in the Mahābhārata, by Emily Hudson. International Journal of Hindu Studies 20,
no. 3 (2016): 385– 92.
— — — . “Hindu Studies in a Christian, Secular Academy.” International Journal of Dharma Studies 5,
no. 1 (2017). doi:10.1186/ s40613- 016- 0037- 5.
— — — . “Literary Violence and Literal Salvation: Śaunaka Interprets the Mahābhārata.”
Exemplar: The Journal of South Asian Studies 1, no. 2 (2012): 45– 68.
— — — . “The Perils of Textual Transmission: Decapitation and Recapitulation.” Seminar 608, The
Enduring Epic (2010): 48– 54.
— — — . “Philosophical Aspects of Bhakti in the Nārāyaṇīya.” In The Churning of the Epics and
Purān ̣as at the Fifteenth World Sanskrit Conference, edited by Simon Brodbeck, Alf Hiltebeitel and
Adam Bowles. 127– 54. New Delhi: Dev Publishers, 2018.
Adluri, Vishwa, and Joydeep Bagchee, eds. Argument and Design: The Unity of the Mahābhārata. Leiden
and Boston, MA: Brill, 2016.
Biardeau, Madeleine. Études de mythologie hindoue I: Cosmogonies purān ̣iques. Paris: l’École française
d’Extrême- Orient, 1981.
— — — . Études de mythologie hindoue II: Bhakti et avatāra. Pondichéry: Publications de l’École Française
d’Extrême Orient, 1994
— — — . Hinduism: Anthropology of a Civilization. Translated by Richard Nice. Delhi: Oxford
University Press, 1989.
— — — . Théorie de la connaissance et philosophie de la parole dans le brahmanisme classique. The
Hague: Mouton, 1964.
— — — . “The Two Sanskrit Epics Reconsidered.” In Studies in Hinduism: Vedism and Hinduism, edited
by Gerhard Oberhammer, 73– 119. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences, 1991.
— — — . “Nara et Nārāyaṇa.” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 35 (1991): 75– 108.
Bowles, Adam. Dharma, Disorder and the Political in Ancient India: The Aˉpaddharmaparvan of the
Mahābhārata. Leiden and Boston, MA: Brill, 2007.
— — — . “Framing Bhīṣma’s Royal Instructions: The Mahābhārata and the Problem of Its ‘Design’.”
In Parallels and Comparisons. Proceedings of the Fourth Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit
Epics and Purāṇas, edited by Petteri Koskikallio, 121–3 5. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences
and Arts, 2009.
Dahlmann, Joseph. Das Mahâbhârata als Epos und Rechtsbuch. Ein Problem aus Altindiens Cultur- und
Literaturgeschichte. Berlin: Felix L. Dames, 1895.
— — — . Die Genesis des Mahâbhârata. Berlin: Felix L. Dames, 1899.
Hiltebeitel, Alf. “Two Kṛṣṇas on One Chariot: Upaniṣadic Imagery and Epic Mythology.” History
of Religions 24, no. 1 (1984): 1– 26.
Sullivan, Bruce M. “The Epic’s Two Grandfathers, Bhīṣma and Vyāsa.” In Essays on the Mahābhārata,
edited by Arvind Sharma, 204– 11. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007.
— — — . Kṛṣn ̣a Dvaipāyana Vyāsa and the Mahābhārata: A New Interpretation. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1990.
— — — . “The Religious Authority of the Mahābhārata: Vyāsa and Brahmā in the Hindu Scriptural
Tradition.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 62, no. 2 (1994): 377– 401.
Oral Epics, Metrical and Statistical Analysis, Search for the Heroic Epic
Metrical and statistical analyses characteristically aim to identify the oral, bardic epic assumed as
the Mahābhārata’s “core.” Their usefulness is limited, since they run into the charge of circu-
larity. Brockington’s The Sanskrit Epics presents a summary of the Sanskrit epics’ development
based on German views of the past two centuries.
511
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 511
Brockington, John. The Sanskrit Epics. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1998.
— — — . “The Spitzer Manuscript and the Mahābhārata.” In From Turfan to Ajanta: Festschrift for
Dieter Schlinglof on the Occasion of His Eightieth Birthday, edited by Eli Franco and Monika Zin,
75– 87. Lumbini: Lumbini International Research Institute, 2010.
— — — . “The Textualization of the Sanskrit Epics.” In Textualization of Oral Epics, edited by Lauri
Honko, 193– 216. Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 2000.
Carroll Smith, Mary. “The Mahābhārata’s Core.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 95, no. 3
(1975): 479– 82.
Edgerton, Franklin. “The Epic Triṣṭubh and Its Hypermetric Varieties.” Journal of the American
Oriental Society 59, no. 2 (1939): 159– 74.
Fitzgerald, James L. “The Rāma Jāmadagnya ‘Thread’ of the Mahābhārata: A New Survey of
Rāma- Jāmadagnya in the Pune Text.” In Stages and Transitions: Temporal and Historical Frameworks
in Epic and Purān ̣ic Literature. Proceedings of the Second Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit
Epics and Purān ̣as, edited by Mary Brockington, 89–1 32. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences
and Arts, 2002.
— — — . “Toward a Database of the Non-A nuṣṭubh Verses in the Mahābhārata.” In Epics, Khilas,
and Purān ̣as: Continuities and Ruptures. Proceedings of the Third Dubrovnik International Conference on the
Sanskrit Epics and Purān ̣as, edited by Petteri Koskikallio, 137– 48. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of
Sciences and Arts, 2005.
— — — . “Triṣtụ bh Passages of the Mahābhārata.” In Epic Undertakings: Papers of the 12th World Sanskrit
Conference, vol. 2, edited by Robert P. Goldman and Muneo Tokunaga, 95– 117. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass Publishers, 2009.
Hopkins, Edward W. “The Bhārata and the Great Bhārata.” The American Journal of Philology 19,
no. 1 (1898): 1– 24.
— — — . The Great Epic of India: Character and Origin of the Mahābhārata. New York: Charles Scribner’s
Sons, 1901.
Van Nooten, Barend A. “Redundancy in Mahābhārata Verse Composition.” Journal of the American
Oriental Society 89, no. 1 (1969): 50– 58.
Schlinglof, Dieter. “The Oldest Extant Parvan- List of the Mahābhārata.” Journal of the American
Oriental Society 89 (1969): 334– 38.
Yardi, M. R. “The Multiple Authorship of the Mahābhārata: A Statistical Approach (Paper III).”
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 62, no. 1/ 4 (1981): 49– 65.
— — — . “The Multiple Authorship of the Mahābhārata: A Statistical Approach (Paper IV).”
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 63, no. 1/ 4 (1982): 181– 93.
— — — . “The Multiple Authorship of the Mahābhārata: A Statistical Approach (Paper V). Annals
of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 64, no. 1/ 4 (1983): 35– 58.
— — — . “The Multiple Authorship of the Mahābhārata: A Statistical Approach (Paper VI).”
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 65, no. 1/ 4 (1984): 59– 80.
Histories and Historical Reconstructions
The “histories” in this section should be used with caution. Many are speculative and prejudicial.
Bühler and Kirste are a welcome exception. Coomaraswamy addresses the sense in which the
Mahābhārata is a “history.”
Bühler, Georg, and J. Kirste. “Indian Studies. No. II. Contributions to the History of the
Mahâbhârata.” Sitzungsberichte der Philosophisch-H istorischen Classe der Kaiserlichen Akademie der
Wissenschaften 127. Vienna: F. Tempsky, 1892.
Van Buitenen, J. A. B. “The Mahābhārata: Introduction.” In J. A. B. van Buitenen, trans. The
Mah bh rata. Vol. 1: The Book of the Beginning. xiii–xliv. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
ā ā
1973.
Coomaraswamy, Ananda K. “Mahābhārata, Itihāsa.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute 18, no. 2 (1937): 211–12.
512
512 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Fitzgerald, James L. “General Introduction: The Translation Resumed.” In James L. Fitzgerald,
trans. The Mahābhārata. Vol. 7: 11. The Book of the Women; 12. The Book of Peace, Part One. xv– xxxi.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
— — — . “History and Primordium in the Mahābhārata.” In Thinking, Recording, and Writing
History in the Ancient World, edited by Kurt Raalaub, 41– 60. Malden, MA, and Oxford:
Wiley- Blackwell, 2014.
— — — . “India’s Fifth Veda: The Mahābhārata’s Presentation of Itself.” In Essays on the Mahābhārata,
edited by Arvind Sharma, 150– 70. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991.
— — — . “Introduction [to the Book of Peace].” In James L. Fitzgerald, trans. The Mahab̄ har̄ata. Vol. 7:
11. The Book of the Women; 12. The Book of Peace, Part One. 79– 164. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2004.
— — — . “Mahābhārata.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol. 2, edited by Knut A. Jacobsen,
Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar and Vasudha Narayanan, 72– 94. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2010.
Brill Online, 2015; http:// referenceworks.brillonline.com/ entries/ brill- s- encyclopedia- of-
hinduism/ mahabharata- BEHCOM_ 2020040 (accessed September 23, 2015).
— — — . “Mahābhārata.” In The Hindu World, edited by Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby, 52– 74.
New York and London: Routledge, 2004.
— — — . “Making Yudhiṣṭhira the King: The Dialectics and the Politics of Violence in the
Mahābhārata.” Rocznik Orientalistyczny 54, no. 1 (2001): 63– 92.
— — — . “The Great Epic of India as Religious Rhetoric: A Fresh Look at the Mahābhārata.” Journal
of the American Academy of Religion 51, no. 4 (1983): 611– 30.
— — — . “The Many Voices of the Mahābhārata.” Review of Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s
Guide to the Education of the Dharma King, by Alf Hiltebeitel. Journal of the American Oriental Society
123, no. 4 (2003): 803– 18.
— — — . “No Contest between Memory and Invention: The Invention of the Pāṇḍava Heroes of
the Mahābhārata.” In Epic and History, edited by David Konstan and Kurt A. Raalaub, 103–
21. Malden, MA: Wiley– Blackwell, 2010.
Hiltebeitel, Alf. “Introducing the Mahābhārata.” Religious Studies Review 41, no. 4 (2015): 153– 74.
Kirste, J. “Zur Mahābhāratafrage.” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 14 (1900):
214– 24.
Mahadevan, T. P. “On the Southern Recension of the Mahābhārata, Brahman Migrations, and the
Brāhmī Paleography.” Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies 15, no. 2 (2008): 43– 147.
— — — . “The Śakuntalā- Yayāti ‘Transposition,’ the Southern Recension of the Mahābhārata, and
V. S. Sukthankar.” In The Churning of the Epics and Puran̄ a
̣
s at the 15th World Sanskrit Conference, edited
by Simon Brodbeck, Alf Hiltebeitel and Adam Bowles, 46– 70. New Delhi: Dev Publishers,
2018.
— — — . “The Southern Recension of the Mahābhārata, the Harivaṃśa, and Āḻvār Vaiṣṇavism.” In
Ways and Reasons for Thinking about the Mahābhārata as a Whole, edited by Vishwa Adluri, 87– 136.
Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 2011.
— — — . “Three Rails of the Mahābhārata Text Tradition.” Journal of Vaishnava Studies 19, no. 2
(2011): 23– 69.
Indian History, Epigraphy and Manuscript Culture
This section lists the literature we consulted in Indian epigraphy, paleography and writing materials.
Baums, Stefan. “Gandhāran Scrolls: Rediscovering an Ancient Manuscript Type.” In Manuscript
Cultures: Mapping the Field, edited by Jörg Quenzer, Dmitry Bondarev and Jan- Ulrich Sobisch,
183– 226. Berlin, Munich and Boston, MA: de Gruyter, 2014.
Bhoi, Panchanan. “Scribe as Metaphor: Patterns of Processing and Writing Palm Leaf
Manuscripts.” Indian Anthropologist 40, no. 1 (2010): 71– 92.
— — — . “The Writer and the Text: The Palmleaf Scribe as Chronicler.” Social Scientist 33, no. 5/
6 (2005): 73– 92.
513
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 513
Hoernle, A. F. Rudolf. “An Epigraphical Note on Palm-l eaf, Paper and Birch-B ark.” Journal of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal LXIX, II (1900): 93– 134.
Mahadevan, Iravatham. “From Orality to Literacy: The Case of the Tamil Society.” Studies in
History, n.s., 11, no. 2 (1995): 173– 88.
Perumal, P. “The Sanskrit Manuscripts in Tamil Nadu.” In Aspects of Manuscript Culture in South
India, edited by Saraju Rath, 157–72. Leiden: Brill, 2012.
Rath, Saraju. “The Evolution of Inscriptional Nāgarī from Early 7th till 12th CE.” In Epigraphika
Vostoka (Epigraphy of the Orient) 29 (2011): 187– 201.
— — — . “The Oriya Script: Origin, Development and Sources.” Heritage India 5, no. 2 (2012): 54– 61.
— — — . “Scripts of Ancient India—S iddhamātṛkā.” In Nyāya- Vasiṣtḥ a. Felicitation Volume of Prof. V. N.
Jha, edited by Manabendu Banerjee et al., 717– 29. Kolkata: Sanskrit Pustak Bhandar, 2006.
— — — . “Varieties of Grantha Script: The Date and Place of Origins of Manuscripts.” In Aspects
of Manuscript Culture in South India, edited by Saraju Rath, 187– 206. Leiden: Brill, 2012.
Rath, Saraju, and Jan Houben. “Introduction: Manuscript Culture and Its Impact in ‘India’:
Contours and Parameters.” In Aspects of Manuscript Culture in South India, edited by Saraju Rath,
1– 53. Leiden: Brill, 2012.
Sircar, D. C. Indian Epigraphy. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1965.
Textual Traditions and Editions of Texts Other than the Mahābhārata
No text is as widely referenced within Indian literature as the Mahābhārata. A list of relevant
textual traditions would easily extend into the hundreds. The following list ofers an initial orienta-
tion to the two most important traditions for the Mahābhārata: the Dharmaśāstras (especially the
Mānava-Dharmaśāstra) and the Rāmāyaṇa. Like Mahābhārata studies, Rāmāyaṇa studies also
rest on foundation the German scholars provided. Once again, the central problem concerns the
search for an oral epic devoid of its theistic references.
Kane, Pandurang Vaman. History of Dharmaśāstra: Ancient and Medieval Religious and Civil Law. 5 vols.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1930– 62.
— — — . “The Two Epics.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 47, no. 1/ 4 (1966): 11– 58.
Olivelle, Patrick. “Structure and Composition of the Mānava Dharmaśāstra.” Journal of Indian
Philosophy 30, no. 6 (2002): 535– 74.
— — — , ed. Manu’s Code of Law: A Critical Edition and Translation of the Mānava- Dharmaśāstra.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Pollock, Sheldon I. “Introduction.” In The Rāmāyan ̣a of Vālmık̄i: An Epic of Ancient India. Edited by
Robert P. Goldman. Vol. III: Aran ̣yakān ̣ḍa. Introduction and translation by Sheldon I. Pollock.
3– 84. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007.
— — — . “Part I. Introduction.” In The Rāmāyan ̣a of Vālmık̄i: An Epic of Ancient India. Edited by
Robert P. Goldman. Vol. II: Aȳodhyakān ̣ḍa. Introduction and translation by Sheldon I. Pollock.
1– 76. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007.
— — — . “The Rāmāyan ̣a Text and the Critical Edition.” In The Rāmāyan ̣a of Vālmık̄i: An Epic of
Ancient India. Vol. I: Bālakān ̣ḍa. Introduction and translation by Robert P. Goldman. 82– 93.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007.
Rocher, Ludo. “Sanskrit Literature.” In Scholarly Editing: A Guide to Research, edited by David
C. Greetham, 575– 99. New York: Modern Language Association of America, 1995.
Sukthankar, Vishnu S. “The Rāma Episode (Rāmopākhyāna) and the Rāmāyaṇa.” In A Volume
of Studies in Indology Presented to Prof. P. V. Kane, edited by S. M. Katre and P. K. Gode, 472– 87.
Poona: Oriental Book Agency, 1941.
German Scholarship/ Errors in Textual Criticism
The works listed in this section are the main ones criticized in this book. Their reasons for inclusion
are transparent, but not every work criticized in this book is listed. Some it better in other sections
514
514 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
or had value nonetheless. Additionally, we list works here that we think deserve mention for their
exaggerated claims on behalf of German philological prestige.
Austin, Christopher R. “Vedic Myth and Ritual in the Mahābhārata: A Critical Study of the
Mahāprasthānika- and Svargārohan ̣a Parvans.” PhD diss., McMaster University, 2007.
Bigger, Andreas. “Balarāma im Mahābhārata.” Asiatische Studien/ Études Asiatiques xlviii, no. 1
(1994): 1297– 99.
— — — . Balarāma im Mahābhārata: Seine Darstellung im Rahmen des Textes und seiner Entwicklung.
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1998.
— — — . “The Normative Redaction of the Mahābhārata: Possibilities and Limitations of a Working
Hypothesis.” In Stages and Transitions: Temporal and Historical Frameworks in Epic and Purān ̣ic
Literature. Proceedings of the Second Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Purān ̣as,
edited by Mary Brockington, 21– 33. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts, 2002.
— — — . “Wege und Umwege zum Himmel. Die Pilgerfahrten im Mahābhārata.” Journal Asiatique
289, no. 1 (2001): 147– 66.
Bronkhorst, Johannes. “Archetypes and Bottlenecks: Relections on the Textual History of the
Mahābhārata.” In Pūrvāparaprajñābhinandam: East and West, Past and Present. Indological and Other
Essays in Honour of Klaus Karttunen, edited by Bertil Tikkanen and Albion M. Butters, 39–5 4.
Studia Orientalia 110. Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society, 2011.
— — — . Greater Magadha: Studies in the Culture of Early India. Leiden and Boston, MA: Brill, 2007.
— — — . How the Brahmins Won: From Alexander to the Guptas. Leiden: Brill, 2016.
Goldstücker, Theodor. “Hindu Epic Poetry: The Mahâbhârata.” The Westminster Review, n.s., 33
(1868): 380– 419.
Grünendahl, Reinhold. “History in the Making: On Sheldon Pollock’s ‘NS Indology’ and
Vishwa Adluri’s ‘Pride and Prejudice.’” International Journal of Hindu Studies 16, no. 2
(2012): 189– 257.
— — — . “Post- philological Gestures— ‘Deconstructing’ Textual Criticism.” Wiener Zeitschrift
für die Kunde Südasiens 52–53, Text Genealogy, Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique
(2009– 10): 17– 28.
— — — . “Zur Klassiizierung von Mahābhārata- Handschriften.” In Studien zur Indologie und
Buddhismuskunde, edited by Reinhold Grünendahl, Jens Uwe-H artmann and Petra Kiefer-P ülz,
101– 30. Indica et Tibetica 22. Bonn: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 1993.
— — — . “Zur Textkritik des Nārāyaṇīya.” In Nārāyan ̣ıȳa- Studien, edited by Peter Schreiner, 30– 74.
Purāṇa Research Publications Tübingen 6. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1997.
— — — , ed. Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ: Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u Part 1: Adhyāyas 1– 43. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz, 1983.
Hacker, Paul. “Zur Methode der geschichtlichen Erforschung der anonymen Sanskritliteratur des
Hinduismus. Vortrag gehalten auf dem XV. Deutschen Orientalistentag Göttingen 1961.”
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 111, no. 2 (1961): 483– 92.
Hanneder, Jürgen. “Introduction.” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 52–53, Text Genealogy,
Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique (2009– 10): 5– 16.
— — — . To Edit or Not to Edit: On Textual Criticism of Sanskrit Works. Pune Indological Series
1. Delhi: Aditya Prakashan, 2017.
Von Hinüber, Oskar. Review of The Sanskrit Epics, by John Brockington. Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde
Südasiens 46 (2002): 268– 69.
— — — . “Der vernachlässigte Wortlaut. Die Problematik der Herausgabe buddhistischer Sanskrit-
Texte, Zur Überlieferung, Kritik und Edition alter und neuerer Text.” In Kleine Schriften, Teil
I. Edited by Harry Falk and Walter Slaje. 431– 50. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 2008.
Holtzmann Jr., Adolf. Zur Geschichte und Kritik des Mahābhārata. Kiel: C. F. Haeseler, 1892.
— — — . Das Mahābhārata nach der nordindischen Recension. Kiel: C. F. Haeseler, 1894.
Holtzmann Sr., Adolf. Indische Sagen. Zweite verbesserte Aulage in zwei Bänden. Vol. 1. Stuttgart: Adolph
Krabbe, 1854.
515
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 515
Lariviere, Richard. Protestants, Orientalists, and Brāhman ̣as: Reconstructing Indian Social History.
Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, 1995.
Lassen, Christian. “Beiträge zur Kunde des indischen Alterthums aus dem Mahâbhârata
I: Allgemeines über das Mahābhārata.” Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 1 (1837): 61– 86.
— — — . Indische Alterthumskunde. 4 vols. Bonn and Leipzig: H. B. Koenig, 1847– 61.
— — — . Indische Alterthumskunde. Vol. 1: Geographie und die älteste Geschichte. Bonn: H. B. Koenig, 1847.
Mylius, Klaus. Geschichte der altindischen Literatur. Bern: Scherz, 1988.
Oberlies, Thomas. “Arjunas Himmelreise und die Tīrthayātra der Pāṇḍavas: Zur Struktur des
Tīrthayātrāparvan des Mahābhārata.” Acta Orientalia 56 (1995): 106– 24.
— — — . “Die Ratschläge des Sehers Nārada: Ritual an und unter der Oberläche des Mahābhārata.”
In New Methods in the Research of Epic/ Neue Methoden der Epenforschung, edited by Hildegard L. C.
Tristram, 125– 41. Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag, 1998.
———. “(Un)ordnung im Mahābhārata: Rahmenerzählungen, Gesprächsebenen und
Inhaltsangaben.” Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 25 (2008): 73–102.
Oldenberg, Hermann. Das Mahābhārata: Seine Entstehung, sein Inhalt, seine Form. Göttingen: Vandenhoek
& Ruprecht, 1922.
Pollock, Sheldon. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and Power in Premodern
India. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2006.
— — — . “Sanskrit Literary Culture from the Inside Out.” In Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions
from South Asia, edited by Sheldon Pollock, 39– 130. Berkeley and Los Angeles and
London: University of California Press, 2003.
Rau, Wilhelm. “Bemerkungen zu Śaṅkaras Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣadbhāṣya.” Paideuma 7, Festgabe
für Herman Lommel zur Vollendung seines 75. Lebensjahres am 7. Juli 1960 (1959– 61): 293–9 9.
— — — . Die vedischen Zitate im Vyākaran ̣a- Mahābhāṣya. Mainzer Akademie der Wissenschaften und
der Literatur, Abhandlungen der Geistes- und Sozialwissenschaftlichen Klasse, Jahrgang 1985,
no. 4. Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1985.
Ruben, Walter. “Schwierigkeiten der Textkritik des Mahābhārata.” Acta Orientalia 8 (1930): 240–5 6.
— — — . Studien zur Textgeschichte des Rāmāyan ̣a. Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer, 1936.
Shalom, Naama. Re- ending the Mahābhārata: The Rejection of Dharma in the Sanskrit Epic. Albany: State
University of New York Press, 2017.
Von Simson, Georg. “Altindische epische Schlachtbeschreibung: Untersuchungen zu
Kompositionstechnik und Entstehungsgeschichte der Bücher VI bis IX des Mahābhārata.”
Habilitationsschrift, University of Göttingen, 1974.
— — — . “Die Einschaltung der Bhagavadgıt̄ā im Bhıṣ̄maparvan des Mahābhārata.” Indo- Iranian Journal
11, no. 3 (1968/ 69): 159– 74.
— — — . Mahābhārata: Die Große Erzählung von den Bhāratas. Berlin: Verlag der Weltreligionen, 2011.
———. “Text Layers in the Mahābhārata: Some Observations in Connection with Mah ābh ārata
VII.131.” In The Mah ābh ārata Revisited. Papers Presented at the International Seminar on the Mahābhārata
Organized by the Sahitya Akademi at New Delhi on February 17–20, 1987, edited by R. N. Dandekar,
37–60. New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi, 1990.
Slaje, Walter. “The Mokṣopāya Project.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 77, no. 1/ 4
(1996): 209– 21.
Srinivasan, Srinivasa Ayya. Vācaspatimiśras Tattvakaumudı:̄ Ein Beitrag zur Textkritik bei kontaminierter
Überlieferung. Alt- und Neu- Indische Studien 12. Hamburg: Cram, De Gruyter & Co., 1967.
Von Stietencron, Heinrich. “Editor’s Introduction.” In Angelika Malinar, Rājavidyā: Das königliche
Wissen um Herrschaft und Verzicht. 6– 11. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1996.
Weller, Hermann. “Zur Textkritik des Mahābhārata.” In Festschrift Moriz Winternitz: 1863–
23. Dezember 1933, edited by Otto Stein and Wilhelm Gampert, 37– 40. Leipzig: Otto
Harrassowitz, 1933.
— — — . “Who Were the Bhriguids.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 18, no. 3
(1937): 296– 302.
516
516 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Winternitz, Moriz. “Genesis des Mahābhārata.” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 14
(1900): 51– 77.
— — — . Geschichte der indischen Literattur. Vol. 1. 2nd edn. Leipzig: C. F. Amelangs, 1909.
— — — . Geschichte der indischen Litteratur. Vol. 3. Leipzig: C. F. Amelangs, 1920.
— — — . “The Mahabharata.” The Visva- Bharati Quarterly 1 (1924): 343– 59.
— — — . “Notes on the Mahābhārata, with Special Reference to Dahlmann’s ‘Mahābhārata.’ ”
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland (1897): 713– 59.
Witzel, Michael. “How to Enter the Vedic Mind? Strategies in Translating a Brāhmaṇa Text.”
In New Horizons of Indological Research: Felicitation Volume in Honour of Prof. P. C. Muraleemadhavan,
edited by Dharmaraj Adat, 21– 33. Delhi: Kunjunni Raja Academy of Indological Research
and New Bharatiya Book Corporation, 2013.
— — — . Katḥ a Ar̄an ̣yaka: Critical Edition with a Translation into German and an Introduction. Cambridge,
MA: Department of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, Harvard University, 2004.
— — — . Das Katḥ a-A r̄an ̣yaka, textkritische Edition mit Uebersetzung und Kommentar. Erlangen: Nepal
Research Centre, 1974.
— — — . “On the Archetype of Patañjali’s Mahābhāṣya.” Indo- Iranian Journal 29 (1986): 249– 59.
— — — . “Textual Criticism in Indology and in European Philology during the 19th and 20th
Centuries.” Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies 21, no. 3 (2014): 9– 91.
The Background of the Mahābhārata Critical Edition/ Biographic
Sources
A history of the Mahābhārata critical edition has never been written. The present work is not this his-
tory, even though we gleaned almost everything known about the edition for this book. This section
ofers a list of the sources consulted. The Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute are the best
source for the history of the edition. They are now fully archived on JSTOR. The list also includes a
few additional sources on the history of the Bhandarkar Institute, its collections and important igures
associated with it (even if not directly involved in the Mahābhārata critical edition itself).
“150th Birth- Anniversary of Ramakrishna Gopal Bhandarkar and 70th Foundation-D ay of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona July 6, 1987.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 69, no. 1/ 4 (1988): i– viii.
Bedekar, V. M. “The Contribution of Dr. S. K. Belvalkar to Indology.” Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 81, no. 1/ 4 (2000): 35– 67.
“Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona Silver Jubilee Celebrations 4th and 5th of
January 1943. Roger Lumley, N. C. Kelkar, J. R. Gharpure, R. N. Dandekar, C. Kunhan Raja,
V. M. Apte, P. V. Bapat, A. P. Karmarkar, B. R. Kulkarni, H. D. Sankalia, C. R. Sankaran,
S. R. Shende, Ludwik Sternbach.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 24, no. 1/
2 (1943): iii– xlvii.
Bhandarkar, R. G. “Text of the Inaugural Address.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute
1, no. 1 (1918– 19): 1– 6.
“The Completion of the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 47, no. 1/ 4 (1966): i– xiv.
Dandekar, R. N. “Geheimrat Professor Dr. Heinrich Lüders (1869–1 943).” Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 24, no. 3/ 4 (1943): 282– 83.
— — — . “The Mahābhārata and Its Critical Edition.” In Exercises in Indology: Select Writings. Vol. 3.
292– 310. Delhi: Ajanta Publications, 1981.
— — — . “Parashuram Lakshman Vaidya.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 60,
no. 1/ 4 (1979): 350– 51.
— — — . “Professor P. V. Kane.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 53, no. 1/4
(1972): 311– 22.
517
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 517
Deshpande, Madhav M. “Professor R. N. Dandekar March 17, 1909–D ecember 11, 2001.” Indo-
Iranian Journal 45, no. 2 (2002): 109– 19.
“Dr. Shripad Krishna Belvalkar.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 47, no. 1/ 4
(1966): 132– 33.
Edgerton, Franklin. “Tribute from the West.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 24,
no. 1/ 2 (1943): 136.
“Editorial Notes.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 1, no. 1 (1918– 19): 81– 85.
“Editorial Notes: Presentation of the First Volume of the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata
to Shrimant Balasaheb Pant Pratinidhi, B. A., Ruler of Aundh, 6th July 1934.” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 15, no. 3/ 4 (1933– 34): 250–5 8.
Emeneau, M. B. “Franklin Edgerton.” Language 40, no. 2 (1964): 111– 23.
Hahn, Adelaide E. “Franklin Edgerton: Personal Reminiscences.” Journal of the American Oriental
Society 85, no. 1 (1965): 3– 8.
Jacobi, Hermann. “Bericht über den Beschluß des Komitees für eine kritische Textausgabe des
Mahabharata.” In Verhandlungen des XIII. Internationalen Orientalisten- Kongresses, Hamburg September
1902. 84– 85. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1904.
Jacobi, Hermann, Heinrich Lüders and Moriz Winternitz. “Promemoria über den Plan einer
kritischen Ausgabe des Mahab̄ har̄ ata.” Almanach der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften 54
(1904): 268–78.
Johnson, Donald Clay. “On the Origins of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute Library,
Part I: The Initiation of the Searches for Sanskrit Manuscripts in Bombay.” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 69, no. 1/ 4 (1988): 111– 24.
— — — . “On the Origins of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute Library, Part II: The
Work of Ramakrishna Gopal Bhandarkar and Peter Peterson.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 71, no. 1/ 4 (1990): 71– 82.
Katre, S. M. “In Memoriam: Vishnu Sitaram Sukthankar 1887–1 943.” Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 24, no. 1/ 2 (1943): 123– 35.
— — — . “Vishnu Sitaram Sukthankar and His Contribution to Indology.” In Sukthankar Memorial
Edition. Vol. 2: Analecta. Edited by P. K. Gode. 463– 505. Bombay: Karnatak Publishing House,
1945.
Lad, Gouri P. “Sumitra Mangesh Katre: A Biographical Note.” Bulletin of the Deccan College Research
Institute 51/5 2, Professor S. M. Katre Felicitation Volume (1991– 92): 3–2 9.
Laddu, S. D., and A. N. Gokhaley. “The Government Manuscripts Library at the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 77, no. 1/ 4
(1996): i– x.
Lévi, Sylvain. “Tato Jayam Udīrayet.” Translated by L. G. Khare. Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 1, no. 1 (1918– 19): 13– 20.
Lüders, Heinrich. Druckprobe einer kritischen Ausgabe des Mahābhārata. Leipzig: Drugulin, 1908.
Marathe, N. B. “Index to Writings on the Mahābhārata from the Annals (1919–1 997).” Annals of
the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 79, no. 1/ 4 (1998): i, iii– xx.
Mehendale, M. A. “Professor Dr. Sumitra Mangesh Katre.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute 79, no. 1/ 4 (1998): 301, 303– 9.
Morgenroth, Wolfgang. “Vishnu Sitaram Sukthankar as a Student in Berlin, 1911–1 914.” Annals of
the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 58/ 59, Diamond Jubilee Volume (1977– 78): 193– 201.
Paranjpe, V. G. “The Late Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar. An Appreciation.” Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 7, no. 1/ 2 (1926): 153– 59.
Pratinidhi, Balasaheb Pant, ed. A Prospectus of a New and Critical Edition of the Mahabharata.
Poona, 1919.
“Prof. Hari Damodar Velankar.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 47, no. 1/4
(1966): 134– 35.
518
518 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Pusalkar, A. D. “Vishnu Sitaram Sukthankar (4 May 1887–2 1 January 1943).” Journal of the Bombay
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 19 (1943): 89– 92.
Radhakrishnan, S. “Silver Jubilee Address (Monday, 4th January 1943).” Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 24, no. 1/ 2 (1943): 1– 8.
Rajwade, V. K., and Harold H. Mann. “Report and Proceedings of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute Poona for the Year 1919– 20.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute
2, no. 1 (1920– 21): 1– 80.
“Ramchandra Narayan Dandekar (1909– 2001).” Indian Literature 45, no. 6 (2001): 152– 54.
Von Schroeder, Leopold. “Bericht über den Stand der vorbereitenden Arbeiten für eine kritische
Ausgabe des Mahabharata.” In Verhandlungen des XIII. Internationalen Orientalisten- Kongresses,
Hamburg September 1902. 83– 84. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1904.
Souvenir of the Completion of the Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 1966.
“Speech by Shri Rajendra Prasad, President of the Indian Union.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 35, no. 1/ 4 (1954): 311– 12.
“Statement Presented by the Chairman of the Executive Board of the Institute.” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 35, no. 1/ 4 (1954): 299, 301– 4.
“A Statement Presented by the General Editor at the Inauguration of the Mahābhārata Printing
Department of the B. O. R. Institute Press.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 25,
no. 1/ 3 (1944): i– xii.
“Statement Presented by the General Editor of the Mahābhārata.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 35, no. 1/ 4 (1954): 305– 10.
Sukthankar Memorial Edition. 2 vols. Edited by P. K. Gode. Bombay: Karnatak Publishing
House, 1944–45.
Sukthankar, Vishnu S. “Appendix VII: Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata.” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 24, no. 1/ 2 (1943): xliv– xlvii.
— — — . “In Memoriam: Professor Moritz Winternitz (1863– 1937).” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 18, no. 3 (1937): 313– 20.
— — — . “Lebenslauf.” In Sukthankar Memorial Edition. Vol. 2: Analecta. Edited by P. K. Gode. 81.
Bombay: Karnatak Publishing House, 1945.
— — — . Prospectus of a Critical and Illustrated Edition of the Mahabharata: India’s Great National Epic.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1937.
“Sushil Kumar De: Curriculum Vitae.” Bulletin of the Deccan College Research Institute 20, no. 1/4 ,
Sushil Kumar De Felicitation Volume (1960): vii, ix– xv.
Thomas, G. A. “Appendix: Report of the Working Committee of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, Poona City, from 6th July 1915 to 10th September 1918.” Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 1, no. 1 (1918– 19): 1–5 9.
Utgikar, N. B. “The Devanagari Recension of the Mahābhārata.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 1, no. 2 (1919– 20): 145– 55.
— — —. “The Devanagari Recension of the Mahābhārata II.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 2, no. 1 (1920– 21): 73– 77.
Winternitz, Moriz. “The Critical Edition of the Mahābhārata.” Paper read in Section Va, 1
(Ancient India) of the XVIIth International Congress of Orientalists, held at Oxford, on
August 28, 1928. Indologica Pragensia 1 (1929): 58– 63.
— — — . “Die kritische Ausgabe des Mahābhārata.” Forschungen und Fortschritte 8 (1932): 427.
— — — . “On the Mahābhārata MSS in the Whish Collection of the Royal Asiatic Society.” Journal
of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland (1898): 147– 50.
— — — . “Promemoria über die Nothwendigkeit einer kritischen Ausgabe des Mahābhārata,
insbesondere der südindischen Recension.” Almanach der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften
51 (1901): 206– 10.
519
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 519
— — — . “A Proposal for the Formation of a Sanskrit Epic Texts Society, to Be Laid before the
Indian Section of the XII International Congress of Orientalists, Held at Rome, in October
1899.” XIIme Congrès International des Orientalistes, Bulletin no. 3 (1899): 46– 49.
Philology, Textuality and the Value of Textual Criticism
The works listed here range from general discussions about the value of philology to specialized
treatments of particular traditions. They are all instructive, and provide insight into the debates
concerning the study of texts occurring today. Tanselle is a good if lengthy introduction.
Canfora, Luciano, and Jean Burrell. “From the Quest for the Archetype to the History of Texts.
A Short Note on the French Critical Style.” Translated by Jean Burrell. Diogenes 47, no. 2
(1999): 28– 29.
Debray- Genette, Raymonde. “Génétique et poétique: esquisse de méthode.” Littérature 28
(1977): 19– 39.
Greetham, David C. Theories of the Text. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
— — — , ed. Scholarly Editing: A Guide to Research. New York: Modern Language Association of
America, 1995.
Hay, Louis. “Genetic Criticism: Origins and Perspectives.” In Genetic Criticism: Texts and Avant- textes,
edited by Jed Deppman, Daniel Ferrer and Michael Groden, 17–27. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press, 2004.
— — — . “History or Genesis?” Yale French Studies 89 (1996): 191– 207.
— — — . “Does ‘Text’ Exist?” Studies in Bibliography 41 (1988): 64– 76.
Kenney, E. J. The Classical Text: Aspects of Editing in the Age of the Printed Book. Berkeley, Los Angeles
and London: University of California Press, 1974.
Mathijsen, Marita. “The Concept of Authorisation.” Text 14 (2002): 77– 90.
McGann, Jerome. A Critique of Modern Textual Criticism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.
McGillivray, Murray. “Towards a Post-C ritical Edition: Theory, Hypertext, and the Presentation
of Middle English Works.” Text 7 (1994): 175– 99.
Müller- Sievers, Helmut. “Reading Evidence: Textual Criticism as Science in the Nineteenth
Century.” The Germanic Review 76, no. 2 (2001): 162– 71.
Nichols, Stephen G. “Introduction: Philology in a Manuscript Culture.” Speculum 65, no. 1
(1990): 1– 10.
Richardson, Peter. “The Consolation of Philology.” Modern Philology 92, no. 1 (1994): 1– 13.
Storey, Wayne H. “Interpretative Mechanisms in the Textual Cultures of Scholarly Editing.”
Textual Cultures 4, no. 1 (2009): 129– 47.
Tanselle, G. Thomas. “Textual Criticism at the Millennium.” Studies in Bibliography 54 (2001): 1–8 0.
Tov, Emmanuel. “The Relevance of Textual Theories for the Praxis of Textual Criticism.” In A
Teacher for All Generations: Essays in Honor of James C. Vander Kam, vol. 1, edited by Eric Farrel Mason,
Samuel I. Thomas, Alison Schoield and Eugene Ulrich, 23– 35. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2012.
Watkins, Calvert. “What Is Philology?” Comparative Literature Studies 27, no. 1 (1990): 21– 25.
Additional Sources
This section contains sources that were cited in the footnotes but did not it into the previous
sections. The majority of works concern art history and art criticism.
Adluri, Vishwa. Review of World Philology, ed. Sheldon Pollock, Benjamin A. Elman and Ku-m ing
Kevin Chang. American Historical Review 121, no. 3 (2016): 908– 10.
Adluri, Vishwa, and Joydeep Bagchee. “Jews and Hindus in Indology.” Paper published on
Academia.edu. www.academia.edu/ 30937643/ Jews_ and_ Hindus_ in_ Indology (accessed
April 14, 2017).
520
520 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
— — — . “Theses on Indology.” Paper published on Academia.edu. www.academia.edu/ 30584042/
Theses_ on_ Indology (accessed October 13, 2017).
Aner, Karl. Die Theologie der Lessingzeit. Halle a.d. Saale: G. Olms, 1929.
Arrowsmith, William. “The Shame of the Graduate Schools: A Plea for a New American Scholar.”
Arion: A Journal of Humanities and the Classics, third series, 2, no. 2/ 3 (1992– 93): 159–7 6.
Austin, Christopher R. “The Sārasvata Yātsattra in Mahābhārata 17 and 18.” International Journal of
Hindu Studies 12, no. 3 (2008): 283– 308.
Bali, Saraswati. Sāyan ̣a’s Upodghāta to the Taittirıȳa Sa ṁhita and the R ̣gveda Sa ṁhitā: Introduction, English
Translation of the Text and Notes. Delhi: Pratibha Prakashan, 1999.
Bobzin, Hartmut. Review of Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ: Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u, by Reinhold Grünendahl.
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 135, no. 1 (1985): 203– 4.
— — — . Review of Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ: Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u, by Reinhold Grünendahl. Zeitschrift
der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 136, no. 3 (1986): 658– 59.
Brockington, John L. “The Bhagavadgītā: Text and Context.” In The Fruits of Our Desiring: An
Inquiry into the Ethics of the Bhagavadgt for Our Times, edited by Julius Lipner, 28–47. Calgary:
īā
Bayeux, 1997.
— — — . “Is the Script Relevant? Further Evidence from a Nevārī- Script Rāmāyaṇa Manuscript.”
In Epic and Argument in Sanskrit Literary History. Essays in Honor of Robert P. Goldman, edited by
Sheldon Pollock, 17–2 9. Delhi: Manohar, 2010.
— — — . “A Malayāḷam- Script Rāmāyaṇa Manuscript.” Indologica Taurinensia 21– 22 (1995– 96):
77– 91.
———. “Regions and Recensions, Scripts and Manuscripts: The Textual History of the Rāmāyaṇa
and Mahābhārata.” www.college-de-france.fr/site/jean-noel-robert/symposium-2016-12-06-
14h00.htm (accessed June 30, 2017).
— — — . Review of Untersuchungen zur Komposition von Reden und Gesprächen im Rāmāyan ̣a, by Renate
Söhnen. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 114, no. 1 (1982): 65.
— — — . Review of Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ: Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u, Part 1: Adhyāyas 1– 43, by Reinhold
Grünendahl. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 2 (1984): 291– 92.
— — — . Review of Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ: Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u. Part 2: Adhyāyas 44– 81, by Reinhold
Grünendahl. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 1 (1986): 126– 27.
— — — . Righteous Rāma: The Evolution of an Epic. New York: Oxford University Press, 1984.
— — — . “The Text of the Rāmāyaṇa.” Indologica Taurinensia 15–1 6, Proceedings of the Seventh
World Sanskrit Conference, Leiden, August 23– 29, 1987 (1989– 90): 79–9 0.
— — — . “Textual Studies in Vālmīkī’s Rāmāyaṇa.” In Epic Threads: John Brockington on the Sanskrit
Epics. Edited by Greg Bailey and Mary Brockington. 195–2 06. New Delhi: Oxford University
Press, 2000.
— — — . “Textual Studies in Vālmīkī’s Rāmāyaṇa.” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft,
Supplement IX, Proceedings of the XXXII International Congress for Asian and North African Studies,
Hamburg, August 25– 30, 1986 (1992): 509– 10.
Brockington, John, and Mary Brockington. Rāma the Steadfast: An Early Form of the Rāmāyan ̣a.
London: Penguin Books, 2006.
Brodbeck, Simon. The Mahābhārata Patriline: Gender, Culture and the Royal Hereditary. Farnham:
Ashgate, 2009.
Brodbeck, Simon, and Brian Black, eds. Gender and Narrative in the Mahābhārata. Abingdon and
New York: Routledge, 2007.
Brullé, Pierre, and Marketa Theinhardt. “Painting Despite Everything: František Kupka on
Creation in the Plastic Arts.” In Painting the Universe: František Kupka, Pioneer in Abstraction, edited
by Dorothy Kosinski and Jaroslav Anděl, 151–77 . Ostildern-Ruit, Germany: Verlag Gerd
Hatje, 1997.
Von Büren, Veronika. “La place du manuscrit Ambr. L 99 sup. dans la transmission des Étymologies
d’Isidore de Séville.” In Nuove ricerche su codici in scrittura latina dell’Ambrosiana, Atti del Convegno
521
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 521
Milano, 6– 7 ottobre 2005, edited by Mirella Ferrari and Marco Navoni, 25– 44. Milan: Vita e
Pensiero, 2007.
Burnell, A. C. A Classiied Index to the Sanskrit MSS in the Palace at Tanjore. London: Trübner, 1880.
— — — . On the Aindra School of Sanskrit Grammarians. Mangalore: Basel Mission Book & Tract
Depository and London: Trübner & Company, 1875.
Chambers, Mortimer. Review of Thucydidis Historiae, Vol. I: Libri I– II, by Carolum Hude and Otto
Luschnat. Classical Philology 51, no. 1 (1956): 44– 45.
Copi, Irving M., Carl Cohen and Kenneth MacMahon. Introduction to Logic. 14th edn. London and
New York: Routledge, 2016.
Dawe, R. D. The Collation and Investigation of Manuscripts of Aeschylus. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1964.
Dickerman, Leah. Inventing Abstraction, 1910– 1925: How a Radical Idea Changed Modern Art.
New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2013.
Doniger, Wendy. “How to Escape the Curse.” Review of The Mahabharata, translated by John
Smith. London Review of Books 31, no. 19 (2009): 17–18. www.lrb.co.uk/v31/n19/wendy-
doniger/ howto-escape-the-curse (accessed October 13, 2015).
Edwards, A. W. F. Cogwheels of the Mind: The Story of Venn Diagrams. Baltimore, MD, and London: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2004.
The Etymologies of Isidore of Seville. Translated by Stephen A. Barney, W. J. Lewis, J. A. Beach and
Oliver Berghof. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Everdell, William R. The First Moderns: Proiles in the Origins of Twentieth- Century Thought. Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press, 1997.
Fontaine, Jacques. Isidore de Séville: genése et originalité de la culture hispanique au temps des Wisigoths.
Turnhout: Brepols, 2000.
— — — . Tradition et actualité chez Isidore de Séville. London: Variorum, 1988.
Foucault, Michel. The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences. London and New York:
Routledge, 2002.
Franco, Eli. Review of The Nay Science: A History of German Indology, by Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep
Bagchee. South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies 39, no. 3 (2016): 695– 713.
Gaugin, Paul. Gaugin’s Intimate Journals. Translated by Van Wyck Brooks. Mineola, NY: Dover
Publishing Company, 1997.
Gehrts, Heino. Mahābhārata: Das Geschehen und seine Bedeutung. Bonn: Bouvier Verlag, 1975.
Goldman, Robert P. “On the Upatva of Upākhyānas: Is the Uttarakāṇḍa of the Rāmāyaṇa an
Upākhyānas of the Mahābhārata?” In Argument and Design: The Unity of the Mahābhārata, edited
by Vishwa Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee, 69– 82. Leiden and Boston, MA: Brill, 2016.
Griith, John G. “A Taxonomic Study of the Manuscript Tradition of Juvenal.” Museum Helveticum
25, no. 2 (1968): 101– 38.
Guha, Sumit. “Lower Strata, Older Races, and Aboriginal Peoples: Racial Anthropology and
Mythical History Past and Present.” The Journal of Asian Studies 57, no. 2 (1998): 423– 41.
Günther, Hans F. K. Kleine Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes. 3rd edn. Munich: J. F. Lehmann, 1934.
Gurd, Sean Alexander. Iphigenias at Aulis: Textual Multiplicity, Radical Philology. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 2005.
Hall, J. B. “Claudian, De Bello Gildonico.” Review of Claudii Claudiani, De Bello Gildonico, ed. E. M.
Olechowska. The Classical Review 33, no. 2 (1983): 203–7.
Hellwig, Oliver. “Stratifying the Mahābhārata: The Textual Position of the Bhagavadgītā.” Indo-
Iranian Journal 60, no. 2 (2017): 132– 69.
Hiltebeitel, Alf. “Kṛṣṇa in the Mahābhārata: A Bibliographical Essay.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 60 (1979): 65– 110.
— — — . “The Nārāyan ̣ıȳa and the Early Reading Communities of the Mahābhārata.” In Between the
Empires: Society in India 300 BCE to 400 CE, edited by Patrick Olivelle, 227– 55. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2006.
522
522 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
— — — . Nonviolence in the Mahābhārata: Śiva’s Summa on R ̣ṣidharma and the Gleaners of Kurukṣetra. London
and New York: Routledge, 2016.
— — — . “Not without Subtales: Telling Laws and Truths in the Sanskrit Epics.” Journal of Indian
Philosophy 33 (2005): 455– 511.
— — — . Rethinking the Mahābhārata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education of the Dharma King. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Hudson, Emily T. Disorienting Dharma: The Aesthetics of Sufering in the Mahābhārata. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2013.
Jacobi, Hermann. Mahābhārata: Inhaltsangabe, Index und Concordanz der Calcuttaer und Bombayer Ausgaben.
Bonn: Friedrich Cohen, 1903.
Jamison, Stephanie W. Sacriiced Wife/S acriicer’s Wife: Women, Ritual, and Hospitality in Ancient India.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Jerusalem, Johann Friedrich Wilhelm. Zweyte Sammlung einiger Predigten. Braunschweig: Rudolph
Schroders Erben, 1752.
Ježić, Mislav. “Vedic Myths and Epico- Purāṇic Mythology—T ransformation of the Sense of
Vision into Narration.” Paper presented at the Dubrovnik International Conference on the
Sanskrit Epics and Purāṇas (DICSEP) 8, Dubrovnik, Croatia, September 12, 2017.
de Jong, J. W. Review of Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ. Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u. Part 1, Adhyāyas 1– 43, by
Reinhold Grünendahl. Indo- Iranian Journal 29, no. 1 (1986): 64– 65.
— — — . Review of Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ. Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u. Part 2, Adhyāyas 44– 81. Part 3,
Adhyāyas 82– 105 (with a Pāda- Index of Adhyāyas 1– 105), by Reinhold Grünendahl. Indo- Iranian
Journal 36, no. 2 (1993): 138– 39.
Kosambi, D. D. “The Autochthonous Element in the Mahābhārata.” Journal of the American Oriental
Society 84, no. 1 (1964): 31– 44.
Kosegarten, Johann Gottfried Ludvig. Pantschatantrum, sive, Quinquepartitum de moribus exponens: ex
codicibus manuscriptis. Bonn: H. B. Koenig, 1848.
Kupka, František. Abstraction, création, art non- iguratif, 1932– 36. New York: Arno Press, 1968.
— — — . La Création dans les arts plastiques. Paris: Cercle d’art, 1989.
Leighten, Patricia. The Liberation of Painting: Modernism and Anarchism in Avant- Guerre Paris. Chicago
and London: University of Chicago, 2013.
Levenson, Alan T. The Making of the Modern Jewish Bible: How Scholars in Germany, Israel, and America
Transformed an Ancient Text. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littleield, 2016.
Lipsey, Roger. The Spiritual in Twentieth Century Art. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2004.
Meecham, Pam, and Julie Sheldon. Modern Art: A Critical Introduction. 2nd edn. Oxford: Routledge, 2005.
Mládek, Meda, and Margit Rowell. “Chronology.” In František Kupka 1871–1 957: A Retrospective.
New York: Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, 1975.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Anti- Education: On the Future of Our Educational Institutions. Edited by Paul
Reitter and Chad Wellmon. Translated by Damion Searls. New York: New York Review of
Books, 2016.
— — — . The Gay Science. Edited by Bernard Williams. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2001.
— — — . “On Truth and Lying in a Non- moral Sense.” Translated by Ronald Speirs. In The
Birth of Tragedy and Other Writings. Edited by Raymond Geuss and Ronald Speirs. 139– 53.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
———. Twilight of the Idols. Translated by Richard Polt. Indianapolis and Cambridge: Hackett
Publishing Company, 1997.
Olivelle, Patrick. “Unfaithful Transmitters: Philological Criticism and Critical Editions of the
Upaniṣads.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 26 (1998): 173– 87.
O’Neil, Edward N. Review of Juvénal, les baladins et les rétiaires d’après le manuscrit d’Oxford, by Jean
Colin. Classical Philology 51, no. 1 (1956): 42– 44.
523
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 523
Pollock, Sheldon. “Crisis in the Classics.” Social Research: An International Quarterly, special issue titled
India’s World 78, no. 1 (2011): 21– 48.
— — — . “Future Philology? The Fate of a Soft Science in a Hard World.” Critical Inquiry 35, no. 4,
The Fate of Disciplines (2009): 931– 61.
— — — . “Introduction.” In World Philology, edited by Sheldon Pollock, Benjamin A. Elman and Ku-
ming Kevin Chang, 1– 24. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015.
— — — . “Kritische Philologie.” Translated by Brigitte Schöning. Geschichte der Germanistik 45/
46 (2014): 5– 12. English translation: www.columbia.edu/ cu/ mesaas/ faculty/ directory/
pollock_ pub/ Kritische%20Philologie%20(+%20English%20original).pdf (accessed February
26, 2017).
— — — . Kritische Philologie: Essays zu Literatur, Sprache und Macht in Indien und Europa. Edited by
Christoph König. Translated by Brigitte Schöning. Göttingen: Wallstein Verlag, 2015.
— — — . “Philology & Disciplinarity.” Baraza: Critical Collaboration on the Middle East, South Asia,
and Africa, https:// baraza.cdrs.columbia.edu/ philology- disciplinarity/ (accessed February
26, 2017).
— — — . “Philology in Three Dimensions.” Postmedieval: A journal of Medieval Cultural Studies 5, no. 4
(2014): 398– 413.
— — — . “Towards a Political Philology: D. D. Kosambi and Sanskrit.” Economic and Political Weekly,
D. D. Kosambi Centenary Volume (2008): 52– 59.
— — — . “What Was Philology in Sanskrit?” In World Philology, edited by Sheldon Pollock, Benjamin
A. Elman and Ku- ming Kevin Chang, 114–3 6. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2015.
Raeder, Siegfried. “The Exegetical and Hermeneutical Work of Martin Luther.” In Hebrew Bible/
Old Testament: The History of Its Interpretation, vol. 2: From the Renaissance to the Enlightenment, edited
by Magne Saebø, 363–406. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2008.
Ramanujan, A. K. “Repetition in the Mahābhārata.” In Essays on the Mahābhārata, edited by Arvind
Sharma, 419– 43. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2007.
Reich, Tamar C. “Ends and Closures in the Mahābhārata.” International Journal of Hindu Studies 15,
no. 1, The Mahābhārata—Perspectives on its Ends and Endings (2011): 9– 53.
Rowell, Margit. “František Kupka: A Metaphysics of Abstraction.” In František Kupka 1871– 1957: A
Retrospective. New York: Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, 1975.
— — — , ed. František Kupka 1871– 1957: A Retrospective. New York: Solomon R. Guggenheim
Foundation, 1975.
Schechter, Solomon. “Higher Criticism—H igher Anti- Semitism.” In Seminary Address and Other
Papers. 35– 39. Cincinnati, OH: Ark Publishing, 1915.
Schreiner, Peter. “Die Hymnen des Viṣṇupurānạ: Materialien zur Textanalyse des Viṣṇupurānạ.”
Habilitationsschrift, University of Tübingen, 1980.
Sheehan, Jonathan. The Enlightenment Bible: Translation, Scholarship, Culture. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2005.
Söhnen, Renate. Untersuchungen zur Komposition von Reden und Gesprächen im Rāmāyan ̣a. 2 vols.
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 6. Reinbek: Dr. Inge Wezler, Verlag für orientalistische
Fachpublikationen, 1979.
Sørensen, Søren. An Index to the Names in the Mahabharata: With Short Explanations and a Concordance to
the Bombay and Calcutta Editions and P. C. Roy’s Translation. 13 vols. London: Williams & Norgate,
1904– 25.
Teugels, Lieve. “Textual Criticism of Late Rabbinic Midrashim: The Example of Aggadat
Bereshit.” In Recent Developments in Textual Criticism: New Testament, Other Early Christian and
Jewish Literature, edited by Wim Weren and Dietrich-A lex Koch, 207– 41. Assen: Van
Gorcum, 2003.
Tieken, Herman. “The Mahābhārata after the Great Battle.” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens
48 (2004): 5– 46.
524
524 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Tuchman, Maurice. The Spiritual in Art: Abstract Painting 1890– 1985. New York: Aberville Publishers,
1986.
Vachtová, Ludmila. Frank Kupka, Pioneer of Abstract Art. Translated by Zdeněk Lederer, with an
Introduction by J. P. Hodin. New York: McGraw- Hill, 1968.
Wojtilla, Gyula. Review of Viṣn ̣udharmāḥ. Precepts for the Worship of Viṣn ̣u, Part 1 Adhyāyas1– 43, by
Reinhold Grünendahl. Acta Orientalia Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 39, no. 2/3 (1985): 392– 93.
Notes
1 The Āśramavāsika, Mausala, Mahāprasthānika and Svargārohaṇa parvans appeared in one
volume.
2 The Śāntiparvan is the only book of the critical edition with a separate introduction.
The Mahābhārata’s longest book was published in ive parts: part I: Rājadharma; part
II: Āpaddharma and Concordance; part IIIA: Mokṣadharma A (Mahābhārata 12.168– 317)
and part IIIB: Mokṣadharma B (Mahābhārata 12.318– 53), along with the aforementioned
introduction, which appeared as the last of the ive parts.
525
INDEX
Page numbers in italics indicate tables, igures and illustrations.
abstract art and concept of critical edition reconstruction of reading of 355, 356
xxiii– xxviii resilience, argument from, and redeinition
adhy āyas 357, 455n22. See also structure of of archetype 61– 62
Mahābhārata special status of 94n28
Adluri, Vishwa, and Joydeep Bagchee, The spread, argument from, and redeinition of
Nay Science xv– xvi, 11, 27, 156n68, archetype 55– 59
319, xxixn8 Aristotle 159n76, 275n14
analytic school 5, 53, 95n37, 112n139, Arjunamiśra 397, 400– 403, 458nn39– 40,
119, 126, 141, 143, 145n8, 146n9, 461n73, 462n79, 462n86, 463n96
148n16, 149n32 Aryanist/ neo- Aryanist ideology xvii, 145n7,
Ānandavardhana 398 319, 479– 480n167, xxxn13
ancestor, concept of 12– 13, 18 Austin, Christopher R. 111– 13n139,
anti- Brahmanism 70, 88– 89, 145n6, 269 144– 45n3, 276n26
anti- modernism xxiv, xxxn14 Āyodhyakāṇḍa manuscript 432
anti- Semitism xvii, 28n2, 140– 41, 145n7,
157n70, 313n359 Bagchee, Joydeep, and Vishwa Adluri, The
apographs Nay Science xv– xvi, 11, 27, 156n68,
classiication issues 319, xxixn8
expertise, argument from 313n360 Barbi, Michele 14
extensive contamination, argument from bardic hypothesis 27, 93n25, 160n79
212, 230, 231, 233, 234– 35, 240, 243, Baur, Ferdinand Christian 319
291n184, 298n250 Baur, George Lorenz 319
independent recensions, argument from Bédier, Joseph, and Bédierism 31n20, 33n30,
259, 301n277, 305n303 248, 268, 308– 9n337
contamination, identifying source of Belvalkar, S. K. xvii, 89n2, 198– 99, 288n162,
124– 25, 126 401, 402, 461n72, 461n74, 461n76,
deined 13 463nn86– 88, 463nn93– 97
apparatus criticus (critical apparatus) 13, Bengālī manuscripts 30n16, 80, 82, 187, 192,
17, 351– 54 204, 205, 223
archetype Bentley, Richard 320, 328n16
Bigger’s assumption of 157n71 Bhagavadgītā 27, 40n88, 99n72, 100n81,
coincidence of archetype and normative 289n168, 402, 425, 425– 27,
redaction 65– 67, 66 463n94, 464n99
deined 13 Bhārgavas 102n98, 147n13
extant tradition, as source of irst branching Bhatta Bakre, Mahadeva Shastri Gangadhara
of 96n47 401, 461n71
multiple meanings of 13, 18– 20, 36n65, 67, Bhaṭṭācārya, Paramānanda 402, 403,
94n34, 97n60 463n88
normative redaction hypothesis, archetype Biardeau, Madeleine 42n92, 274,
and original in 46, 46– 49, 48, 92n14 317n395, 430
526
526 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
biblical criticism and theology, as background brevior lectio potior 171, 175
of German Indology 325n4, brevity, argument from 169– 82, 170, 174,
327nn12– 13 177– 78, 179
Bidnur, Jahnavi 398 Brockington, John L. 142, 271, 273, 429,
Bieler, Ludwig 31n20 464n104. See also Venn diagrams
Bigger, Andreas Bronkhorst, Johannes 63, 65, 99nn75– 76,
archetype, assumption of 157n71 100n80, 269, 328– 29n22
Brockington on Venn diagrams and 433, Burnell, A. C. 367, 455– 56n23,
434, 466n109, 466n117 456– 57nn25–26
on classiication and Grünendahl’s work
163– 64, 167, 169, 275n13, 275n17, Catholicism 342, 479– 80n167, xxx– xxxin15
277n28, 314– 15n369 Caturbhuja 400, 401, 403, 463n95,
on critical edition 157n72 464nn97– 98
on iliation 275n17 Cicero, Ad Atticum 18
normative redaction hypothesis of xv, xvii, citation of Mahābhārata 357
21, 22, 28, 35n54, 45– 46, 47– 49, classical philology, spurious relationship of
101n88 (See also normative redaction German Indology to 319– 24
hypothesis) classiication of Mahābhārata manuscripts
oral source, on contamination from 132, 5– 8, 163– 274
133, 135– 39, 140 brevity, argument from 169– 80, 170, 174,
on prehistory of normative redaction 121, 177– 78, 179, 182
122, 143, 144 expertise, argument from 269– 74
uncertainty, on contamination argued from extensive contamination, argument
126– 29, 131 from 209– 46
Witzel’s thesis compared 269 assimilation of K1 manuscript to Śāradā
bipartite stemma 39n81, 125, 127, 167, 168 codex 241– 46, 244– 247
birth and death of manuscripts 24– 26, 25 corruption, contamination as 210– 15,
Bornmann, Fritz 124 211, 212, 213, 214
bottleneck theories 18, 20, 36n65, 58, 65, 67, iliation, Grünendahl’s failure to
99n75, 321, 328n19, 328– 29nn22–23 understand 233– 35
Brahmā- Gaṇeśa interpolation 106n114, 201 Grünendahl’s understanding of
Brahmanic tradition overriding Kṣatriya concept of classiication and 228– 33,
tradition 228– 29, 231– 33
anti- Brahmanism 70, 88– 89, 145n6, 269 inlation (transmission of interpolations),
Bhārgavas and 102n98, 147n13 contamination as 215– 17, 216, 217
Brockington on Venn diagrams and non- contamination (absence
429, 432– 33 of interpolations) as type of
conservatism of Brahmanic contamination 217– 30, 220, 222, 223,
tradition 160n79 225– 26, 227, 228, 295– 96n218
as contamination 119– 22, 126– 31, 132, ‘purity’, Grünendahl’s deinition of
139, 140– 41, 144, 150– 51n40, 153n59 294n208
distinction of Vedic- Brahmanic and Sukthankar’s identiication of K group as
Epic- Heroic traditions 467– 68n118 separate class 235– 41, 237– 40
in normative redaction hypothesis 45, false premises, argument from
52, 54, 59– 60, 62, 63, 66– 67, 68, 169– 70, 180– 82
71, 72, 74– 75, 87– 88, 97– 98n65, iliation, determining 164– 67
100n78, 100n80 independent (regional) recensions, argument
origins of theory of 155– 56n65 from 247– 69
textual critics’ response to critical edition confusion leading to 290n175
and 22, 24, 27, 28n2, 38n74, ‘criticism of the base manuscript’
38n79, 40n88 approach 248, 266– 69
527
INDEX 527
superiority of Ñ4 to K1, 248, 257– 66, contamination 4– 5, 119– 44. See also under
261, 265 classiication of Mahābhārata
superiority of Newārī to Kaśmīrī manuscripts
manuscripts generally 248– 56, 250, as Brahmanic takeover or redaction
252, 254, 256 of Kṣatriya tradition 119– 22,
by meliores and deteriores 310– 11n345 126– 31, 132, 139, 140– 41, 144,
misapprehension concerning classiication 150– 51n40, 153n59
(Schriftartprämisse), argument from deining 119– 20
182– 209 extra- archetypal 146– 47n10
content of text, classiication properly extra- stemmatic 120– 22, 126, 127– 30, 132,
based on 192– 96, 205, 278n50 143, 145– 46n9, 152n54
geographic or script- based presentation, hyperarchetypal 120– 22, 132, 143,
assumptions regarding 191– 92, 146– 47n10
204– 8, 207 intra- stemmatic 120, 131, 132,
K siglum, misunderstanding of use 146– 47n10, 149n33
of 203– 4 normative redaction hypothesis and 121,
Kaśmīrī version and K siglum, critique of 122, 126– 27, 129, 131
Sukthankar’s use of 200– 5 objective criteria for identifying source of
presentation or organization of material 122– 26, 123
185– 92, 187– 88, 192 from oral source 131– 39, 133– 35, 137, 138,
reproduction of Sukthankar’s stemma 152n53, 155n64
and 184, 184– 85 postulated antiquity and ideology,
single manuscript as evidence of version arguments from 140– 44, 142, 143
of text 196, 196– 200, 198, 199 ‘purity’, Grünendahl’s deinition of
racial classiication theories inluencing 294n208
313n360, 318 Sukthankar on 301n271
typological versus genealogical 163– 64 uncertainty, argument from 126– 31,
witness texts, eliminating 167– 69, 168, 127– 30, 151n46
284– 85n127 content of text, classiication properly based
codex descriptus (codices descripti) 197, on 192– 96, 205
284– 85n127, 434– 35, 473– 74n133 Contini, Gianfranco 13, 50, 156n67,
codex optimus 31n20 281n100, 330n27
codex unicus 19, 35n53, 47, 50, 60, 141, corruption, contamination as 210– 15, 211,
248, 322 212, 214, 215
commentaries and commentators. critical apparatus (apparatus criticus) 13, 17,
See also speciic commentators 351– 52, 352– 54
on Bhagavadgītā 425, 425– 27 critical edition. See also Mahābhārata critical
on Mahābhārata 397– 403, 403– 18, edition
458n38 abstract art and concept of xxiii– xxviii
role of 12, 63, 99n75, 159– 60n78 Bigger on 157n72
Sukthankar on study of 317n393 deined 324
variant readings, not concerned by 292n188 German Indologists on concept of
common- error method 47, 324, 328n18 335– 36n53
conjunctive errors 34n36, 55– 56, 57, 67, 74 plurality of texts, as arrangement of xxviii,
conservatism xxxin28
of Brahmanic tradition 160n79 reasons for creating 11– 12
of geographic peripheries relative to as reconstruction of reading of archetype
linguistic center 432, 454n9 355, 356
of Mahābhārata tradition as text versus working tool 15, 32n24
154– 55n63, 454n8 critical philology of Pollock 272,
constitutio textus (critically constituted text) 13 315– 16nn383–84
528
528 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
critically constituted text (constitutio textus) 13 extra- archetypal contamination 146– 47n10
crux 7, 14, 94n31, 129– 30, 247, 267, 356 extra- stemmatic contamination 120– 22,
126, 127– 30, 133, 134, 143,
Dandekar, R. N. 401, 456n24, 145– 46n9, 152n54
462n79, 463n91
death of manuscripts 24– 26, 25 false premises, argument from 169– 70,
Debroy, Bibek 347– 48, 455n17 180– 82
decimation rate 24 iliation
Dembowski, Peter F. 165, 311n355 Bigger on 275n17
descendant manuscripts, concept of 96n56 Brockington’s Venn diagram proposal
Devabodha 317n393, 397– 403, and 435
458– 9nn40–41, 459n44, 460n68, classiication of manuscripts and 163– 67
461n73, 462n79, 463nn93– 94, 463n95 Grünendahl’s failure to understand
Devanāgarī manuscripts 233– 35
Burnell’s stemma and 456– 57n26 interpolations/ absence of interpolations as
classiication issues insuicient basis for 214, 216– 17, 219,
expertise, argument from 271 225– 26, 230
extensive contamination, argument from normative redaction hypothesis and
209, 223, 224, 235 69, 102n92
independent recensions, argument from inal redaction (normative redaction)
248, 308n327, 310– 11n345, 312n357 hypothesis of von Simson 19– 24, 27,
misapprehension concerning classiication 28, 33n34, 35n54, 36– 37nn66–67,
(Schriftartprämisse), argument from 184, 40n88. See also normative redaction
186– 87, 193, 195, 200, 201– 4, 205, hypothesis
206nn8– 10, 281n103, 281– 82n108, Fitzgerald, James L. xv, xvi, 21, 28– 29n3,
285– 86n136, 287– 88nn160–62, 35n54, 36n64, 41– 42nn91–92,
289nn166– 68 112– 14n139, 271– 72
commentaries and 462n86 Flores, Enrico 55– 60, 58, 62
in normative redaction hypothesis 80, Fontaine, Jacques 142
102– 3n100, 105– 6n112, 110n130 Foucault, Michel, The Order of Things, vii
Telegu recension and 30n16 Fraenkel, Eduard 319
Venn diagrams and 465– 66n108 Franco, Eli 325– 26n6, 464n104
diaskeusis 92n20, 101n86, 114n143, 155n65 Frankensteinism 14– 15, 29– 30n12
Doniger, Wendy 14– 15 Froger, Jacques 164, 166, 275n18
double agreement 280n84
Gauguin, Paul xxx– xxxin15
ecdotics xviii, xviii– xixn7 genealogical- reconstructive method 13,
Edgerton, Franklin 89– 90n2, 200– 201, 268, 324, 355, 429, 470n124. See also
286nn140– 42, 288– 89nn164–65, stemma/ stemmata
296n224, 300– 301n262, 304n300, genealogy of German Indology 342
305n306, 400 genetic racism 313– 14n360, 318
Edwards, A. W. F. 472n127 genetic relationships between manuscripts
empty reference, argument from 67– 75, 33n35, 217, 218, 289n165, 292n191,
72, 102n91 293n193, 452, 477n158
English translations of Mahābhārata genetics, compared to philology xxiii, 37n69,
347– 50 276n24, 313– 14n360
epic, concept of 153– 54n62 geographic presentation of material,
epistemic prejudices 145n7 classiication misapprehension based
Euler diagram 472n127 on 191– 92, 203– 8, 207
Euripides, Iphigenia in Aulis xxvii geology, Indian historical writing inluenced
expertise, argument from 269– 74 by 325n4
529
INDEX 529
German Indology and German Indologists structure and arrangement 367
319– 24, 339. See also speciic German textual critics’ reception of Mahābhārata
Indologists critical edition and 30n16, 38n73
anti- Semitism of xvii, 28n2, 140, 145n7, Griith, John G. 451– 52, 475– 77nn149–58
157n70, 313n359 Grünendahl, Reinhold xv, 21
Aryanist/ neo- Aryanist ideology of xvii, Brockington on Venn diagrams and 433,
xxxn13, 145n7, 319, 479– 80n167 434, 465– 66n108, 466n109, 479n165
biblical criticism and theology inluencing classiication theories of 164, 169 (See
325n4, 327nn12– 13 also classiication of Mahābhārata
Brahmanic tradition overriding Kṣatriya manuscripts)
tradition, belief in 22, 24, 27 (See critical edition, on concept of 335– 36n53
also Brahmanic tradition overriding Mahābhārata manuscripts, lack of
Kṣatriya tradition) experience with 289n167, 290n173
Brockington’s Venn diagrams and 433– 35, normative redaction hypothesis and 86
466– 67n118 sole edition (of Viṣṇudharmāḥ) produced
classical philology, spurious relationship by 308– 9n337, 310– 11n345, 311n350,
to 319– 24 312n357
deined 324n1 on textual criticism 311– 12n356, 326nn7– 8,
genealogy of 342 333– 34n49
Mahābhārata critical edition, reception of Guidi, Vincenzo 24
20– 28, 23, 25 (See also Mahābhārata Günther, Hans F. K. 313– 14n360, 318
critical edition) Gupta redaction hypothesis of Fitzgerald xv,
oral hypothesis, reliance on xv– xvi, 28, 21, 26, 35n54, 41– 42n91, 113n139
28– 29n3, 36– 37n66, 41n90, 89– 90n2, Gurd, Sean Alexander xxix– xxxn10, xxxin23
429– 30 (See also oral hypothesis)
‘original’ meanings, conidence in ability to Hacker, Paul 94– 95n35
recover 332n40, 334– 35n52 Hahn, Michael 116– 17nn147–49
Protestantism, inluence of 15, 32n23, 88, Hellwig, Oliver 100n81
140, 154– 55n63, 156n69, 160n79, Herder, Johann Gottfried 320
313n359, 319, 327n12, 327– 28n15, higher criticism, concept of 49– 53, 51
339, 342 Hiltebeitel, Alf 273, 316– 17n390, 379
realia and 339 Rethinking the Mah ābh ārata xvi
recognition of 299– 300n256 Hinüber, Oskar von 31– 32n22, 46,
responsibility, lack of sense of 480n168 270– 71, 434
Gode, P. K. 400, 460n57 historical and textual criticism, confusion
Goldstücker, Theodor 155n65 of 328n16
Grantha edition 359 historical- critical method 114– 15n144,
Grantha manuscripts 327– 28nn15–16, 342
Burnell’s stemma and 393, 456– 57n26 Hitler, Adolf xxxn13
classiication issues Holtzmann, Adolf, Jr. 27, 28n3, 40–
expertise, argument from 271, 273 41n89, 88, 115n146, 153nn60– 61,
extensive contamination, argument from 325nn4– 5, xxixn8
210, 211, 213, 214, 291n181, 293n192 Holtzmann, Adolf, Sr. 325n4
independent recensions, argument from Homer, Mahābhārata compared to 35n58,
303n285 40n88, 97n60, 270, 333n45, 430
misapprehension concerning classiication Hopkins, Edward W. 114n142, xxixn8
(Schriftartprämisse), argument from horizontal transmission 50, 80, 91n6,
183, 186, 187, 192, 193, 204, 206n7, 108n122, 119, 216, 255, 292n191,
282n109, 283– 84n121, 289n170 296n225– 26, 450
commentaries and 463n88 Howe, Christopher J. 39n82
Nāgarī/ Grantha bottleneck 329n23 Hudson, Emily xxxi– xxxiin29
530
530 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Human Genome Project 37n69 independent recensions, argument
hyparchetypes from 248– 49, 252, 257, 304– 5n301,
classiication issues and 308n327
brevity, argument from 280n86 misapprehension concerning
extensive contamination, argument from classiication, argument from 193,
209, 212, 216, 218, 235, 238, 243, 200– 204, 281– 82n108, 284– 85n127,
293– 94n200 286n142, 287– 88nn159–60
independent recension, argument contamination and 131
from 253, 254, 256, 257, 301n277, normative redaction hypothesis and
302nn283– 84, 304n292, 310n343 106– 7n115
misapprehension concerning classiication textual critics’ responses to Mahābhārata
(Schriftartprämisse), argument from 185, critical edition and 16
191, 197, 282n110, 285n130, 285n133 Kosambi, D. D. 147n12
witnesses, eliminating 168 Kṣatriya tradition. See Brahmanic tradition
contamination and 148n27 overriding Kṣatriya tradition
deined 14, 29n10, 51 Kupka, František xxiii, xxvi– xxviii,
in normative redaction hypothesis 14, xxixn1, xxixn7
29n10, 51, 63 Hindu Motif (Graduated Red) xxvii, xxxin27
hyperarchetypal contamination 120– 22, 132, Le Premier Pas (The First Step) xxiii– xxvii,
143, 146– 47n10 xxviii
hyperarchetypal inference. See normative
redaction hypothesis Lachmann, Karl 15, 33n30, 93n26, 122– 23,
196– 97, 248, 319, 328n16, 334n50
ideology, argument from 140– 44, 142, 143 Lariviere, Richard 334n51
independent recensions, argument from. Lassen, Christian 88, 101n86, 114n143,
See under classiication of Mahābhārata 155n65, 157n70, 325n4
manuscripts latent errors 23, 50, 93– 94n27, 330n27
inlation (transmission of interpolations), Lears, T. J. Jackson xxxn14
contamination as 215– 17, 215, 216, 217 Leclere, Basile 397– 98, 459n44
intra- stemmatic contamination 120, 131, 132, lectio diicilior 27, 263, 264, 265, 320, 431,
146– 47n10, 149n33 474n133
Irigoin, Jean 119, 296– 97n225 lectio heroicior praeferenda est 139, 152– 53n58
Isidore, Etymologies 141– 43, 142, 158– 59n76 Lejay, Paul 275– 76n18
Leonardi, Lino 13, 15, 163, 248, 267– 68,
Jacob, Benno 313n359 281n100, 331– 32n38, 480n168
James, William, The Varieties of Religious Lévi, Sylvain 16, 33n30
Experience xxxn14 Lipsey, Roger, Disks of Newton xxv– xxvi
Jamison, Stephanie 326– 27n9 loss, argument from 75– 88
Janamejaya 28 lost original, eforts to reconstruct 93n25
Jerusalem, Johann 88 lower criticism 50, 52, 93n24, 94n34, 276n26
Joyce, James, Finnegans Wake 429 Lüders, Heinrich 183, 185, 192– 93, 204,
209– 10, 270, 281– 82n108, 290n175
Kaṇikanīti xxxi– xxxiin29 Luther, Martin 32n23, 342
Kannada script 431
Kantorowicz, Hermann 18, 319 Maas, Paul xvii, 50– 52, 51, 55, 60, 92n17,
Kaśmīrī version 94n28, 165, 167, 319
classiication issues Maas, Philipp 36n65
brevity, argument from 173 Mahābhārata. See also structure of
extensive contamination, argument from Mahābhārata
242, 293– 94n200 abbreviated concordance of principle
false premises, argument from 181 editions 389, 389– 90
531
INDEX 531
average Indian’s understanding of 274, salaries of editors of 479n160
317n392 stemmata used to construct 13 (See also
citation of 357 stemma/ stemmata)
conservative nature of tradition table of manuscripts collated for 384
154– 55n63, 454n8 as text versus working tool 15, 32n24
editions prior to critical edition 345– 46 textual critics’ reception of 20– 28, 23, 25
English translations 347– 50 variant readings, scribes and commentators
northern and southern recensions not concerned by 292n188
150nn38– 39, 361, 367– 68, 368– 70 volumes 343– 44
number of verses 359, 359– 60 witness texts, role of xxxi– xxxiin29
oldest dated manuscript of Ādiparvan written text, Mahābhārata viewed as xvi
39n83, 77– 78, 82, 110n127, Mahābhārata vulgate 16, 471n126
110n129– 30, 162 Mahadevan, T. P. xvi, 466n109
Mahābhārata critical edition xv– xvi, 1, 11– 28 Maithili manuscripts 82, 223, 461n76
abbreviations and diacritical signs 387– 88 Malayām manuscripts
abstract art as means of understanding Brockington on Venn diagrams and
concept of xxiii– xxviii 432, 435
archetype, concept of 13, 18– 20 (See also Burnell’s stemma and 456– 57n26
archetype) classiication issues 184, 192– 93, 198– 99,
Brahmanic tradition overriding Kṣatriya 210– 11, 257, 283– 84n121, 289n166,
tradition, German Indologists’ belief in 291n180
22, 24, 27 (See also Brahmanic tradition parvans, arrangement of 367
overriding Kṣatriya tradition) Marichal, Robert 45
contamination and 119– 44 (See also McGrath, Kevin 479– 80nn166–67
contamination) Meecham, Pam xxixn7
critical apparatus, deinition and use of 13, Mehendale, M. A. 470– 71n125
17, 351– 52, 352– 54 mimesis and Mahābhārata xxvii– xxviii
deined and described 12– 16, 13, 17 Minkowski, Christopher 397, 459n43
editors of 343 Müller- Sievers, Helmut 334n50
inal redaction hypothesis of von Simson Mylius, Klaus 147n12
19– 22, 24, 27, 28
irst editorial board 44 Nāgarī recension 204, 393, 456– 57n26
Frankensteinism, charged with 14– 15, Nāgarī/ Grantha bottleneck 329n23
29– 30n12 Nandināgari script 206n11, 288n163, 431
German scholars, recognition of narrative units (up ākhy ānas or subtales) of
299– 300n256 Mahābhārata 379– 81
Gupta redaction hypothesis of Fitzgerald xv, Nepālī manuscripts
21, 26, 35n54, 41– 2n91, 113n139 classiication issues
interpretation of 14– 20 expertise, argument from 271
mimesis, central role of xxvii– xxviii extensive contamination, argument from
normative redaction hypothesis 21, 28, 224, 233
35n54, 45– 88 (See also normative false premises, argument from 278n50
redaction hypothesis) independent recensions, argument from
oral hypothesis, German Indologists’ reliance 247, 248, 259, 267– 68, 307nn318– 19
on xvi, 28, 29– 30n3, 36– 37n66, 41n90 misapprehension concerning classiication
(See also oral hypothesis) (Schriftartprämisse), argument from 190,
plurality of texts, as arrangement of xxviii, 285n129, 289n167, 290n173
xxxin28 in normative redaction hypothesis 77, 79,
reasons for creating 11– 12 82– 86, 110n129
reconstruction of reading of archetype oldest dated manuscript of Ādiparvan
355, 356 39n83, 82– 86, 107n116, 110n127, 162
532
532 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Newārī manuscripts 170, 206n3, 248, 252, failure of scholars to make case for
312n357 479– 80nn166–67
Nibelungenlied xxvii, 123, 196 normative redaction hypothesis and
Nietzsche, Friedrich xvii, xxxn11, 89– 90n2
xxx– xxxin15, 75, 99n69, 105n106, 453 textual critics’ responses to Mahābhārata
Nīlakaṇṭha 12, 16, 33n31, 45, 91n6, 200, 270, critical edition based on belief in xvii,
317n393, 397– 403, 430, 456– 57n26, 28, 28– 29n3, 36– 37n66, 41n90
461n73, 463n92 oral source, contamination from 131– 40,
non- contamination (absence of interpolations) 133– 35, 137, 138, 152n53,
as type of contamination 217– 30, 220, 155n64
222, 223, 225, 227, 228, 295– 96n218 organization or presentation of material,
Nordic type, classiication of 313– 14n360, 318 classiication misapprehension based
normative redaction hypothesis 2– 3, 45– 89 on 185– 91, 187– 88, 191, 192
anti- Brahmanism of 88 Oriya script 431
archetype and original in 46, 46– 49,
48, 92n14 Paramānanda. See Bhaṭṭācārya, Paramānanda
as if logic of 88, 115–1 6n146 Paranjpe, V. G. 401
coincidence of archetype and normative Paris, Gaston 275– 76n18
redaction in 65– 67, 66 parvans 357, 359– 60, 361, 361– 65, 367– 68,
comprehensive revision of text, pointing 368– 70, 371– 77, 393, 393– 96,
to 92n18 455n18, 456– 7n26. See also structure of
contamination and 121, 122, 126– 27, Mahābhārata
129, 131 Pasquali, Giorgio 31n19, 98– 99n68, 454n9
deined and described 45– 46 Storia della tradizione e critica del testo
empty reference, argument from 67– 75, xvii, 134– 35
72, 102n91 Philipps- Rodriguez, Wendy 433
loating oral tradition and 101– 2n88, philology
112n139, 138, 152n56 classical philology, spurious relationship of
higher criticism and 49– 53, 51 German Indology to 319– 24
loss, argument from 75– 88 critical philology of Pollock 272,
prehistory of 121, 122, 143, 144 315– 16nn383–84
resilience, argument from 54, 61, 61– 67 deined by Witzel 340n3
space- time continuum of Indian history “post- philological,” as concept 320, 326n7
and 339– 40n2 Pollock, Sheldon I. 272, 315– 16nn383–84,
spread, argument from 54– 61, 58 478n161
textual critics’ reception of Mahābhārata popular narratives
critical edition and 21, 28, 35n54 classiication and 155 n65, 158n75
uniform redaction, based on xv, 45, 47, normative redaction hypothesis and 63,
89– 90n2 76, 78, 79– 80, 81, 82, 91n6, 105n105,
Nuremberg Race Laws (1935) 313– 14n360 108n122
textual critics’ response to critical edition
Oldenberg, Hermann xxixn8 and 28, 38n74
oldest dated manuscript of Ādiparvan 39n83, Venn diagrams, Brockington on 435
82– 86, 107n116, 110n127, 162 “post- philological,” as concept 320, 326n7
oral hypothesis postulated antiquity, argument from 140– 44,
bardic origins attributed to Mahābhārata 142, 143
and 27, 93n25, 160n79 presentation or organization of material,
Brockington on Venn diagrams and 429– 30, classiication misapprehension based
434, 468– 69nn120–21 on 185– 91, 187– 88, 191, 192
distinction of Vedic- Brahmanic and Protestantism and Mahābhārata textual
Epic- Heroic traditions 467– 68n119 criticism 15, 88, 140, 154– 55n63,
533
INDEX 533
156n69, 160n79, 313n359, 319, classiication issues
327n12, 327– 28n15, 339, 342 brevity, argument from 169, 171,
‘purity’, Grünendahl’s deinition of 294n208 172, 175, 176, 178, 180, 278n48,
280n82
quadripartite stemma 125 extensive contamination, argument from
Quellenkritik 27, 158n75 235, 236, 241, 243, 293– 94n200
false premises, argument from 181, 182
rabbinic literature and textual criticism misapprehension concerning classiication
154– 55n63 (Schriftartprämisse), argument from 186,
racial classiication 313n360, 318 197, 199, 200, 201, 202, 285n127,
Rāmakṛṣṇa (commentator) 400, 403 286n142, 287n155, 287n159
Rāmānuja 401, 403, 464n103 contamination and 151n43
Ramanujan, A. K. xxvii extent of, for Ādiparvan 385
Rāmāyaṇa and Rāmāyaṇa critical edition textual critics’ responses to Mahābhārata
Brockington on Venn diagrams and 429, critical edition and 38n73, 39n83
431– 33, 435, 447, 450, 465– 66n108, Śāradā manuscripts 322
467– 68n119, 468– 69nn120–21, Brockington on Venn diagrams and 431
473– 74n133, 475n139, 477– 78n161 classiication issues
classiication issues 230– 31, 282– 3n113 brevity, argument from 176
contamination and 153n61, expertise, argument from 270,
153– 54n62 271– 72, 273
criticism and 104– 5n104 extensive contamination 210, 225, 228,
Ratnagarbha 400, 403, 464n98 230, 235– 36, 242– 43, 291n180,
Rau, Wilhelm 334n51 293– 94n200, 297n235, 297n239,
real trees 19, 23, 24, 63, 65, 66, 67, 98n67, 300n259
99n75, 437 independent recensions, argument from
recentiores deteriores 137, 138 258, 308n327
recentiores non deteriores 134– 35, 135, misapprehension concerning classiication
136, 450 (Schriftartprämisse), argument from 184,
Reeve, Michael D. 55– 59, 61– 2, 111n132, 186, 187, 195– 97, 199– 204, 205,
145– 46n9, 148– 49n28, 168, 212, 206n12, 281n103, 282n108, 285n129,
278n49, 284n125, 475n145 286n136, 287n155, 287– 88n160,
regional recensions, argument from. See 288n162, 289n168, 289n170
under classiication of Mahābhārata contamination and 131
manuscripts normative redaction hypothesis and 63, 77,
Reichenbach, Karl von xxxn13 91n6, 106– 7n115, 110nn129– 30
resilience, argument from 54, 61, 61– 67 textual critics’ responses to Mahābhārata
Rizzo, Silvia 279n62 critical edition and 38n73
Roman Catholicism 342, 479– 80n167, Sarvajña- Nārāyaṇa 397, 400, 401,
xxx– xxxin15 403, 463n95
Rousseau, Jean Jacques 320 Śaunaka 28
Rowell, Margit xxiv Schechter, Solomon 313n359
Ruben, Walter 282– 83n113, 283– 84n121, Schriftartprämisse. See under classiication of
290n173 Mahābhārata manuscripts
script- based presentation of material,
Sāṃkhya school 398 classiication misapprehension based
S āṃkhyak ārik
ā
398 on 191– 92, 204– 9, 207
Śaṅkara 401, 403, 464n103 Sedulius Scottus 278n49
Śaṅkarācārya 425 Semler, Johann Salomo 319
Sannazaro, Arcadia 24 Sheehan, Jonathan xixn8
Śāradā codex Sheldon, Julie xxixn7
534
534 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Shillingsburg, Peter L. 336– 37n54 ‘style’, concept of 145n5
signiicant errors 7, 56, 82, 172, 209, 233, subjective reconstruction 37n67
276n25, 292n189, 302n280, 310n345, subtales (up ākhy ānas or narrative units) of
437, 439 Mahābhārata 379– 81
single manuscript, as evidence of version of Sukthankar, V. S. xvii– xviii, 10. See also
text 196, 196– 99, 198, 199 Mahābhārata critical edition
single manuscript, emerging consensus that abstract art, creation of critical edition
reconstructive editions should respect compared to xxiii– xxviii
integrity of 331– 32n38 Calcutta edition numbering criticized by
Slaje, Walter 269, 270 457– 58n35
śodhapatra 11 commentaries, on study of 317n393
Söhnen, Renate 430, 465n107 on conservative nature of Mahābhārata
Spencer, Matthew 39n82 tradition 154– 55n63
spread, argument from 54– 61, 58 on contamination 301n271
stemma/ stemmata describing critical edition 13, 16, 18
abstract art, creation compared to Edgerton on death of 286n140
xxiii– xxviii educational background xxixn9
apparent narrowing of tradition indicated irst(?) attempt at stemma codicum of
by 46, 46– 49, 48 Ādiparvan versions xxii
bipartite 39n81, 125, 127, 167, 168 German scholars, recognition of
criticism of stemmatic method 93– 94n27 299– 300n256
deined xxixn3, 96n58 on higher criticism 53
Griith’s tabulation of agreements on lack of loss in the tradition 26,
compared 451– 52, 475– 77nn149–58 109– 10n124
Grünendahl’s attack on (See classiication of motivation and purpose of 478n163
Mahābhārata manuscripts) on northern and southern manuscripts
Maas’s hypothetical stemma 50– 52, 51 150nn38– 39
for parvans 393, 393– 96 plurality of texts, critical edition as
quadripartite 125 arrangement of xxviii, xxxin28
real trees 19, 23, 24, 63, 65, 66, 67, 98n67, on readability of critical edition 32n24
99n75, 437 script and version, on concommitance
recensio, stemma emerging from 185– 86 between 288n161
shapes of 98n66 search for lost oral epic rejected by 95n37
stemma codicum, deined 13 on spurious passages 107– 8n121
Sukthankar’s irst(?) attempt at stemma table of manuscripts collated for
codicum of Ādiparvan versions xxii Mahābhārata 384
tripartite 30n13, 50, 125– 26, 169 on vulgate versus critical edition 471n126
Venn diagrams versus 429, 448, 450 (See also synthetic school 145n8
Venn diagrams)
Witzel on 331n36 Taine, Hippolyte 299n256
Stercutus 159n76 Telugu edition 346, 359, 454n11
Stietencron, Heinrich von 312– 13n358 Telugu manuscripts
stock phrases, use of 118 classiication issues
structure of Mahābhārata 357 expertise, argument from 271, 273
adhy āyas 357, 455n22 extensive contamination, argument from
narrative units (up ākhy ānas or 209– 11, 291n181
subtales) 379– 81 misapprehension concerning classiication
number of verses 359, 359– 60 (Schriftartprämisse), argument from
parvans, arrangement of 357, 361, 361– 65, 182, 183, 187, 193, 206n10,
367– 68, 368– 70, 371– 77, 455n18, 288– 89nn163–64
456– 57n26 normative redaction hypothesis and
upaparvans 357, 361, 361– 65, 455n22 104n100, 107–8n121
535
INDEX 535
parvans in 367 Vaiśaṃpāyana xxvi, 28, 458n40
textual critics’ reception of Mahābhārata Vaisṇava devotional tradition 397, 398
critical edition and 14, 30n16, 38n73 van Buitenen, J. A. B. 145n6, 147n12
Teugels, Lieve 154– 55n63 variant readings (variae lectiones) 12– 13, 33n34
text- critical approach 27, 37n67, 53, 73, 76, Velankar, H. D. 367, 401
82, 94– 95n35, 144– 45n3, 272 Venn diagrams 429– 53
text- historical approach 52, 94– 95n35, 235 concept of 435, 436
textual criticism Euler diagram versus 472n127
classical philology, spurious relationship of iliation issues 437– 38
German Indology to 319– 24 German Indologists inluencing Brockington
of German Indology (See German Indology on 433– 35, 466– 67n118
and German Indologists) graphical representation versus 447– 48
historical and textual criticism, confusion Griith’s tabulation of agreements
of 328n16 compared 451– 52, 475– 77nn149–58
Mahābhārata critical edition and (See ideological stance of Brockington and
Mahābhārata critical edition) 477– 78n161
single manuscript, emerging consensus that inadequacies of using 448– 51
reconstructive editions should respect Mahābhārata critical edition, Brockington’s
integrity of 331– 32n38 views on 429– 33, 449– 50
textual unconscious xixn8 oral hypothesis and 429– 31, 434, 453,
textus simplicior 176, 242, 245, 280n86, 468– 69nn120–21
310n343, 431 problems with Brockington’s presentation of
theology and biblical criticism, as background 438– 43, 440– 43
of German Indology 325n4, stemmata versus 429, 448, 450 (See also
327nn12– 13 stemma/ stemmata)
theosophy xxiv, xxxn11, xxxn13 true Venn diagrams, use of 443– 48,
Timpanaro, Sebastiano 15, 18, 23, 34– 5n46, 444– 46, 447
120, 123, 124, 126, 145– 46n9, 146n10, vertical transmission 80, 216, 219, 230,
152n54, 196– 97, 275n14, 276n27 310 n345, 450
tripartite stemma 30n13, 50, 125– 26, 169 Vidyāsāgara 402, 403
Trivandrum manuscript 431, 432, 434, 435, Vimalabodha 397, 400– 403, 461n76, 464n97
449, 473n131 Vira, Raghu 200, 285– 86n136, 289n166,
Trovato, Paolo xvii, 11, 18– 20, 23, 24, 34n36, 400
67, 93n25, 146– 47n9, 147n10, 319, Vi ṣamapadavivara ṇa 400
330n26, 332n40, 451, 473– 74n133, von Büren, Veronika 141– 44, 142, 158n75
478n162 von Roth, Rudolf 325n4
Tuchman, Maurice xxv, xxvi, xxxn13, xxxin24 von Simson, Georg, inal redaction (normative
redaction) hypothesis of 19– 22, 24,
Ugraśaravas xxvi, 28, 48– 69n120 27, 28, 33n34, 35n54, 36– 37nn66–67,
uncertainty, argument from 126– 31, 40n88 (See also normative redaction
127– 30, 151n46 hypothesis)
uniform redaction, concept of xv, 45, 47, vulgate text of Mahābhārata 16, 471n126
89– 90n2 Vyāsa xxvi, 28, 40n88, 41n90, 92n20,
up ākhy ānas (narrative units or subtales) 379– 81 107– 8n121, 180, 274, 458n40
upaparvans 357, 361, 361– 65, 455n22. See also
structure of Mahābhārata Wagener, Otto xxxn13
Urepos 12, 28n2, xxxn11 war narrative hypothesis 27
usus scribendi 27, 142, 265 Weitzman, Michael P. 39n81
West, Martin L. 131, 135, 136, 171, 186,
Vādirāja 400– 403, 460n63, 461n72, 281n106, 290n172, 451– 52, 475n146
462– 63n87 Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique xvii
Vaidya, P. L. xvii, 288n163 Whitman, Walt xxxn14
536
536 PHILOLOGY AND CRITICISM
Winternitz, Moriz 12, 29n5, 41n90, Witzel, Michael 269, 314nn361– 62,
114– 15nn144–45, 153– 54n62, 314n364, 320– 24, 335– 36n53,
155– 56n65, 158n75, 274n2 340nn3– 4
witness texts xxxi– xxxiin29, 167– 69, 168, Wolf, F. A. 31n21, 320, 328n16,
284– 85n127 471n126
