In Dialogue with Classical Indian Traditions
Encounter, Transformation and Interpretation
Edited by Brian Black and Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad
LONDON AND NEW YORK
This is an Accepted Manuscript of a book chapter published by Routledge/CRC
Press in In Dialogue with Classical Indian Traditions (2019), available online at:
https://www.routledge.com/In-Dialogue-with-Classical-In-dian-Traditions-
Encounter-Transformation/Black-Ram-Prasad/p/book/9780367786724
1
“Mahābhārata Dialogues on Dharma and Devotion with Kṛṣṇa and Hanūman”
Bruce M. Sullivan
The most well-known, frequently memorized, and arguably most important dialogue in
the Hindu religious tradition is to be found in the Bhagavad Gītā (Mahābhārata 6.23-
40).1 In this chapter, I compare this dialogue with another with which it has many
parallels and thematic resonances, the dialogue between Hanūmat (Hanūmān) and
Bhīma from the Āraṇyaka Parvan (Mahābhārata 3.146-53).2 The critical edition of the
Mahābhārata shows both passages to be represented throughout the manuscript
tradition, and to have relatively few variant readings. Themes shared by these two
dialogues include their presentations of Time as determining the quality of human life,
Time’s manifestation in the four eons (yuga-s), the importance of following one’s
dharma, and devotional worship (bhakti) of the divine.
These two dialogues are parallel not only with regard to their themes but also
their structure: each is an encounter of a Pāṇḍava warrior with a divine elder relative
who instructs his junior as a guru instructs a disciple. That the disciple in both cases is
a kṣatriya means that the admonition to follow his dharma refers specifically to the
warrior’s dharma. But the passages also repeatedly use the expression svadharma
(one’s own dharma), which will be significant as we shall see; kṣatriyadharma and
svadharma (even for a warrior) are not necessarily synonymous. Kṛṣṇa and Hanūmat
both deliver their discourses in dazzling divine forms that overwhelm their Pāṇḍava
2
disciples, who soon request in each case that the deity resume his prior form. The
revelation of divinity is also a secret: Kṛṣṇa displays his divine form only to Arjuna
despite the presence of many other warriors on the battlefield, while Hanūmat’s
revelation occurs privately and he tells Bhīma to keep it a secret. Indeed, the parallels
between these two dialogues are sufficiently numerous and close as to suggest to me
that the Hanūmat-Bhīma dialogue is likely to have been patterned on the Bhagavad
Gītā.
Time and Yuga
In the Bhagavad Gītā, Arjuna is stunned by the vision of Kṛṣṇa’s Viśvarūpa form,
which he associates with the eon-ending cataclysm: Arjuna tells Kṛṣṇa that he is
“Seeing your mouths that bristle with fangs and resemble the fire at the end of the
yuga…” (Bhagavad Gītā 11.25). Kṛṣṇa’s immediate response to Arjuna confirms his
perception: “I am Time grown old to destroy the world, embarked on the course of
world destruction…” (Bhagavad Gītā 11.32). This exchange follows shortly after the
previous chapter’s statements by Kṛṣṇa that also identify him as Time, even before he
reveals his Viśvarūpa form. In Kṛṣṇa’s recitation of entities with which he is identified,
he states “I am Time among those that count…” (Bhagavad Gītā 10.30). Kṛṣṇa goes on
to say, “I alone am imperishable Time, the Placer who faces all directions. I am Death
who seizes all, and the source of what will come to be…” (Bhagavad Gītā 10.33-34).
One of the most widely known verses in the Bhagavad Gītā is Kṛṣṇa’s statement
on his repeated births: “I come into being from yuga to yuga, for the rescue of the
3
good and the destruction of the evil, in order to restore dharma.” (Bhagavad Gītā 4.8).
The context for this statement to Arjuna is Kṛṣṇa’s presentation of his many births, all
of which he remembers, and while he is unborn and eternal, he takes birth whenever
dharma is threatened. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa states that he is imperishable, beyond time and
the rebirth cycle, a process he describes as follows: “…the Day of Brahmā lasts
thousands of yuga-s, the Night of Brahmā ends after thousands of yuga-s” (Bhagavad
Gītā 8.17). But those who practice exclusive devotion to the Supreme Person Kṛṣṇa go
to him at death and, on reaching him, their souls are not reborn again. This statement
will be considered again with other statements about devotion (bhakti).
Kṛṣṇa presents himself in the Bhagavad Gītā as Time, the divine force that
determines the limit of existence for the world and every human being. He also
presents himself as beyond the controlling influence of time, as beyond death and
rebirth, of which he is the master. Presiding over creation and destruction, he takes
birth on earth to protect dharma and those who follow dharma.
In the Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama, the theme of time conceived as four yuga-s
is prominent. Once Bhīma realizes that the old monkey before him is his brother
Hanūmat, both being sons of Vāyu the Wind God, Bhīma bows to him and asks to see
the “incomparable form” (rūpam apratimaṃ) in which Hanūmat jumped over the ocean
to reach Sītā in captivity, on Rāma’s behalf (Mahābhārata 3.148.3). Hanūmat says in
response that the form from an earlier yuga cannot now be seen again since all beings
comply with the yuga in which they live, and that even for him Time is inescapable.
Bhīma, however, is curious about the four yuga-s to which his brother has referred, and
4
asks for a description. The remainder of chapter 148 is dedicated to that description,
key features of which are summarized here:
Kṛta Yuga: White Nārāyaṇa is the soul of all beings; the four social classes are
well-defined and perform their own tasks (svakarmaniratāḥ prajāḥ, Mahābhārata
3.148.17). Dharma is complete in four quarters.
Tretā Yuga: Acutya (Kṛṣṇa) becomes red, and dharma is diminished by a
quarter. Sacrifice and ascetic practices are engaged in, and people adhere to dharma,
following their svadharma and performing rites.
Dvāpara Yuga: Viṣṇu becomes yellow, and dharma lives on only half-strength.
With the Veda separated into four, truthfulness and morality decline.
Kali Yuga: Keśava (Kṛṣṇa) becomes black in this age of darkness, and only a
quarter of dharma survives. Ordered social life, dharma, and rituals all fail.
Having stated that beings conform to the yuga in which they live, Hanūmat
nevertheless grants his brother the favor of viewing his form from the earlier yuga, and
expands to mountainous size, thereby demonstrating that he is not bound by
constraints of time. Delighted yet awestruck, Bhīma asks Hanūmat to reduce his
overwhelming magnitude (Mahābhārata 3.149.1-16). Hanūmat displays knowledge of
time as measured out in four yuga-s, each with its own distinctive qualities. He also
displays mastery of time and freedom from the restrictions time and the yuga-s impose.
As he informed Bhīma, Hanūmat had asked Rāma, “May I live as long as the story of
Rāma (rāmakathā) lives on in the worlds” (3.147.37), which Rāma granted, thereby
5
making Hanūmat practically immortal. Most of the rest of Hanūmat’s discourse
concerns dharma, and will be discussed below.
The four-yuga system, and Time as a divine force determining human limitations,
are not unknown elsewhere in the Mahābhārata. The four-yuga system is presented in
a discourse to Yudhiṣṭhira by Mārkaṇḍeya (Mahābhārata 3.187). While it differs
somewhat from Hanūmat’s description, there are many similarities.3 Another passage
(12.70) presents the idea of four yuga-s associated with a decline in the power and
efficacy of dharma. Clearly, the yuga idea is important to the Mahābhārata, even if
expressed with variations, since it is presented to the two eldest Pāṇḍava brothers, in
each instance by an immortal spokesman revealing extraordinary knowledge about how
the universe functions. As context for understanding the ideas of Time and yuga-s in
the Bhagavad Gītā and Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama, I cite three other places in the
Mahābhārata where these topics are presented.
In the first chapter of the text (1.1.187-190), Dhṛtarāṣṭra laments the outcome,
highlighting a series of events at which he had lost hope of victory, and Saṃjaya
addresses him as follows:
No one steps beyond the path the Ordainer has ordained. All this is
rooted in Time, to be or not to be, to be happy or not to be happy. Time
ripens the creatures. Time rots them. And Time again puts out the Time
that burns down the creatures. Time unfolds all beings in the world, holy
and unholy. Time shrinks them and expands them again. Time walks in
all creatures, unaverted, impartial. Whatever beings there were in the
6
past will be in the future, whatever are busy now, they are all the
creatures of Time—know it, and do not lose your sense.4
The text here depicts Time as controlling all beings, governing the length and quality of
life itself, and as a force that creates and destroys.
After the battle has apparently ended, Śiva tells Aśvatthāman that his enemies
“have fallen under the power of Time” and will die that very night (Mahābhārata
10.7.63). Aśvatthāman offers himself to and is possessed by Śiva, then attacks the
sleeping warriors in their camp at night, describing his plan to “careen around like
Time” (kālavat) in his death-dealing ferocity (Mahābhārata 10.8.8). As he kills his
enemies, a female manifestation of death appears before them: the Night of Time
(kālarātriṃ), a black-skinned woman bearing a noose, whose eyes and mouth are
blood-red, as are her garlands and ornaments, a dreadful goddess wearing a single
garment covered in blood (Mahābhārata 10.8.64-67). Aśvatthāman himself, exiting the
site of the massacre, is said to blaze like the fire at the end of the yuga that has
reduced all beings to ashes (Mahābhārata 10.8.137).
Finally, years after the battle, Kṛṣṇa’s clan has largely survived the fighting but
Time is stalking them. In the form of a fierce, monstrous bald-headed man with black
and orange skin, Time peers in their windows and haunts them (Mahābhārata 16.3.1-
2). Soon the warriors are killing each other in a drunken brawl.
These passages show that the Mahābhārata includes a recurrent theme of Time
as a divine force, sometimes embodied in frightful forms and associated with death.
The text describes the author Vyāsa himself as kālavādin, one who espouses this
7
understanding of Time (Mahābhārata 6.4.2). As W.J. Johnson has observed, in the
Mahābhārata, Time is an expression of the “cosmic crisis” of transition from one yuga to
the next.5 Though Time as a controlling force is prominent in the text, the concept of
four yuga-s as a measure of the passage of time and the declining quality of life
through time is expressed relatively rarely in the Mahābhārata. In my view, references
to the fire at the end of the yuga (such as in Bhagavad Gītā 11.25 and Mahābhārata
10.8.137) reflect a developing concept of the cyclical destruction of the world (pralaya),
later understood (and articulated clearly in Purāṇa texts) as occurring not at the end of
each yuga but at the end of the fourth and final eon, Kali Yuga. González-Reimann
(2010: 65) has argued that “…when the Mahābhārata was composed the yuga theory
was at a formative stage and was most likely being shaped within the later strata of the
Epic itself.” That the moral decline and departures from dharma are not explained in
the Mahābhārata’s final books as deriving from the onset of Kali Yuga is claimed by
González-Reimann as a key point for interpreting the Mahābhārata and for
understanding the yuga idea.6 I acknowledge the relevance of his observations, but
see no reason to assume that composition occurred in strata or layers over centuries,
something for which we have no definitive evidence. It is important to notice that the
text does contain a clear articulation of the idea that reaching the fourth and final yuga
in the series is responsible for violations of dharma. Below I discuss a very direct
statement of this point of view from none other than Kṛṣṇa, who justifies Bhīma’s
apparent violations of dharma by referring to the decline of dharma through four yuga-s
(Mahābhārata 9.59). González-Reimann argues that the scarcity of indications that the
8
outcome of the narrative, with its apparent violations of dharma, is due to the onset of
the final yuga because the idea was only becoming clear to the text’s composers as it
reached the form we find in the critical edition. But it may also be that other meanings
are to be found in the text as well, such as the view of Ānandavardhana and
Abhinavagupta that the aesthetic purpose of the Mahābhārata is to produce in the
audience a disenchantment with worldly values and a turn to spiritual aspirations.7
Since the defining qualities of poetry are traditionally understood to include multiplicity
of meanings and poetry’s power to suggest meanings, I propose that we regard the
text as suggesting and allowing such a diversity of interpretations, even including some
that are rarely stated explicitly. In other words, I suggest that we see the text as the
product of poetic creativity in which pralaya and yuga imagery may be deployed in a
variety of ways to achieve aesthetic purposes for its audience.
Dharma
The Mahābhārata is widely acknowledged to be a text in which exploring the
meanings and applications of dharma is central to its purpose and is one of its great
accomplishments as a scripture. As James Fitzgerald observed, “The word dharma
signifies a concept that is one of the most central and important topics of thought and
debate in the Mahābhārata” yet also the most difficult for him to translate.8 The text
says of itself that Vyāsa composed it “for the sake of dharma” (dharmakāmyayā,
Mahābhārata 18.5.41), and we see throughout the text the preoccupation with
discussing the subtleties of dharma. The very first word of the Bhagavad Gītā is
9
dharma: its setting is on the field of dharma. Indeed, the very first word spoken by
Kṛṣṇa in the Mahābhārata is his pronouncement that Draupadī has been won by Arjuna
according to dharma (dharmeṇa labdhā, Mahābhārata 1.181.32), so Kṛṣṇa’s
introduction to the text’s action (and to the text’s audience) is as an authority on
dharma. The two dialogues here under consideration feature discourses on dharma
delivered by deities, each of whom functions as guru to a disciple who is a warrior. The
discourses focus on kṣatriyadharma, the way of life incumbent on all warriors, and also
include admonitions that the warrior should follow his svadharma, his own dharma. As
the latter is more specific, svadharma will be the focus of comparison.
Famously, Kṛṣṇa instructs Arjuna as follows: “It is better to perform one’s own
dharma (svadharmo) poorly than another’s dharma well; it is better to die in one’s own
dharma that to thrive in another’s” (Bhagavad Gītā 3.35). Similarly at the end of the
text Kṛṣṇa states: “It is better to do one’s svadharma poorly than another’s well; action
performed in accord with one’s own nature incurs no fault” (Bhagavad Gītā 18.47).
Such general statements are applied more specifically to being a warrior in Kṛṣṇa’s
instruction (Bhagavad Gītā 2.31-33):
Recognizing your svadharma, do not waver, for there is nothing better for
a warrior than a war that accords with dharma. It is an open door to
heaven, happily found; and warriors who find a war like that are
fortunate, Pārtha. If you will not engage in this war according with
dharma, then you give up svadharma and honor, and take on sin.
10
Hanūmat’s instructions to Bhīma are similar. He tells the warrior “Do not commit
violence, my friend: guard your svadharma. Abiding by your svadharma, you must
learn and discover highest dharma” (Mahābhārata 3.149.25). After expounding on
aspects of dharma shared by all (sacrifice, study, and donation), and the practices
unique to each of the four social classes, Hanūmat addresses Bhīma’s particular
situation: “Kaunteya, yours is the warrior’s dharma: protection by dharma. Practice
your svadharma, with senses and conduct controlled” (Mahābhārata 3.149.37). As
James Hegarty’s chapter in this volume demonstrates, Vidura’s advice on kingship in the
Mahābhārata similarly emphasizes the importance of equanimity in a ruler, so it echoes
the teaching of Hanūmat to Bhīma here. Hanūmat describes the dharma of a king,
including the use of spies and diplomacy, and the important duty of administering
punishment and reward. He ends his discourse on dharma by stating that “This is the
severe and difficult dharma that is imposed upon you, Pārtha; guard it humbly in accord
with performing your svadharma” (Mahābhārata 3.149.50). The surprising feature of
Hanūmat’s instruction on dharma is the emphasis on a king’s dharma since Bhīma is not
becoming a king. The closing statement from Hanūmat, however, generalizes the
application of punishment and protection as the means by which the kṣatriya attains
heaven (Mahābhārata 3.149.51-52).
As context for understanding how svadharma relates to kṣatriyadharma, I call
attention to two passages; each one concerns a Pāṇḍava warrior who is being
encouraged to attend to his svadharma. The passage concerning Arjuna occurs on the
battlefield as he, Kṛṣṇa, and others are watching a duel between Bhūriśravas and
11
Sātyaki. Kṛṣṇa observes that his clansman Sātyaki, an ally of Arjuna, is fighting without
his chariot, is weary, and is losing the duel against Bhūriśravas. Kṛṣṇa pronounces the
encounter unfair and urges Arjuna to protect his follower (Mahābhārata 7.117.42-49).
Seizing Sātyaki by the hair and kicking him in the chest, Bhūriśravas raises his sword to
kill Sātyaki, but Arjuna shoots an arrow that cuts off the arm of Bhūriśravas
(Mahābhārata 7.117.60-62). Bhūriśravas berates Arjuna for attacking him while he was
engaged in combat with Sātyaki, citing the warrior code of conduct on which they had
agreed before fighting, and accuses Arjuna of abandoning kṣatriyadharma. According
to Bhūriśravas, this action is uncharacteristic of Arjuna, who knows svadharma better
than anyone in this world; the act, he says, surely must have been inspired by Kṛṣṇa
(Mahābhārata 7.118.1-15). Others observing Arjuna’s action condemn it as well.
Arjuna responds to this critique by declaring, “Every king here knows my great vow that
no ally of mine can be killed within bowshot of me. Remembering this, Bhūriśravas,
you ought not to condemn me, for it is improper to condemn someone without knowing
his dharma” (Mahābhārata 7.118.23-24). Arjuna proclaims that his action was not
prohibited by dharma. While Arjuna indicates that all know of his vow, clearly others on
the battlefield either did not or had forgotten about it since they denounce his action as
inappropriate for a warrior. When Sātyaki beheads the dying Bhūriśravas and is widely
censured for doing so, he too cites a vow of his own that he would kill any opponent
who treats him abusively and kicks him. In fact, Sātyaki is angry at Arjuna for
interfering with the fulfillment of his own vow! He also insists that his action was
12
proper (Mahābhārata 7.118.31-48). This episode thus has two interesting instances of
vows overriding the general principles of kṣatriyadharma.
Bhīma also takes vows that modify his dharma as a warrior. As Draupadī is
being treated abusively, Bhīma vows that if he does not rip open the chest of
Duḥśāsana and drink his blood, he will not after death attain the worlds of his
ancestors, a vow widely applauded in the hall (Mahābhārata 2.61.44-46). When
Duryodhana lewdly shows Draupadī his left thigh, Bhīma similarly vows that if he fails to
break that thigh in battle he would not attain the worlds of his ancestors (Mahābhārata
2.63.14). As a climactic moment at the end of the battle, Bhīma kills Duḥśāsana and
drinks his blood, reminding him and astonished onlookers of the many Kaurava
misdeeds that caused Bhīma to make such a ferocious vow (Mahābhārata 8.61). In
killing Duryodhana, not only does Bhīma strike below the belt with his club, he also
presses the head of Duryodhana into the earth with his left foot, taunting him
(Mahābhārata 9.58.1-13). Warriors even on the Pāṇḍava side are scandalized by this,
and Yudhiṣṭhira speaks to Bhīma, telling him not to let his dharma falter (Mahābhārata
9.58.14-18). A stronger response comes from Kṛṣṇa’s brother Balarāma, who curses
Bhīma and rushes toward him. Kṛṣṇa intervenes, saying, “You know that a warrior’s
dharma is to accomplish what he has vowed to do” (Mahābhārata 9.59.14). Since
Bhīma had vowed in the assembly hall to break Duryodhana’s thighs, he has done
nothing wrong, according to Kṛṣṇa. He urges his brother to remember Bhīma’s vow
and to remember that the Kali Yuga is beginning (Mahābhārata 9.59.21), but Balarāma
remains furious and leaves. Kṛṣṇa queries Yudhiṣṭhira about how he can condone
13
Bhīma’s act of adharma, stepping on Duryodhana’s head (and does not mention striking
below the waist). Yudhiṣṭhira refers to being cheated, insulted, and exiled by
Duryodhana, whom he describes as a greedy and unwise man, and that he tolerates
Bhīma’s action, whether it is dharma or adharma. Kṛṣṇa acquiesces, and Yudhiṣṭhira
announces his approval of all Bhīma has done on the battlefield (Mahābhārata 9.59.28-
36). Bhīma salutes Yudhiṣṭhira, announces that their enemies are eliminated, and that
Yudhiṣṭhira should rule the earth according to his svadharma. Yudhiṣṭhira
congratulates Bhīma on his victory, and for fulfilling his promises to his mother and his
anger (Mahābhārata 9.59.39-44).
These warriors have taken vows that obligate them to perform certain actions.
As is clearly stated, a warrior is expected to act to fulfill his vows; to do otherwise
would be a violation of that warrior’s dharma. His kṣatriyadharma has been modified
by the addition of the vow he is now obliged to fulfill; completion of that vow is now
included in his svadharma. Accused by Bhūriśravas of abandoning kṣatriyadharma,
Arjuna replies by citing his vow and states that “it is improper to condemn someone
without knowing his dharma.” Sātyaki’s widely condemned action was proper,
according to him, because it was performed in fulfillment of a vow and therefore not a
violation of dharma. The warriors on the battlefield who hear their justifications for
their actions, justifications based on having taken vows to perform such actions, have
no argument with the view that fulfilling those vows is in accord with dharma. Both of
Bhīma’s extraordinary actions that contradict the general principles of kṣatriyadharma
are also presented as in accord with dharma due to his vows. Stepping on
14
Duryodhana’s head is generally condemned, but that was not part of his vow.
Nonetheless, Bhīma’s actions are sanctioned by Kṛṣṇa and Yudhiṣṭhira, who agree that
vow fulfillment is obligatory. And in Bhīma’s case we also have an appeal to the onset
of Kali Yuga as justification for less stringent adherence to dharma.
James Fitzgerald (2004: 679) has observed as follows:
Everyone has a svadharma, a proper dharma, a pattern of life incumbent
upon him or her that will ensure his or her welfare after death. But though
ancient Indian karman is highly individualistic, one’s svadharma is not
individual or personal: It varies according to one’s sex, one’s varṇa, and
one’s āśrama, etc.
To his list of svadharma variables, clearly we need to add vows. In light of the
examples here cited, in which the vows taken are specific to an individual person’s
circumstances (being kicked in the chest; breaking a certain person’s thigh with a club
in battle), Fitzgerald’s comment that “one’s svadharma is not individual or personal” is
difficult to reconcile with these passages.
Bhakti
Each of the texts under consideration here, the Bhagavad Gītā and Hanumad-
Bhīma-Samāgama, features a deity encouraging a devotee to worship with devotion
(bhakti). In the context of discourses on dharma, they present bhakti as the way to be
religious, though they differ in an interesting manner.
15
The Bhagavad Gītā uses the term bhakti thirty-three times, in a variety of
compound expressions and case endings. For example, after Kṛṣṇa reveals his divine
form to Arjuna, then resumes his human form at Arjuna’s request, Kṛṣṇa says,
Arjuna, I can only be known by bhakti having no other object; this is how
I can be seen, and known truly, and entered into, enemy-burner. Only
one who acts for me, who regards me as highest, who is my devotee
(madbhaktaḥ), who is free of attachment and hatred for any being, comes
to me, Pāṇḍava. (Bhagavad Gītā 11.54-55)
Kṛṣṇa’s final words on bhakti in the Gītā (18.65-68) sum up how to be religious on the
path of devotion.
Fix your mind on me, be devoted to me, sacrifice to me, honour me: this
way truly you will come to me. I promise you: you are dear to me.
Abandoning all dharma-s, take me alone as your refuge. Do not agonize;
I will release you from all evils. This should never be told to one who
neglects asceticism, or who is not devoted to me, or who does not want
to hear it, or to one who disparages me. One who expounds this supreme
secret to my devotees and has shown the highest devotion to me will
come to me, without a doubt.
Kṛṣṇa is very clear that bhakti is to be directed to him exclusively, though he also
indicates that whatever divine form is worshiped with faith, he makes that worship
effective (Bhagavad Gītā 7.22-24).
16
Hanūmat’s discourse to Bhīma refers only once to bhakti (Mahābhārata
3.149.24): “Bull of the Bhāratas, the Gods give their grace when worshiped with
offerings, sacrifices, mantra-s, and with bhakti, O Bhārata.” This statement is made by
Hanūmat in his divine form that Bhīma had asked to see, and in the context of his
discourse on dharma. In contrast to the discourse by Kṛṣṇa, the briefer discourse by
Hanūmat does not direct the warrior to offer exclusive devotion to him, nor indicate
that such devotion would after death bring the devotee to Hanūmat himself. Rather,
multiple ways of being religious are stated to induce the Gods (plural) to show grace to
the worshiper.
That these discourses in which bhakti is advocated are delivered by deities is
clear. Twice Kṛṣṇa is addressed as Viṣṇu by Arjuna (Bhagavad Gītā 11.24 and 30).
Though the term avatāra is not used in relation to Kṛṣṇa, the idea is clearly articulated
when Kṛṣṇa states that he is eternal, has had many births and remembers them all, and
that he takes birth to support dharma in yuga after yuga. To Bhīma, Hanūmat
articulates the avatāra idea by referring to Rāma as “Viṣṇu in human form” (viṣṇur
mānuṣarūpeṇa, Mahābhārata 3.147.28). In fact, this episode includes the only use of
the term avatāra in the whole Mahābhārata! The word is not used in reference to
Hanūmat or Rāma, and in the narrative context of this episode it is not primarily about
divinity either; it refers to Bhīma, crashing through the forest on his way to the
mountaintop, being regarded by the female consorts of Yakṣas and Gandharvas as if he
were “a new incarnation of beauty.”9 Here we see subtle suggestions of the erotic
mood (śṛṅgāra rasa) in the fact that Bhīma goes on a quest for flowers in this idyllic
17
setting due to Draupadī’s demand, “if you love me, bring me many more” (Mahābhārata
3.146.11). Repeated references in the text to her desire for these flowers, and his
intention of pleasing her by gaining possession of them through heroic acts, establish a
mood of śṛṅgāra rasa.10 This erotic motif is striking in its narrative context, as Draupadī
and her husbands the Pāṇḍavas are in exile, living much as ascetic renouncers would
have lived, and with hints of celibacy. Despite repeated references just before this
passage to their asceticism (e.g., tapas twice in 3.141.22), they are not renounced
ascetics, so the erotic mood is not jarring. Subtle suggestion is also apparent in the use
of the term avatāra, which has other, very significant connotations that have nothing to
do with the erotic, but with attitudes of devotion to God. Just as the erotic rasa is
being suggested by the setting, Draupadī’s demand, Bhīma’s beauty, etc., the presence
here of the term avatāra may be taken as suggesting an attitude of bhakti, a subtle cue
to the audience just before Bhīma meets Hanūmat and hears about devotion. I credit
the poet with full awareness of the meanings of the word avatāra, and with intentional
deployment of the religiously significant term at the beginning of this passage in which
the divinity of Hanūmat is about to be revealed; again, meaning is communicated subtly
through suggestion. Both passages, then, can be seen as disclosing an underlying
Vaiṣṇava ideology concerning avatāra manifestations.
Conclusions
To amplify on the three themes presented in this chapter, I will comment on two
more parallel features of these discourses. Both Arjuna and Bhīma ask to be shown a
18
divine form, and receive teachings on Time, dharma, and bhakti from God in that form.
In the Gītā, Kṛṣṇa complies with Arjuna’s request to see his supreme form (rūpam
aiśvaraṃ, Bhagavad Gītā 11.3), and dazzles the warrior with his infinite form on which
all the Gods are represented. As chapter 11 of the Gītā ends (Bhagavad Gītā 11.46),
Arjuna asks that Kṛṣṇa again assume the form with which he is familiar, Kṛṣṇa’s four-
armed form. This request is odd, however, in that the text contains no indication that
Arjuna has ever before seen Kṛṣṇa with four arms, nor does the text state that Kṛṣṇa
reverts to his conventional two-armed form at any subsequent moment. Neither
traditional commentaries nor modern translators seem to take note of this anomaly in
the text. 11 Perhaps the “familiar form” to which the text here refers is the form of
icons of Kṛṣṇa/Viṣṇu, familiar to the text’s audience if not to Arjuna in the narrative. In
a parallel with the Bhagavad Gītā, Bhīma requests to see the “incomparable form”
(rūpam apratimaṃ 3.148.3) in which Hanūmat leaped over the ocean in the prior yuga
and Hanūmat, after some hesitation, grants his request. Thrilled but stunned by his
magnitude, Bhīma asks that Hanūmat resume his smaller form (Mahābhārata 3.149.10-
15). Hanūmat discourses on dharma and bhakti for the rest of the chapter before
shrinking his body to smaller compass (Mahābhārata 3.150.1-2). To end their
encounter, Hanūmat disappears before Bhīma’s eyes (ity uktvāntaradhīyata,
Mahābhārata 3.150.15), a further indication of his divinity. That his forest fare consists
of the roots and fruit of banana trees that taste like the elixir of immortality (amṛta)
suggests that Hanūmat’s diet (plus Rāma’s boon) contribute to lengthening his lifespan,
perhaps to eternity.
19
Not only are the discourses between these Pāṇḍava warriors with divine beings
on similar topics, they are also private and secret discussions. Kṛṣṇa gives Arjuna the
“divine eye” to see his supreme form, and tells him that it is a form that no one but
Arjuna has ever seen (Bhagavad Gītā 11.47). The teaching presented in the Gītā is
described by Kṛṣṇa as the ultimate secret (rahasyaṃ hy etad uttamam, Bhagavad Gītā
4.3). At the end of the text (Bhagavad Gītā 18.63-68), Kṛṣṇa again describes his
teaching as the supreme mystery (paramaṃ guhyaṃ) and not to be shared with any
but devotees. Hanūmat, after completing his discourse, vanished with the request his
location not be revealed. Both teachings are transmitted in secret, even if Hanūmat’s
mountainside location includes Yakṣas and Gandharvas who might be inclined to
eavesdrop, and even if Arjuna’s chariot is surrounded by many thousands of warriors
who may wonder what they are discussing.
Scriptures are provided with written commentaries in India, and the Bhagavad
Gītā is a text with a particularly rich tradition of commentary authorship. Hundreds of
formal commentaries in Sanskrit on the Bhagavad Gītā are extant, from Śaṅkara’s in the
eighth century to the present.12 Indeed, V. S. Sukthankar (2016: 119) broadens the
concept of “commentary” in the following statement: “The Gītā is in fact the heart’s
heart of the Mahābhārata, and the Mahābhārata is a sort of a necessary commentary
on the Gītā.” While I will not adopt this expansive view of commentary, it is certainly
the case that the Mahābhārata is a text that refers to and comments on itself with great
regularity.
20
The many parallels between the two dialogues in the Mahābhārata, the
Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama and the Bhagavad Gītā, are too numerous to be
accidental, and suggest to me that these two dialogues stand in intertextual relationship
to one another. Within the Mahābhārata, such a relationship between passages is not
unknown: the Anugītā (Mahābhārata 14.16-50) is a passage that refers to and was
clearly inspired by the Bhagavad Gītā. Despite the evident disparity in meaning
between the two passages, the Anugītā clearly responds to the prominent place of the
Bhagavad Gītā in the Mahābhārata. Indeed, as observed by Arvind Sharma (1986: 2),
the Anugītā is “the first comment, if not commentary” on the Bhagavad Gītā.13
The Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama, while not a commentary on the Bhagavad Gītā
since it does not present a line-by-line explication of the Gītā’s meaning, is a kind of
comment, but I maintain that the relationship between the two passages is a strong
one. So how does the Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama help an audience read (or hear) the
Bhagavad Gītā? By providing a much more extensive account of the functioning of time
in four yuga-s, the Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama gives meaningful context to the
statement by Kṛṣṇa that he comes into being in yuga after yuga to support dharma. By
also specifying the form in which Viṣṇu/Kṛṣṇa appears in each yuga, Hanūmat
articulates the Vaiṣṇava idea of the manifestation of the divine as an avatāra. And
while that term appears in neither passage’s discussion of divine manifestations,
Hanūmat provides support and context for Kṛṣṇa’s explicit statements of his divinity,
and his Viśvarūpa revelation. How does the Bhagavad Gītā help an audience read (or
hear) the Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama? By having Hanūmat fulfill the same function in
21
the text, as the revealer of cosmic truths to a Pāṇḍava warrior who is his relative, the
text invites us to see Hanūmat as divine. The two passages reinforce each other’s
messages.
Not only are these two passages in dialogue with one another, but perhaps as
well with another passage in the Mahābhārata. I refer to the revelation of Kṛṣṇa’s
divine form in the Kaurava assembly hall (Mahābhārata 5.129). Kṛṣṇa goes to the
Kauravas as an envoy but his peace overture is rebuffed; Duryodhana plots to capture
him but Kṛṣṇa, with a laugh, reveals his (four-armed) form that displays the Gods, the
Pāṇḍavas, his weapons, flames, and dazzling rays of light. Most present are astonished
at this dreadful, awe-inspiring form (Mahābhārata 5.129.12a, ghoram ātmānaṃ) and
close their eyes, but Droṇa, Bhīṣma, Vidura, Saṃjaya, and the ascetics and sages in the
room had been granted divine sight and beheld this vision. After resuming his usual
two-armed form,14 Kṛṣṇa departs and confers with the mother of the Pāṇḍavas, Kuntī,
to see what message he could convey from her to her sons (Mahābhārata 5.130).
Interestingly, she gives her sons (via Kṛṣṇa) a discourse similar to Hanūmat’s on the
four yuga-s and dharma, including a king’s dharma! The striking echo of Hanūmat’s
discourse raises the question whether this passage stands in intertextual relationship
with both the Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama and the Bhagavad Gītā.15 Certainly the
revelation of Kṛṣṇa’s divine form in the assembly hall foreshadows in the narrative his
similar revelation to Arjuna alone on the battlefield. Kuntī’s discourse on dharma,
intended for all her sons, reinforces the similar but private discourse to Bhīma by
Hanūmat. Moreover, as we consider that Kṛṣṇa’s own description of his discourse in the
22
Bhagavad Gītā as “the royal wisdom, the royal mystery,”16 we can see that all these
passages share themes concerning the role in society of the king, and the kṣatriya class
in general.
The Mahābhārata presents Hanūmat without introduction or explanation in the
Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama. From the text, it is evident that the audience is expected
to know and recognize Hanūmat, and the fact that Bhīma does not recognize him,
instead responding with boasting and bravado, is clearly intended to be humorous. The
Mahābhārata’s own version of the story of Rāma, Sītā, and Hanūmat is found later in
the text (Mahābhārata 3.258-75), there called the “Rāmopākhyāna.” The Hanumad-
Bhīma-Samāgama is drawing on an already established tradition about the nature and
personality of Hanūmat, so this episode stands in intertextual relationship to another
work. It could be Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa, though we do not know whether it was
composed before the Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama. The work with which the Hanumad-
Bhīma-Samāgama is in dialogue could be the Mahābhārata’s “Rāmopākhyāna” subtale,
called “the Rāmāyaṇa subtale” in the Mahābhārata’s table of contents.17 Perhaps both
textual versions of Rāma’s story, and the Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama itself, all draw on
earlier oral traditions about Hanūmat, but these are unknown to us. In any case, the
Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama provides a perspective on Hanūmat that adds to the
audience’s understanding of him, particularly with regard to his divinity and his
teachings.
In this chapter, I have sought to show the intertextual relationship between
several dialogues in the Mahābhārata, particularly the Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama and
23
the Bhagavad Gītā. Certainly the Gītā has made a greater impact on the Mahābhārata
as a whole than has the Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama, but I believe that I have
demonstrated how the latter has been in part inspired by the former and is responding
to it. The parallelism of the Bhagavad Gītā and Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama calls for an
explanation, and it seems evident that the influence flows from the former to the latter,
with the Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama patterned on the more famous and profoundly
significant Gītā.
Notes
1. All citations of the Mahābhārata are to the Critical Edition: Sukthankar, V. S., et al.
(1933-59). Bhagavad Gītā citations will be to Bhagavad Gītā chapters and verses.
Translations are by the author except where noted otherwise. Recent works by Vishwa
Adluri and Joydeep Bagchee (2014a, 2014b, 2016) on the history of interpretation of
these texts, and the shortcomings of approaching the texts as consisting of layers from
diverse authors and times, have contributed significantly to the understanding of the
Bhagavad Gītā and the Mahābhārata as a whole.
2. It is conventional to use as his name either Hanūmān or Hanumān, and as noted by
John Brockington (2004: 134, note 1), the spelling with long u is more frequent in the
Mahābhārata (though he does not use that spelling in his title). However, for the sake
of consistency with other names cited in the stem form, I will use Hanūmat in this
24
article (apart from the title for the sake of recognition). This episode’s name is
somewhat variable. Ādhyāya colophons in the manuscripts consulted for the Critical
Edition have a variety of titles, including both long and short u, the word samāgama
(“meeting”) replaced by saṃvāda (“dialogue”), and some that omit reference to Bhīma:
Hanumad-Vākyaṃ (“Hanūmat’s Speech”) and Hanūmad-Darśanaṃ (“The Vision of
Hanūmat”). I call this passage Hanumad-Bhīma-Samāgama because of the prevalence
of this title in devanāgarī and Kaśmīrī manuscripts of this episode (with short u here
even though the long u is more prevalent in the Mahābhārata as a whole). This
episode is discussed in greater detail in Sullivan (2016).
3. Hence I do not entirely agree with the view that the yuga teaching is neither
consistently presented in the Mahābhārata nor integral to the text, as argued by Luis
González-Reimann (2002; see especially pp. 102-06). See also the insightful chapter by
González-Reimann (2010), where he argues for the dice match as inspiration for the
four-yuga concept. Alf Hiltebeitel (2011) extensively discusses the terms yuga and
kalpa, and Hindu and Buddhist uses of them, in chapters six and seven of his
monumental work Dharma.
4. van Buitenen (1973: 30). I do not feel that I can improve upon his translation,
except perhaps in regard to his rendering of avidhr̥taḥ as “unaverted”; the word is
perhaps best understood as meaning that Time is unavoidable.
25
5. W. J. Johnson (1999: xxviii-xxxv), in his excellent introduction, discusses the views
of Dumézil, Biardeau, and Hiltebeitel on the “cosmic crisis” of the Mahābhārata. See
also on this topic the first article published by Alf Hiltebeitel (1972).
6. González-Reimann (2011: 101–110).
7. See, for example, discussions in Sullivan (2011), the introductory essay to a special
issue of the International Journal of Hindu Studies.
8. Fitzgerald (2004: 671). His article describes three different meanings that he
translates as (1) Law or Lawful Deeds; (2) Rightness; (3) Virtue.
9. Quoting the translation of van Buitenen (1975, vol. 2: 500): navāvatāraṃ rūpasya
(Mahābhārata 3.146.33). Sutton (2000: 156) missed this subtle use of avatāra, stating
that the Mahābhārata “has a more limited understanding of the concept and in fact
never once in the Critical Edition uses the term avatāra.”
10. As discussed by David Gitomer (1991) in his “Rākṣasa Bhīma.”
11. Traditional commentators and modern translators alike ignore what seems an
anomaly in the Bhagavad Gītā. Arjuna asks Kṛṣṇa to resume his familiar four-armed
form, though such a form was never previously displayed or mentioned in the
26
Mahābhārata. For example, Śaṅkara, in the earliest extant commentary on the text,
comments neither on the oddity of assuming the four-armed form purportedly seen
previously, nor on the absence of a resumption of his two-armed form anywhere in the
text (Sastry, 1977: 297); Rāmānuja is similarly silent (Ādidevānanda, 1991: 388).
12. As observed by Richard Davis (2015: 55), referring to Callewaert and Hemraj
(1982: 98-110), who listed 227 commentaries. Subsequent decades will have increased
the total.
13. And as Brian Black observes (in an unpublished manuscript quoted with kind
permission, p. 18), “Thus, in contrast to the Bhagavad Gītā which is a call to arms and
justification for war, the Anu Gītā is a discourse which emphasizes renunciation and
non-violence. In contrast to Arjuna’s initial dilemma of whether to fight or not, the Anu
Gītā is delivered within the context of Arjuna’s remorse after the war.” Arjuna’s
remorse not only offers a reason for the Anugītā’s emphasis on renunciation but
supports the interpretation that the Mahābhārata leads its audience to embrace
spiritual, not worldly, values. In the Bhagavad Gītā, Kṛṣṇa’s teachings go far beyond
encouraging Arjuna to do his duty as a warrior, and include the mutual love between
God and devotee as a practice that transcends even dharma.
27
14. Mahābhārata 5.129.16b reads saṃjahāra vapuḥ svakam. While van Buitenen
(1978: 428) translates this as “withdrew his real form,” a more literal translation could
be “withdrew his own (beautiful) form.”
15. The perspective on royal dharma in all three Mahābhārata passages contrasts
markedly with the Jain approach to royalty, as discussed by Jonathan Geen in his
chapter in this volume. While the Jains envision a king immediately abdicating the
throne to become a Jain monk as the only way to fulfill his spiritual needs, the
Mahābhārata advocates that a king remain on the throne to rule society. As Kṛṣṇa
teaches in the Bhagavad Gītā, one can remain in society, renouncing neither dharma
nor one’s social role, while also attaining the highest spiritual ends. In a somewhat
parallel pattern, Brian Black, in his chapter in this volume, draws attention to how the
Upaniṣads tend to emphasize complementarity between the king and the religious
leader, while the Buddhist Nikāya texts are more likely to emphasize their distinct roles.
16. Bhagavad Gītā 9.2a: rājavidyā rājaguhyaṃ.
17. The table of contents in the Ādi Parvan, the Parvasaṃgraha, terms its long Vana
Parvan subtale rāmāyaṇam upākhyānam (Mbh 1.2.126c), but it is obviously not
Vālmīki’s text. Van Buitenen (1975: 180) comments: “The ones responsible for the
inclusion of the story of Rāma inThe Book of the Forest either did not know of Vālmīki’s
poem, or knew that the story of Rāma was different from it.” Brockington
28
demonstrated close correspondences between the Northeast recension of the
Rāmāyaṇa and the “Rāmopakhyāna” but also acknowledges the latter’s influence on the
former, indicating that the two constitute a literary feedback loop, or stand in
intertextual relationship; see Brockington (1998: 473-77); and in greater detail, Bailey &
Brockington (2000: 288-325).
References
Ādidevānanda, Svāmi (trans.). 1991. Śrī Rāmānuja Gītā Bhāṣya. Madras: Sri
Ramakrishna Math.
Adluri, Vishwa, & Joydeep Bagchee. 2016. Paradigm Lost: The Application of the
Historical-Critical Method to the Bhagavad Gītā. International Journal of Hindu Studies
20, 2: 199–301.
——. 2014a. The Redemption of the Brahman: Garbe and German Interpreters of the
Bhagavadgītā. In Transcultural Encounters between Germany and India: Kindred Spirits
in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries, pp. 68–83. Joanne Miyang Cho, Eric
Kurlander, & Douglas T. McGetchin, editors. New York: Routledge.
29
——. 2014b. The Nay Science: A History of German Indology. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Bailey, Greg, & Mary Brockington (eds.). 2000. Epic Threads: John Brockington on the
Sanskrit Epics. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Black, Brian. 2015. In dialogue with Kṛṣṇa, in dialogue with the Bhagavad Gītā.
Spalding Symposium 2015 Lecture (unpublished manuscript).
Brockington, John. 1998. The Sanskrit Epics. Leiden: Brill.
——. 2004. Hanumān in the Mahābhārata. Journal of Vaishnava Studies 12, 2: 129-35.
Buitenen, J.A.B. van (trans.). 1973. The Mahābhārata, vol. 1. Chicago: The University
of Chicago Press.
——. 1975. The Mahābhārata, vol. 2. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
——. 1978. The Mahābhārata, vol. 3. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Callewaert, Winand, and Shilanand Hemraj. 1982. Bhagavadgītānuvāda: A Study in
Transcultural Translation. Ranchi: Satya Bharati Publications.
30
Davis, Richard H. 2015. The Bhagavad Gita: A Biography. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Fitzgerald, James. L. 2004. Dharma and Its Translation in the Mahābhārata. Journal of
Indian Philosophy 32, 5: 671-685.
Gitomer, David L. 1991. Rākṣasa Bhīma: Wolfbelly among Ogres and Brahmans in the
Sanskrit Mahābhārata and the Veṇīsaṃhāra. In Essays on the Mahābhārata, pp. 296-
323. Arvind Sharma, editor. Leiden: Brill.
González-Reimann, Luis. 2002. The Mahābhārata and the Yugas: India's Great Epic
Poem and the Hindu System of World Ages. New York: Peter Lang.
——. 2010. Time in the Mahābhārata and the Time of the Mahābhārata. In Epic and
Argument in Sanskrit Literary History: Essays in Honor of Robert P. Goldman, pp. 61-73.
Sheldon Pollock, editor. New Delhi: Manohar Publishers.
——. 2011. Ending the Mahābhārata: Making a Lasting Impression. International
Journal of Hindu Studies 15, 1: 101–10.
31
Hiltebeitel, Alf. 2011. Dharma: Its Early History in Law, Religion, and Narrative. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
——. 1972. The Mahābhārata and Hindu Eschatology, History of Religions, 12, 2: 95-
135.
Johnson, W. J. (trans.). 1999. Sauptikaparvan of the Mahābhārata: The Massacre at
Night. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sharma, Arvind. 1986. The Hindu Gītā: Ancient and Classical Interpretations of the
Bhagavadgītā. London: Duckworth.
Sastry, Alladi Mahadeva (trans.). 1977. The Bhagavad Gita with the Commentary of Sri
Sankaracharya. 7th ed. [1897]. Madras: Samata Books.
Sukthankar, V. S. 2016. On the Meaning of the Mahābhārata, 2nd ed. [1957]. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.
Sukthankar, V. S., et al. (editors). 1933-59. The Mahābhārata: For the First Time
Critically Edited, 19 vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.
32
Sullivan, Bruce M. 2016. The Tale of an Old Monkey and a Fragrant Flower: What the
Mahābhārata’s Rāmāyaṇa May Tell Us about the Mahābhārata. In Argument and
Design: The Unity of the Mahābhārata, pp. 187-205. Vishwa Adluri & Joydeep
Bagchee, editors. Leiden: Brill Academic.
——. 2011. The Mahābhārata: Perspectives on its Ends and Endings, International
Journal of Hindu Studies, 15, 1: 1-7.
Sutton, Nicholas. 2000. Religious Doctrines in the Mahābhārata. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
